Citation Nr: A25030348
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240925-476982
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ear condition, variously claimed as bilateral hearing loss, recurrent ear infection, earache and "running ear", is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1969 through February 1971.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which were later reviewed and continued in a September 2024 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision. The Veteran appealed the decision in a September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 13, 2024. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 and July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for an ear disability, tinnitus, and allergic rhinitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This appeal has been advanced on the docket. 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ear condition, variously claimed as bilateral hearing loss, recurrent ear infection, earache and "running ear", is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Remand is warranted to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Specifically, the AOJ should have broadly construed the issues on appeal beyond sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus in light of the facts and contentions - appropriately developing the claim thereof, to include obtaining an adequate/inclusive VA medical examination and opinion. 

Even in regard to the bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus, the Board finds the March 2024 VA examination and June 2024 addendum opinion did not resolve important medical ambiguities in the record necessary to adequately adjudicate the issues on appeal.  The AOJ should have sought further clarification prior to adjudicating the claim, another pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. 

In particular, with regard to the issues on appeal, the Board first finds the AOJ erred by construing the issues on appeal narrowly to sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus rather than more broadly as to other ear related conditions.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009) (holding that the scope of a claim is determined by the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim).

Upon entrance into service, service treatment records reflect the Veteran reported having recurrent trouble hearing when he has an earache. See April 1968 Report of Medical History. While in service, the Veteran reported current or past ear, nose, or throat trouble, earache, and running ears. See July 1970 Report of Medical History. His service treatment records (STRs) also showed treatment for nasal congestion. See March 1970 Health Record. 

There is also indication that the Veteran possibly entered service with some preexisting hearing loss defect, particularly his right ear. See April 1963, Induction Audiogram; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. 

In general, when a servicemember enters service with defective hearing within the meaning of VA's regulatory definition, they are deemed to have a preexisting hearing loss disability, and the presumption of soundness does not attach. McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15 (2016) (hearing loss is considered "noted" on entrance if it meets VA's definition of a "disability" for hearing loss under § 3.385 and, in those cases only, the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111 does not attach).

It is not immediately apparent, however, whether the Veteran's entrance examination should be accepted at face value. The Veteran also indicated earache, congestion, "running ear," and other issues that could have been affecting his hearing at the time of entrance into service.  Indeed, his December 1970 separation examination separation audiogram was within normal limits.  See December 1970 separation examination.

After service, his contentions with recurrent congestion tied to ear and hearing related problems continued.

Although the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2024 with an addendum opinion in June 2024, these opinions solely focused on acoustic trauma in service as well as his conceded in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  Neither examiner addressed the ambiguities related to hearing trouble associated with earache and congestion or whether the Veteran had other ear conditions associated with these ongoing complaints of congestion. 

Remand is therefore appropriate to correct these pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

As an aside, the Board notes that the medical evidence currently links the Veteran's tinnitus to his hearing loss and, therefore, the claims are intertwined and should be adjudicated together. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (holding if a claim is inextricably intertwined with another claim, the claims must be adjudicated together).

3. Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

Remand of the claim of service connection for allergic rhinitis (also claimed as sinusitis) is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Specifically, the AOJ should have obtained a VA medical opinion for direct service connection before issuing the July 2024 rating decision on appeal.

By way of procedural history, a September 2024 higher-level review rating decision continued the July 2024 denial of service connection for allergic rhinitis. The same September 2024 decision also identified a duty-to-assist error with respect to service connection for sinusitis and deferred this issue for further development. Thus, the separate issue of service connection for sinusitis is not presently on appeal before the Board.

The Veteran asserted that his sinusitis or allergic rhinitis began in service and is related to in-service dust exposure. See January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ; December 2024 Hearing Transcript. His STRs note that he sought treatment at one point for symptoms which included nasal congestion. See March 1970 Health Record. He reported sinusitis and ear, nose, or throat trouble at his induction, in-service, and separation examinations. See April 1968 Report of Medical History; July 1970 Report of Medical History; December 1970 Report of Medical History. At separation, the examining physician clarified that the Veteran reported chronic sinus drainage. See December 1970 Report of Medical History.

The Veteran was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis at a March 2024 VA examination. The examiner provided a TERA opinion, indicating that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis was less likely than not caused by his claimed exposure to dust and conceded exposure to herbicides. However, the examiner did not address the notations of sinus issues in the Veteran's STRs and the Veteran's contention that his allergic rhinitis had its onset during service. No opinion was provided for the theory of direct service connection. The AOJ did obtain multiple opinions regarding secondary service connection for sinusitis, but these opinions likewise did not address direct service connection for allergic rhinitis. Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain a VA medical opinion for direct service connection.

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time for VA medical opinions, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020), and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders. The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of his claimed ear conditions, to include (but not limited to) hearing loss, tinnitus, and any conditions manifested by recurrent earaches/ear infections or "running ear." Following review of the claims file, the examiner is to address the following:

(a.) Identify any and all bilateral ear disabilities found during the examination or found within the pendency of the examination, even if currently resolved, to include, but not limited to, hearing loss, tinnitus, earaches, running ears, and/or recurrent ear infections.

NOTE: the examiner is specifically directed to consider the contentions related to recurrent ear infection, earache, and congestion related ENT issues.

(b.) For right ear hearing loss specifically, the examiner must reconcile the likelihood that the Veteran had a preexisting disability prior to service. 

In particular, in consideration of the April 1963 entrance audiogram, showing a right ear hearing loss disability on entrance into service with notations of an earache at that time and subsequent audiograms, to include the December 1970 separation audiogram largely within normal limits, opine as to the likelihood that the Veteran had a preexisting right ear hearing loss disability prior to service (as opposed to an acute earache affecting his hearing). Provide a rationale for the said opinion.

i.	If the right ear hearing loss did preexist service, opine as to whether there was any worsening of hearing loss during service? 

ii.	and, if so, whether such worsening clearly and unmistakably (that is, undebatably) was due to the natural progress of the disease? 

(c.) For every disability found in (a.) that did not preexist service, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or higher) that the disability was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to his military service, to include the in-service reports of recurrent earaches, recurrent trouble hearing with earaches, running ears, nasal congestion, ear/nose/throat trouble, conceded in-service acoustic trauma, and/or lay statements describing congestion and/or hearing trouble and tinnitus since service. 

In so opining, the examiner must consider all relevant evidence of record, to include the Veteran's April 1963 entrance audiogram indicative of at least some hearing loss (albeit with complaints of an acute earache), a December 1970 separation audiogram largely within normal limits, the Veteran's in-service reports of recurrent earaches, recurrent trouble hearing with earaches, running ears, nasal congestion, and ear, nose, or throat trouble.

The examiner should consider the Veteran's reports regarding onset of symptoms. If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a rationale for doing so (e.g., whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject his contentions).

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed allergic rhinitis. The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician writing the opinion. Following review of the claims file, the clinician is to address the following:

(a.) Determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that allergic rhinitis had an onset in service or is otherwise attributable to service. 

The clinician should consider all relevant medical and lay evidence of record.

The clinician must specifically address the notations of sinus issues in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs), specifically:

(1)	 the April 1968 Report of Medical History where the Veteran self-reported sinusitis and ear, nose, or throat trouble;

(2)	 a March 1970 STR regarding care for nasal congestion;

(3)	 the July 1970 Report of Medical History where the Veteran self-reported sinusitis and ear, nose, or throat trouble; and

(4)	 the December 1970 Report of Medical History where the Veteran self-reported sinusitis and ear, nose, or throat trouble, and the examining physician clarified that the Veteran reported chronic sinus drainage. 

The clinician should consider the Veteran's reports regarding onset of symptoms. If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the clinician should provide a rationale for doing so (e.g., whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject his contentions).

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the clinician determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

3. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, readjudicate the issues on appeal, including the inextricably intertwined issues of secondary service connection. 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Harris, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.