Citation Nr: A25030746
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-453664
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle condition, to include tendinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle condition, to include tendinitis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran does not have a diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1999 to April 2005.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, eczema, and left and right ankle conditions, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim; symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. Id. at 5. The Veteran initially filed a claim for service connection for anxiety. The record reflects reports by the Veteran contending he has anxiety and deals with stress frequently. Therefore, the Board expands the scope of the Veteran's claim to encompass all acquired psychiatric disorders, to include anxiety, to be consistent with the Court's decision in Clemons.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety.

The Veteran contends he has an acquired psychiatric disorder due to his active service.

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection requires evidence showing: (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

As discussed below, the Board finds the Veteran does not have an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that is related to service.

Review of the service treatment records is negative for any diagnosis, complaint, or finding indicating an acquired psychiatric disorder. The Veteran's service treatment records do indicate that he endorsed feeling stressed due to work in December 2001, but noted it was not affecting life at home or work.

The Veteran has no VA or private medical records in his claims file. His claims file is silent as to any complaints, diagnoses, or treatment for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination and opinion in May 2023. The examiner found the Veteran did not have a mental disorder. The examiner opined, "the Veteran does not report any clinically significant symptoms of a mental health condition, including symptoms of anxiety, and does not meet DSM-5 criteria for a psychiatric diagnosis. He endorses mild worry thoughts and feelings of stress related to work; however, he does not report anxiety symptoms which rise to the level of clinical significance, or which interfere with functioning."

The Board finds the May 2023 opinion to be of high probative value. The medical opinion is based on sufficient facts and data (e.g., the Veteran's lay statements, in-service and post-service medical records); the medical opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; and the result of principles and methods reliably applied to the facts. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Further, the medical opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data, and also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Id. at 301.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statement that he experiences anxiety and stress, however, there is no competent evidence diagnosing an acquired psychiatric disorder. Although the Veteran is competent to identify and explain the symptoms that he observes and experiences, he is not competent to offer an opinion as to whether those symptoms meet the diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder. Psychological disorders are by their very nature complex disabilities that require specialized training to properly diagnose. Such an opinion requires medical knowledge, interpretation of diagnostic testing, and consideration of medical history. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Board has also considered Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). However, neither the lay nor medical evidence of record suggest that the Veteran's reported symptoms result in functional impairment that affects earning capacity.

Having reviewed the record, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have an acquired psychiatric disorder and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a), (d).

In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992); see also Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (service connection may not be granted unless a current disability exists).

To qualify for compensation, the Veteran must prove existence of a disability, and one that has resulted from a disease, injury, or event that occurred in active service. The weight of the evidence is against the claim and there is no doubt to be resolved. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). As there is no disability due to disease, injury, or event in active service, service connection is not applicable. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran contends he has hypertension due to his active service.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded to correct a pre-decisional error, as the AOJ failed to obtain relevant VA and private medical treatment records to assist the Veteran in the development of his claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

At his June 2023 hypertension examination, the Veteran indicated he had elevated blood pressure since the early 2000s, which had been noted during routine care visits. However, there are no VA or private medical treatment records in the claims file relating to the issue. Thus, it appears that there may be outstanding VA or private medical treatment records relevant to the Veteran's claim. As such, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error to not obtain these records. On remand, the AOJ should associate all of the Veteran's outstanding VA and private medical treatment records documenting treatment for the issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema.

The Veteran asserts his eczema is due to his active service.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded to correct a pre-decisional error, as the AOJ failed to obtain an adequate VA examination and medical opinion to assist the Veteran in the development of his claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The AOJ obtained a medical opinion in June 2023. The Board finds the opinion inadequate to decide the claim. The VA examiner seemed to rely solely on the lack of a diagnosis of treatment and diagnosis of eczema during service and lack of continuity of care following service. To the extent that this examiner appears to have relied on an absence of a diagnosis of the claimed conditions in service, etiology opinions with such rationale are inadequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (2006); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (2007); see also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a veteran's reports of an in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a Veteran's service treatment record to provide a negative opinion). The VA examiner also failed to consider the Veteran's statements and contentions regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, namely, that his symptoms had their onset during service and have continued since. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (an adequate and thorough examination must consider all other relevant evidence of record, including lay statements).

This pre-decisional duty to assist error should be remedied on remand by providing the Veteran a new VA examination that includes an adequate opinion and rationale.

As such, the Board finds that remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion and examination to assess the Veteran's eczema.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle condition, to include tendinitis.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle condition, to include tendinitis.

The Veteran contends that he has left and right ankle conditions, to include tendinitis, due to his active service.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right ankle conditions are remanded to correct a pre-decisional error, as the AOJ failed to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion necessary to decide the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).

A June 2023 report of general information indicates the Veteran clarified his contentions as ankle tendinitis.

The Board notes the Veteran was afforded a knee and lower leg conditions examination, but was not provided an examination to determine the nature and etiology of any ankle conditions. At the knee and lower leg examination, the Veteran reported knee pain related to physical fitness training starting at boot camp and worsened with regular everyday activities per duties in the military.

While the Veteran is not competent to medically diagnose or opine on the etiology of any left and right ankle conditions, satisfying the third McLendon element requires only that the evidence 'indicates' that there 'may' be a nexus between the two and is a low threshold. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

The Board notes there is insufficient competent medical evidence in the Veteran's claims file for the Board to decide the claim.

Given the Veteran's clarification, and statements at the knee and lower leg examination, the Board finds the record was sufficient to meet the low threshold for providing a medical examination in response to the left and right ankle condition claims. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The failure to obtain an examination and opinion for left and right ankle conditions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

As such, the Board finds that remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion and examination to assess any left and right ankle conditions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. With the Veteran's assistance, attempt to obtain the Veteran's VA and private medical treatment records relevant to treatment the Veteran received for any hypertension. All reasonable attempts to obtain such records should be made and documented. If VA attempts to obtain any outstanding records which are unavailable, the Veteran should be notified in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a clinician with appropriate expertise to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's eczema. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the reviewing clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed. If the reviewing clinician finds that diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

The clinician should obtain a history of the Veteran's eczema and clarify when the Veteran's eczema began. If the clinician rejects any medical history of symptoms, he/she must explain the reasons therefor.

After the record review and examination of the Veteran, the reviewing clinician must opine on the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's eczema had onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service event, injury, or disease?

The clinician is asked to provide the underlying reasons for all opinions expressed and is reminded that the term "as likely as not" means the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

The clinician should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record.

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report in-service injuries and treatment. Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the reviewing clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.

The clinician should not rely solely on the absence of evidence of in-service treatment or injury in the Veteran's service treatment records as a basis for any given opinion.

The clinician must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions. If the clinician is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he/she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the clinician should identify the additional information that is needed.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a clinician with appropriate expertise to assess the nature and etiology of any left and right ankle conditions. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the reviewing clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed. If the reviewing clinician finds that diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

The clinician should obtain a history of the Veteran's left and right ankle condition symptoms and clarify when any left and right ankle conditions began. If the clinician rejects any medical history of symptoms, he/she must explain the reasons therefor.

(a.) Provide a diagnosis for any left and right ankle conditions found. If the Veteran does not have any diagnosable left and right ankle conditions, but has pain only, determine whether that pain causes functional loss. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's ankle condition (to include pain that causes functional loss) was caused by an injury, event, or disease in service? In so opining, the clinician should address the lay statements of record regarding the Veteran's symptoms during and after service.

The clinician is asked to provide the underlying reasons for all opinions expressed and is reminded that the term "as likely as not" means the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

The clinician should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record.

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report in-service injuries and treatment. Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the reviewing clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.

The clinician should not rely solely on the absence of evidence of in-service treatment or injury in the Veteran's service treatment records as a basis for any given opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The clinician must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions. If the clinician is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he/she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the clinician should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.A. Murphy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.