Citation Nr: A25030429
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210121-134365
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tinnitus is related to her in-service noise exposure.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from May 1997 to September 2003, and from July 2005 to May 2006.  She also has additional periods of inactive service with the United States Navy Reserve.  For her meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Navy Achievement Medal, the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, and the Iraq Campaign Medal.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2020 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system, known by the Board as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. 

In the January 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the hearing docket.  The Veteran, and her husband, appeared at a hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in November 2024.  A transcript of the hearing is in the Veteran's file.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2020 rating decision (i.e., agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision) on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or her representative, at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  

If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, a left ankle disability, and a neck disability, any evidence the Board could not consider may be considered on readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The issue of entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) due to military sexual trauma (MST) and combat stressor, anxiety, and depression has been recharacterized as service connection of an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, in accordance with Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  

Certain chronic diseases, such as organic diseases of the nervous system like tinnitus, will be presumed related to service if they were noted as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if continuity of the same symptomatology has existed since service, with no intervening cause.  38 U.S.C. § § 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2012); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307, 3.309(a).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his or her current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 491 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

Service connection for tinnitus

The Veteran generally contends that she has tinnitus from in-service noise exposure.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Specifically, the Veteran contends she had excessive exposure to aircraft (e.g., F-18, F-16, C-130) and firearms (e.g., shot gun, M16 rifle, 9mm handgun).  See January 2021 VA Form 10182, NOD.  She reports being exposed to a F-18 jet engine without hearing protection during an airshow in 1999, and hearing a pop in her left ear.  In addition, she was exposed to noise, such as gunfire and rocket attacks, in combat while on deployment.  See November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 3, 7.  After service, the Veteran continued to have issues with tinnitus, although she was not exposed to loud noises.  For instance, she had an office job, and she did not have any loud hobbies (i.e., hunting or shooting without ear protection).  Id. at pp. 3, 8. 

The Veteran reports having constant ringing in her ears to the point she needs something running at all times to try and drown it out.  She also reports the constant ringing affects her sleep every night and her daily work.  See January 2021 Veteran Statement; see also August 2019 VA Examination for Hearing Loss and Tinnitus.  

Turning to the direct service connection framework, in the January 2020 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran has been diagnosed with tinnitus.  See also August 2019 VA Examination for Hearing Loss and Tinnitus.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first criteria for direct service connection, a current disability, has been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The next issue is whether the Veteran had an in-service incurrence.  The Veteran's available personnel records confirm her participation in a seafarer airman apprenticeship program and assignment to a Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron (i.e., the Blue Angels), military occupational specialty (MOS) as a law enforcement specialist, and deployment to Iraq and Kuwait.  See generally Military Personnel Records.  Accordingly, the Board finds that her report of in-service noise exposure is credible and consistent with the circumstances of her service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154.  The second criteria for service connection, an in-service incurrence, has been met. 

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to her in-service noise exposure. 

To that point, as discussed, the record contains the Veteran's competent reports that she has tinnitus.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ; January 2021 VA Form 10182, NOD; November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 3, 7.  Notably, tinnitus is a disability that is capable of lay observation and does not require medical expertise to determine its presence or relationship, if any, to prior events.  Thus, the Veteran is competent to speak to the origins of her tinnitus, including when she started having buzzing and/or ringing in her ears and how long it has continued since her service.  Moreover, her statements are consistent with the type of service she had, and have been consistent throughout the record.  For that reason, the Board finds her statements to be credible and assigns them great probative weight. 

In August 2019, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for hearing loss and tinnitus.  During the examination, the Veteran reported experiencing constant bilateral tinnitus since 1997.  

The VA examiner determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus was caused by or the result of her military noise exposure.  As rationale, the examiner stated there were no significant changes in hearing observed at ratable frequencies during the Veteran's active military service.  The examiner explained that while there are numerous possible causes of tinnitus, an audiologist can only address the etiology of tinnitus as it related to auditory system injuries.  Without evidence of an objectively verifiable noise injury (e.g., hearing loss, significant permanent hearing threshold shift, or other objective evidence of acoustic trauma), the association between claimed tinnitus and noise exposure does not exist.  Thus, the August 2019 VA examiner offered a negative nexus opinion. 

The VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because he relied on the absence of service treatment records (STRs) with evidence of significant changes in hearing, such as a significant permanent hearing threshold shift, and failed to consider the onset and recurrence of the Veteran's symptoms since her service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  As such, the Board assigns minimum probative weight to this opinion. 

On the other hand, the Board reiterates tinnitus is a disability capable of lay observation, and the record contains competent and credible assertions from the Veteran that she has continuously experienced tinnitus symptoms since her service.  Given there is no significant evidence contradicting her account, the Board resolves all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that each element of the service connection framework is met for this claim, and service connection for tinnitus is granted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends she has PTSD, which began in April 2006 approximately, due to combat and MST.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ; January 2021 VA Form 10182, NOD.  With regard to combat related incidents, the Veteran reports there were mortar and rocket attacks in Iraq.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-0781; November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 5, 26, 40.  

The Veteran also states she experienced multiple MSTs in service.  In 1998 and 2000, the Veteran explained she reported the incidents to supervisors, but was told she was not going to ruin the career of the servicemember involved on both occasions.  An additional incident occurred in Spring of 2002 or 2003, and then another in April 2006, after the Veteran returned from Iraq.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-0781a; November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 26-39.  The Veteran reports that the multiple MSTs are the reason she left service all together.  She states her behavior changed after these incidents, she began to shut down and did not want people around.  She had trust issues, did not want relationships, and developed drinking issues after her 2005 deployment.  See November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 29-31.  The Veteran's husband reported he noted the Veteran had suicidal ideations while deployed, and as a treatment provider at the time, he referred her to a physician in service, in 2005 or 2006.  Id. at pp. 37-38.      

The Veteran's March 13, 1997, enlistment examination was normal, with a normal psychiatric clinical evaluation. 

On December 12, 2000, the Veteran presented for lower abdominal cramping.  During the visit, she reported having unprotected intercourse one week prior, and she expressed concerns about STDs.  The Veteran was examined for STDs and given a pregnancy test.     

A June 7, 2002, retention examination was also normal, with a normal psychiatric clinical evaluation.  However, in a concurrently completed, June 7, 2002, report of medical history, the Veteran reported experiencing depression.    

On an October 30, 2003, report of medical history for the Navy Reserve, the Veteran reported anxiety and worry secondary to September 11, 2001, which had since resolved.  

On March 15, 2006, a post-deployment health care provider noted the Veteran's concerns about having mood swings that are bad at times, and referred her for a consult with mental health for combat stress.

On post-deployment health assessments, the Veteran reported she had psychiatric symptoms (i.e., little interest or pleasure in doing things, feeling down, depressed, hopeless, having nightmares, etc.) and indicated she would be interested in receiving help for stress, emotional, alcohol, or family problems.  See March 15, 2006, April 7, 2006, STRs.     

Post-service treatment records show that shortly after the Veteran's separation she reported a history of unwanted sexual advances while on military duty during a May 31, 2006, MST screening.  The Veteran also reported a possible pregnancy, which was subsequently confirmed.  See June 21, 2006, VAMC Other Output/Reports.  

On August 3, 2018, the Veteran saw a social worker to request counseling resources.  She was subsequently diagnosed with depression and anxiety by her primary care physician and started on psychotropic medication (i.e., sertraline).  See, e.g., October 19, 2018, April 19, 2019, April 10, 2020, Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility.   

In November 2018, the Veteran was given a provisional diagnosis of PTSD.  November 21, 2018, Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility; November 26, 2018, VAMC Other Output/Reports.   

Turning to the service connection framework, the Veteran's claim has been denied to this point on the basis that she did not have a diagnosis of PTSD that conforms to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria, as required for service connection for PTSD.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(f), 4.125(a).  

In the January 2020 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability and noted her provisional diagnosis of PTSD.  See also November 26, 2018, VAMC Other Output/Reports.  Therefore, based on this provisional diagnosis and markers of MST in the file, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination solely addressing PTSD in November 2019.  The November 2019 VA examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion based on a finding that the Veteran did not have a PTSD diagnosis that conforms to DSM-5 criteria.  See November 2019 VA Examination for Initial PTSD.

To date, however, the Veteran has not undergone a VA examination to address the possible relationship between other diagnosed psychiatric disorders and her service.  The evidence of record shows the Veteran complained of depression, anxiety, and psychiatric symptoms, like mood swings, while in service.  See, e.g., March 15, 2006, April 7, 2006, STRs.  Then post-service, she was diagnosed and treated for those psychiatric disorders by her physician.  See, e.g., October 19, 2018, April 19, 2019, April 10, 2020, Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility.  Thus, there is evidence of a current disability and an in-service incurrence in the file.  Therefore, the Board finds the requirements for obtaining an examination and opinion for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder(s) have been met.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).  

In the January 2020 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an examination and opinion to address the deficiency above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Board acknowledges that, following her hearing, the Veteran submitted a statement from K.S., LMSW, a provider from whom she has been receiving treatment for symptoms of PTSD.  See December 2024 SW K.S. Letter.  SW K.S. stated the Veteran has been receiving treatment for symptoms of PTSD after multiple self-assessments suggested a probable diagnosis in accordance with the DSM-5-TR (text revision).  In addition, she mentioned that the Veteran has reported multiple accounts of MST and exposure to traumatic events while deployed to a combat zone.  Id.  While SW K.S. also discussed the Veteran's progress and commitment to treatment, she did not provide a medical opinion to support a grant of service connection.   

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends her left ankle strain and/or pain is due to injuries she sustained in service during physical training.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ; See January 2021 VA Form 10182, NOD.  More specifically, the Veteran reports spraining her ankle multiple times (i.e., at least three or four) doing physical training and exercise.  See November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 8-11.  The Veteran sprained her ankle again after being issued ill-fitting boots that she had to keep wearing until a different size was ordered.  She states she sprained the Achilles on the left ankle and both of her feet were completely covered in blisters.  The Veteran also twisted her ankle on Liggett holes during a nighttime field exercise prior to deployment in 2005.  Id.  The Veteran reports her left ankle pain has continued since its onset in service.  Id. at p.14.         

The Veteran's husband, who has known her since their 2005/2006 deployment, noticed her ankle disability around August or September 2005.  He observed the Veteran hobbling during the field exercises prior to deployment, and recalls she had problems moving a heavy comms gear because her ankle hurt.  She was issued an ankle stabilizing boot, which was too large (i.e., size 7 boot for her size 5 and a half foot), making the use of an ACE wrap the best option to stabilize the ankle.  She was seen multiple times to have her ankle wrapped.  Id. at pp. 10-11.  

The Veteran's March 13, 1997, enlistment examination was normal, with a normal clinical evaluation of her lower extremities.  

A June 7, 2002, retention examination reflects a normal clinical evaluation for the Veteran's lower extremities, but an abnormal evaluation for her feet.  In a concurrently completed report of medical history, the Veteran reported her feet ache and are tender, as well as impaired use of her left leg during running.  See June 7, 2002, Report of Medical History.  

An October 30, 2003, report of medical history, shows the Veteran reported her foot cramping secondary to inserts resolved in 2002, and issues with swollen or painful joints was no longer a problem.  In addition, the Veteran indicated the use of her arms, legs, hands, or feet was impaired, but did not provide further explanation as to which area was affected.  

On March 15, 2006, a post-deployment health care provider noted the Veteran's concerns about her ankles, as well as her feet because of blisters from improperly fitting boots.  The Veteran also reported developing swollen, stiff, or painful joints during her deployment.  See March 15, 2006, April 7, 2006, STRs.  On an April 12, 2006, report of medical assessment, the Veteran reported concerns with her ankles again. 

Post-service treatment records show the Veteran receives treatment for left foot pain.  See, e.g., August 3, 2018, VAMC Other Output/Reports; April 19, 2019, Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility.  

Turning to the direct service connection framework, in the January 2020 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran has been diagnosed with left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.  See also August 2019 VA Examination for Ankle Conditions.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first criteria for direct service connection, a current disability, has been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The next issue is whether the Veteran had an in-service incurrence.  As discussed, the Veteran's STRs reflect her reported concerns about her ankles, and improperly fitting boots.  See, e.g., March 15, 2006, April 12, 2006, STRs.  Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report events capable of lay observation, such as the onset and recurrence of her left ankle pain.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  Accordingly, the second criteria for direct service connection, an in-service incurrence, has been met, although the Board offers no findings as to the Veteran's credibility at this time.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's left ankle disability is related to her active service. 

To that point, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for ankle conditions in August 2019.  During the examination, the Veteran reported she injured her left ankle during physical training at her first duty station.  She also reported she was seen and told to just wear her boots tighter.  The Veteran explained that her left ankle did not heal properly.  She has constant pain and feels like she walks abnormally.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic and/or recurrent left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.  

The August 2019 VA examiner determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left ankle disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  As rationale, the examiner focused solely on the possibility of the Veteran's disability being linked to her service in Southwest Asia.  The examiner found there was insufficient evidence (e.g., medical authority, peer reviewed study, or DOD/VA directive) of an association with Gulf War service.  Thus, the examiner offered a negative nexus.  

The August 2019 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because it is conclusory and not supported with a reasoned medical explanation based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case.  The examiner did not state whether, given her expertise, her examination of the Veteran led to any evidence regarding a relationship between the Veteran's left ankle disability and her active service (to include her service outside of the Southwest Asian theater).  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

In a subsequent medical opinion, a VA examiner also determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left ankle disability was incurred in or caused by service.  See January 2020 Medical Opinion.  As rationale, the examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's STRs note an ankle/foot condition in June 2002 and a foot/ankle condition in October 2003.  Nevertheless, the examiner offered a negative nexus because there was no additional documentation after October 2003 to support a chronic condition.  

This opinion is inadequate because it is based on inaccurate factual premises, given that the Veteran's STRs show she had complaints about her ankles after 2003.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  As discussed, the Veteran reported concerns about her ankles in 2006, after her deployment.  See, e.g., March 15, 2006, April 12, 2006, STRs.  The opinion is also inadequate because the examiner relied on the absence of STRs documenting the Veteran's condition was chronic, and failed to consider the onset and recurrence of her left ankle symptoms since service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

In the January 2020 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiencies above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

3. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

The Veteran generally contends that she has cervical strain and/or pain that began in service.  See July 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Specifically, the Veteran reports she wore a heavy, specialty helmet at her first and second commands, and heavy, oversized gear while stationed in Italy and deployed to Iraq.  The Veteran is a petite person (i.e., 4'11" in height and about 100 pounds in service), but was issued a heavy Kevlar helmet that was too large, and an extra-large Kevlar vest.  She explained that the weight of the helmet alone, kept pulling on her neck.  The Veteran states the weight of the heavy gear, as well as her firearm and other equipment (i.e., a field laptop) contributed to her neck pain.  See November 2024 Hearing Transcript, pp. 17-18.  

The Veteran's STRs do not reflect complaints, treatment, or diagnoses associated with a neck disability.  For instance, her March 14, 1997, entrance examination was normal, with normal clinical evaluations of her spine and head, face, neck, and scalp.  A June 7, 2002, retention examination also reflects normal clinical evaluations of the Veteran's spine and her head, face, neck, and scalp.

Nevertheless, post-service treatment records show the Veteran began to have complaints of neck pain in December 2010, which have been treated with physical therapy and chiropractic care.  See, e.g., December 14, 2010, VAMC Other Output/Reports; August 3, 2018, and April 19, 2019, VA Treatment Records

Turning to the direct service connection framework, in the January 2020 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability, cervical degenerative disc disease and degenerative arthritis.  See also August 2019 VA Examination for Neck (Cervical Spine) Conditions.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first criteria for direct service connection, a current disability, has been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The next issue is whether the Veteran had an in-service incurrence.  The Veteran is competent to report events capable of lay observation, such as the onset and recurrence of her neck pain.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  Accordingly, the second criteria for direct service connection, an in-service incurrence, has been met, although the Board offers no findings as to the Veteran's credibility at this time.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's neck disability is related to her active service. 

To that point, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for neck (cervical spine) conditions in August 2019.  During the examination, the Veteran reported picking up a communications container on one of her last deployments, and feeling a pain shoot straight down her neck to her back.  She reported it has never been the same, and that she developed neck pain a few years prior to the examination.  The Veteran stated being seen by a chiropractor made it worse, and she now has constant pain and tingling radiating to both hands.  She reported being unable to lift, and limitations with driving and doing chores.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative disc disease and degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine.

The August 2019 VA examiner determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left ankle disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As rationale, the examiner focused solely on the possibility of the Veteran's disability being linked to her service in Southwest Asia.  The examiner found there was insufficient evidence (e.g., medical authority, peer reviewed study, or DOD/VA directive) of an association with Gulf War service.  Thus, the examiner offered a negative nexus.  

The August 2019 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because it is conclusory and not supported with a reasoned medical explanation based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case.  The examiner did not state whether, given her expertise, her examination of the Veteran led to any evidence regarding a relationship between the Veteran's neck disability and her active service (to include her service outside of the Southwest Asian theater).  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

In the January 2020 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiency above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The Board acknowledges that, in December 2024, the Veteran submitted a positive nexus opinion from W.P., DC, a chiropractor who treated her neck disability from November 2020 to December 2022.  See December 2024 DC W.P. Letter.  DC W.P. stated that he reviewed the Veteran's record regarding her neck pain that radiates down both arms, and provided a detailed explanation of her symptoms, diagnosis, and resulting physical limitations.  He also recounted the Veteran's statements that physical demands and mental challenges such as constant heavy lifting, running and injuries sustained during her military service played a key role to her chronic pain.  DC W.P. opined that the Veteran's current diagnosis is more likely than not the direct result of the events that occurred during her military service.  Id.  

The Board notes that while DC W.P. indicated there was a nexus between the Veteran's current neck disability and her military service, the opinion is conclusory and not supported with a reasoned medical explanation based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Accordingly, DC W.P.'s opinion cannot support a grant of service connection.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

	Psychiatric Disorder

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination, with someone other than the November 2019 examiner, to determine the nature and possible relationship between the Veteran's service and her psychiatric disorder(s).  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.   

(A)	After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, the examiner is to state from which psychiatric disorder or disorders (including PTSD) the Veteran currently suffers, or whether she has had any other psychiatric disorders during the pendency of this appeal. 

(B)	If the examiner determines that the Veteran does not currently suffer from PTSD, and that this diagnosis would not have been appropriate at any time during the appeal period, the examiner must state what elements are missing from that diagnosis. 

(C)	If the examiner determines that the Veteran does suffer from PTSD, then the examiner must state whether it is at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's reported MSTs or combat-related stressors. 

(D)	If the examiner determines that the Veteran suffers from a psychiatric disorder other than PTSD, then the examiner must state whether it is at least as likely as not that any such identified disorder had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's active service, to include service in combat.

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. 

The examiner is instructed that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner is also advised that, as the Veteran served in combat, any statements made regarding in-service injuries related to any combat activities must be addressed.

Left Ankle Disability

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner as to the question below.  If the reviewing examiner determines that it is not possible to offer an opinion without first examining the Veteran, then schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination.  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.  

Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left ankle disability had its onset during her active service, or is otherwise related to her active service.

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. 

The examiner is instructed that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

	Neck Disability

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner as to the question below.  If the reviewing examiner determines that it is not possible to offer an opinion without first examining the Veteran, then schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination.  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.  

Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's neck disability had its onset during her active service, had onset during one year of discharge from active service, or is otherwise related to her active service.

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. 

The examiner is instructed that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative 

?

finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination. 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Neal, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.