Citation Nr: A25030764
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240331-428252
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran contends that OSA is secondary to service-connected sinusitis and rhinitis. In an August 2023 medical opinion, a VA clinician found that OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability. In formulating the opinion, the examiner explained that rhinitis and sinusitis could exacerbate OSA but were not necessarily causative. However, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to aggravation. 

Accordingly, an addendum opinion is required to clarify whether service-connected sinusitis and rhinitis aggravated OSA. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Direct the claims file to a clinician to determine the etiology of OSA. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following: 

"	What is the medical probability that OSA was aggravated by service-connected sinusitis or rhinitis? 

Aggravation means a worsening in the condition beyond its natural progression. but the worsening does not have to be permanent.

If aggravation is shown, the clinician should indicate, to the extent possible, the baseline level of the disability (that is, the approximate level of severity of the disorder prior to the onset of the aggravation).

It would be helpful to the Board if the clinician could discuss the difference between co-morbidity and causation, and specifically comment on the medical literature regarding an etiological connection between sinusitis, rhinitis, and OSA.

A rationale for all opinions must be provided.

An examination need not be scheduled unless the examiner deems it necessary to provide the requested opinions.

 

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kokolas, Thomas

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.