Citation Nr: A25030387
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240209-415064
 DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.  This issue is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low, mid, and upper back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shin splints is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shin splints is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran had active military service in the Southwest Asia theatre of operations. 

2. The record shows a current diagnosis of sinusitis during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for presumptive service connection for sinusitis under the PACT Act have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; Sergeant First Class (SFC) Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 7854 (December 22, 2022); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1978 to September 1992.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) in this case.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding all of the claims on appeal except for service connection for sinusitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

As a result of the PACT Act, sinusitis is now a condition that is now presumed to be associated with exposure to burn pits or other toxins for veterans with a qualifying period of active service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.320. Qualifying periods of active service include service on or after September 11, 2001, in Afghanistan, and service on or after August 2, 1990, in Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, and United Arab Emirates, Somalia, or the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, and the Red Sea. Id. The presumption established by the PACT Act means that when the law's criteria are met, as they are in this case, the law presumes a causal relationship between the claimed disability and the veteran's service, and no evidence of a nexus is needed to establish service connection.

A December 2022 VA Memorandum acknowledged that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theatre of operations between August 2, 1990, through July 31, 1991. His Department of Defense Form 214 specifies that this service was December 1990 to May 1991. Further, at a VA examination in October 2023, the examiner noted a diagnosis for sinusitis.  

Here, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to burn pits or other toxins because his deployment records show that he served in the Southwest Asia theatre of operations between August 2, 1990, through July 31, 1991. Having found that the Veteran had qualifying military service, and that he has a diagnosis for sinusitis, the Board finds that presumptive service connection pursuant to the PACT Act is warranted. The Veteran's appeal is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

After the Veteran's February 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ was submitted, the AOJ attempted to retrieve his VA treatment records, and associated with the record a screenshot of a search screen.  See CAPRI received September 18, 2023.  The search screenshot shows that he was treated at the Austin MyHealtheVet (MHV).  However, an error message was also shown, which stated that, "CAPRI cannot connect to the site you've chosen. CAPRI can only connect to VHA VistA systems. Treatment records stored outside of VistA, such as those in the Cerner electronic health record (EHR) system, must be accessed via other means."  A review of the Veteran's claims file does not document any further attempts to obtain the Veteran's VA treatment records from Austin MHV, by any other means.  The Board finds that those outstanding VA treatment records are pertinent to all of the claims on appeal and the AOJ's failure to attempt to obtain the Veteran's outstanding treatment records is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted.  

In addition to the failure to obtain the Veteran's outstanding VA treatment records, remand is warranted for other reasons.    

A review of the Veteran's STRs shows complaints for left foot pain, headaches, stomach pain, back pain, left ankle pain, bruised knees, right knee pain, left shoulder pain, thoracic pain, left knee pain, and scapular pain.  

At October 2023 VA examinations for the ankles, lower legs, hypertension, the shoulders, the elbows, the feet, the spine, headaches, and for the stomach in October 2023, diagnoses included a bilateral elbow condition, migraines, a lumbosacral strain, upper and mid-thoracic strain, bilateral plantar fasciitis, a bilateral shoulder condition, hypertension, a bilateral knee condition, and a bilateral ankle condition.  He was not found to have a diagnosis for a stomach condition or for shin splints.   

The Veteran was also provided nexus opinions for the spine, the feet, the ankles, headaches, the shoulders, the knees, the elbows, the stomach, and hypertension.  Regarding the stomach and hypertension, the examiner provided negative nexus opinions regarding the Veteran's exposure to burn pits and other particulates while deployed to Southwest Asia.  The examiner explained that there was no evidence that these conditions were related to those toxic exposures.  Regarding the other aforementioned conditions, the examiner used the same rationale, for the negative nexus opinions, explaining that the records were silent after separation.  

Here, the Board finds that the opinions provided by the October 2023 VA examiner are inadequate for adjudication purposes.  In this regard, the Board finds that the examiner did not provide any rationale in support of their conclusory opinion regarding toxic exposures and the Veteran's hypertension and stomach condition. The probative value of a nexus opinion comes from its reasoning. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Regarding the other claims, the examiner simply relied on the absence of post-service medical treatment as the basis for the rendered opinions.  Opinions based solely on the absence of treatment records are inadequate.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

The Board finds that the AOJ's reliance on the inadequate medical opinions to be a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's VA treatment records from Austin MHV, and any other VA facility where the Veteran has received care.  Document all efforts to obtain the outstanding records in the claims file.  

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's low, mid, and upper back condition. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's low, mid, and upper back condition had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing numerous complaints for low back pain, mid back pain, thoracic pain, scapular pain, and radiculopathy symptoms.  

3. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's foot conditions. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's foot conditions had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing a left foot injury, and numerous complaints for left foot pain.  

4. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's ankle conditions. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's ankle conditions had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing a left ankle sprain in August 1979, and numerous complaints for left ankle pain.    

5. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's migraines. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraines had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing numerous complaints for headaches, and his report at the separation examination that he had serious headaches.

6. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's shoulder conditions. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's shoulder conditions had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing complaints for left shoulder pain in April 1978 and May 1980.

7. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's knee conditions. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's knee conditions had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing an injury to the left knee in June 1978, badly bruised knees in February 1988, and numerous complaints for right knee pain.  

8. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's elbow conditions. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's elbow conditions had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?  Why or why not?

9. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's hypertension. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's military service, to include any toxic agents, and/or due to the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities?  Why or why not?

10. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's stomach condition. The examiner should provide the following opinion:

(Continued on the next page)

?

a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's stomach condition had its onset during his active duty service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's military service, to include any toxic agents, and/or due to the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.?  Why or why not?

11. A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions and conclusions expressed, citing to claims file documents, clinical findings, and/or medical literature as appropriate. If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner should identify what information or findings would be necessary to provide an opinion without speculation.

 

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fu, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.