Citation Nr: A25030090
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240424-435353
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 30 percent disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's service-connected lower back condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively shows that the Veteran's IBS has continuously been manifested by diarrhea with more or less constant abdominal distress.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for establishing entitlement to an initial 30 percent disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected IBS have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from August 2010 to February 2015.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from October 2023 and March 2024 rating decisions from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In June 2023, the RO issued a rating decision wherein they granted service connection for the Veteran's IBS and assigned a noncompensable evaluation effective March 1, 2023.  Thereafter, on June 21, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request, seeking Higher-Level Review of the June 2023 rating decision.  Pursuant to this Decision Review Request, a Higher-Level Review rating decision was issued in October 2023.  In this October 2023 rating decision, VA continued the noncompensable rating assigned in the June 2023 rating decision. 

In April 2024, the Veteran disagreed with the above-noted October 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision, and the March 2024 rating decision, and filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)).  The Veteran selected the Direct Review Lane by submitting notice of disagreement under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Accordingly, based on the Veteran's selections of the Higher-Level Review Lane and the Direct Review option, the Board is limited to review of the evidence in the record up and until the date of notification of the June 2023 rating decision for the IBS issue on appeal, and the evidence of record up and until the date of notice for the March 2024 rating decision for the lower back claim on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2601, 20.301.

The Board notes that in his 10182, the Veteran claimed that Higher-Level Review was never conducted for his IBS claim.  However, as explained above, the RO completed Higher-Level Review and issued a Higher-Level Review rating decision with regard to the IBS claim.  As such, the claim is properly before the Board.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the above claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

Increased Rating-Legal Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of the two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

In both initial rating claims and normal increased rating claims, the Board must discuss whether "staged ratings" are warranted, and if not, why not.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  The analysis in the following decision is therefore undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

IBS-Legal Criteria 

The Board initially notes rating criteria for digestive disabilities were revised effective May 19, 2024. Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Digestive System, 89 Fed. Reg. 19,735 (March 20, 2024) (to be codified at 38 C.F.R. § 4.114).  However, the amended rating criteria are not applicable here because the decision on appeal was issued in October 2023, prior to the amending rating criteria going into effect on May 19, 2024.  Therefore, the revised code will not be discussed further.

The Veteran's IBS is evaluated under the prior provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.  Under the prior version of Diagnostic Code 7319 applicable here, a noncompensable rating was assigned for mild irritable colon syndrome, disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress.  A 10 percent evaluation was assigned for moderate irritable colon syndrome; frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.  Finally, a 30 percent evaluation was assignable for severe irritable colon syndrome; diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress.

The Board observes that the words "mild," "moderate" and "severe" as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

The Board notes that for its purposes here, "mild," is defined as "not severe" or temperate; with "temperate" being defined as "keeping or held within limits" and "not extreme or excessive."  See Merriam-Webster's Dictionary (merriam-webster.com/dictionary, accessed January 21, 2025). "Moderate" is defined as "tending toward the mean or average amount," "not violent, severe, or intense," and "limited in scope or effect."  Id. "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree."  Id.

IBS-Analysis 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial compensable disability evaluation for his service-connected IBS.  For the reasons explained below, the Board agrees and finds a 30 percent initial disability rating is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected IBS.  

The Veteran's medical treatment records throughout the period document his complaints of, and treatment for, diarrhea.  The Veteran was afforded a May 2023 VA Intestinal Conditions examination for his IBS condition.  The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced watery loose stool 9-10 times per day, abdominal bloating 3-4 times per week, and has bright red blood in stool at least once a week.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements concerning his symptoms. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms such as diarrhea, blood in stool, and abdominal distress because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes.

Such competent evidence, with respect to the severity of this Veteran's IBS disability includes an assessment of the Veteran's disability.  This competent medical evidence has been provided by the medical personnel who have diagnosed and examined his IBS during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations.

The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) with consideration of the Veteran's symptoms, directly address the criteria under which such distinctively diagnosed disabilities are evaluated.

In this case, the medical evidence of record persuasively establishes that the Veteran's IBS has continuously been manifested by symptoms of diarrhea and with more or less constant abdominal distress.  Therefore, the Veteran is entitled to an initial 30 percent rating for his service-connected IBS.  As 30 percent is the maximum schedular evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7319 for the Veteran's IBS disability, this counts as a complete grant of the Veteran's claim on appeal.

In sum, the Board concludes that the criteria for an initial 30 percent disability rating is warranted throughout the period of appeal for the Veteran's IBS, and therefore, the Veteran's claim is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.  This case raises no additional issues.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Lower Back

The Board shall remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicolson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  To be considered adequate, a medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

While there is a May 2023 VA examination and medical opinion regarding the severity of the Veteran's lower back condition, the Board finds it to be inadequate for rating purposes.  

Specifically, the Board notes that in Jones v. Shinseki, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria." 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  More specifically, "if [a diagnostic code (DC)] does not specifically contemplate the effects of medication, the Board is required... to discount the ameliorative effects of medication."  McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271 (2016) (en banc) (citing Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 63).     

Thus, under Jones, the Board is precluded from considering the effects of the Veteran's pain medication when assigning a disability rating under the DC for his lumbar spine.

The Board also acknowledges a recent decision in which the Court held that applicable diagnostic codes and regulations pertaining to musculoskeletal disabilities do not explicitly contemplate medication use, and as such, VA must discount the beneficial effects of medication when assigning an evaluation of a musculoskeletal disability.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, slip op. at 10 (Vet. App. March 12, 2025).  Examiners must consider and discount the beneficial effects of medications when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities, to specifically include a discussion of whether a veteran may experience additional functional impairment, to include range of motion loss, without the use of medications.

The May 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran is taking Flexeril and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for treatment of his lower back pain.  However, the examiner does not indicate whether the Veteran's limitations of range of motion recorded during the examination, to include during repeated use over time and during a flare up, consider the ameliorative effects of the medication.  The Court has held that the VA cannot "assess a veteran's worst-case scenario, including a flare up, if it was also factoring in the beneficial effects of medication."  See Ingram, supra.

As such, the Board finds that a remand is required in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and provide the Veteran with an adequate VA examination which addresses the severity of his service-connected lumbar spine.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination, with a qualified examiner, to determine the current nature and severity of his lumbar spine disability.  The claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner and all necessary tests should be performed. 

(a.) The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  In reporting the results of range of motion testing, the examiner should identify any objective evidence of pain, and the degree at which pain begins.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.  The examiner should describe any pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, instability of station and incoordination present.  

(b.) The examiner must also attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.  If the Veteran is not currently experiencing a flare-up, then based on relevant information elicited from the Veteran, a review of the file, and the current examination results regarding the frequency, duration, characteristics, severity, and functional loss regarding his flares, the examiner is requested to provide an estimate of the Veteran's functional loss due to flares expressed in terms of the degree of additional range of motion lost, or explain why the examiner cannot do so.  [The Board recognizes the difficulty in making such determinations but requests that the examiner provide his or her best estimate based on the examination findings and statements of the Veteran.] 

(c.)  The examiner must expressly consider and discount the beneficial effects of medications when evaluating the Veteran's musculoskeletal disability, to specifically include a discussion of whether the Veteran may experience additional functional impairment, to include range of motion loss, without the use of medications-to include during flare-ups and after repeated use over time. [The Board recognizes the difficulty in making such determinations but requests that the examiner provide his or her best estimate based on the examination findings and statements of the Veteran.] 

(d.) The examiner must indicate whether the Veteran has ankylosis.  If ankylosis is not diagnosed then the examiner must answer whether there is evidence demonstrating the functional equivalent of ankylosis-i.e., functional loss consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.

(e.) To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the claimed disabilities and comment on the effect of these disabilities on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living. 

(f.) If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement, or an opinion regarding flare-ups, repeated use over time, symptoms, or functional impairment without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide a reason for doing so. 

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all proffered opinions.  If an examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.  If an examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete answer as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.   

 

 

A.	C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gresham, Trevor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.