Citation Nr: A25030665
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240425-434363
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a sinus disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from July 1997 to July 2004.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the April 25, 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received to reconsider the claims of entitlement to service connection for non-allergic rhinitis and entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.  This is a favorable finding by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to the address the claim on the merits.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Board recognizes that the Veteran, as a layperson, is not competent to distinguish between competing sinus diagnoses, and so a claim of service connection for one is considered a claim for all.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  As such, while the Veteran's initial claim was for service connection for sinusitis and non-allergic rhinitis, the Board has expanded the claim to one for service connection for a sinus disorder generally.  Id.

In January 2024, the Veteran's private attorney withdrew her representation.  A claimant's representative may withdraw from representation "if such withdrawal would not adversely impact the claimant's interest."  38 C.F.R. §§ 14.631(c), 20.6.  The Board finds that there is no adverse impact to the Veteran's interest, and the attorney withdrew representation with adequate notice and time for the Veteran to obtain new representation, which the Veteran has not done.  Accordingly, the Board accepts this withdrawal of the attorney's representation.  The Veteran is now unrepresented.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a sinus disorder is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disorder is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2023 decision on appeal.

The Veteran asserts that his sinus problems developed during his active duty service from his exposure to dust, smoke, and chemicals.  He indicated that he never had sinus problems prior to service.  He reported having a constant running and itchy nose, difficulty breathing, and frequent infections ever since service.  He said that because he did not have proper medical care during or after service, he relied mostly on over-the-counter decongestants or ignored the symptoms.  See August 2023 statement. 

In February 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination and was diagnosed with non-allergic rhinitis.  During the VA examination, the Veteran reported that his symptoms began in 1999 while he was deployed to Japan.  He said that he sought medical attention and had been using Flonase spray since service.  He reported currently having symptoms of nasal congestion, a runny nose, post-nasal drip, water eyes, sneezing, and frontal and ethmoid sinus pressure.  The February 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sinus disorder, claimed as sinusitis, was less likely than not incurred in or caused by active duty service.  In providing a rationale, the February 2022 VA examiner found that the Veteran's objective examination was normal, that his symptoms were subjective only, and his sinus x-ray was negative for sinus disease.  The February 2022 VA examiner concluded that there was no chronic diagnosis for sinusitis.  

In a March 2022 VA opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's non-allergic rhinitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by active duty service.  In providing a rationale, the March 2022 VA examiner found that after reviewing the Veteran's treatment records, he could find no evidence that Veteran was evaluated for, treated for, or diagnosed with allergic rhinitis during his military service.  The March 2022 VA examiner also found that the Veteran's treatment records did not include any radiology evidence that the Veteran was evaluated for non-allergic rhinitis or chronic sinusitis during military service.  The March 2022 VA examiner referenced medical literature and explained that chronic sinusitis was associated with numerous complications to include obstruction, abscess, formation, in rare cases, spinal meningitis, loss of smell and taste, but not associated with non-allergic rhinitis.  In fact, allergic rhinitis and non-allergic rhinitis are actually causes for chronic sinusitis as a complication of chronic nasal congestion, swelling and obstruction.  Due to the lack of evidence to suggest a nexus of injury, the March 2022 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's current non-allergic rhinitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his military service.  

The Board finds that the February 2022 and March 2022 VA opinions are inadequate.  The March 2022 VA examiner relied on the Veteran's lack of service treatment records (STRs) or radiological evidence documenting evaluation, treatment or diagnosis for allergic rhinitis during service; however, in a July 2023 VA notification letter, VA informed the Veteran that his STRs could not be located.  Although the record does include some of the Veteran's STRs, they do not include his separation examination.  Significantly, the available STRs reflecting a December 1999 diagnosis for acute sinusitis not otherwise specified, do not include any other information, including any reported symptoms or any diagnostic testing used to confirm the diagnosis.  Nevertheless, the March 2022 VA examiner appeared to rely on the incomplete information to arrive at his opinion.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (finding that "the medical examiner cannot rely on the absence of medical records corroborating that injury to conclude that there is no relationship between the appellant's current disability and his military service").  Moreover, the March 2022 VA examiner did not address the Veteran's lay reports that his symptoms began during service and that he self-treated his sinus problems with Flonase since service.  Finally, neither the February 2022 VA examiner nor the March 2022 VA examiner had the benefit of reviewing the Veteran's August 2023 statement in which he described the onset and continuity of his sinus symptoms, including his assertion that his symptoms were caused by exposure to dust, smoke, and chemicals during service.  The duty to assist requires an examiner to address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion because medical opinions can inform credibility findings.  Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).  For all of these reasons, the Board finds that the February 2022 and March 2022 VA opinions are inadequate, and a remand is required to obtain a supplemental VA opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's sinus disorder and to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his sinus problems began during service and continued following service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  Although the Board is requesting a medical opinion regarding his lay contentions, this is for thoroughness and not based on a finding that these contentions are credible.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for an addendum opinion by an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sinus disorder.  The examiner should respond to the following:

Opine whether the Veteran's current sinus disorder, diagnosed as non-allergic rhinitis, had its onset during active duty service or was otherwise etiologically related to service, to include his reported exposure to dust, smoke, and chemicals.  

In providing the above opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's complete and relevant medical history, including a December 1999 service treatment record documenting a diagnosis for acute sinusitis not otherwise specified.  The examiner must note that the Veteran's complete service treatment records could not be located.  See July 2023 VA notification letter.  

The examiner must address the Veteran's lay reports describing the onset and continuity of his sinus symptoms.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner must not rely solely on the lack of medical documentation as the basis for a negative opinion.  

A complete rationale with discussion of medical literature for any opinion expressed must be provided.  If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, discuss why this is the case.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Journet Shaw, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.