Citation Nr: A25030852
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-467805
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1969 to May 1972.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) in December 2024.  A transcript has been associated with the record.  

Based on the Veteran's election of the Hearing docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right and left lower extremities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity 

2. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity

The Veteran contends that his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is related to herbicide agent exposure while serving in the Republic of Vietnam.  See December 2024 Hearing Transcript; June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Veteran was afforded a VA peripheral nerves conditions examination in July 2023, however, no VA opinion was obtained.  The August 2023 rating decision explained that an opinion was not obtained because the Secretary had determined there was no indication of an association between peripheral neuropathy, right or left lower extremities, and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) and because there was no competent medical or scientific evidence of an association between the Veteran's claimed disabilities and an in-service TERA.

For the reasons that follow, the Board disagrees and finds that the evidence of record was at least sufficient to trigger VA's duty to assist to provide a VA medical opinion.

For service connection claims, VA is obliged to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion in a claim when (1) the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability, (2) the record indicates that the disability or signs and symptoms of disability may be associated with active service, and (3) the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The threshold for finding a link between current disability and service is low. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy in his right and left lower extremities.  The Veteran was also found to have confirmed service in the Republic of Vietnam and, thus, the Veteran's exposure to herbicide agents is presumed. See August 2023 Rating Decision.  Favorable findings made by an AOJ are binding on the Board "unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding."  38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  

However, as noted above, despite these findings, no VA medical opinion regarding his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was obtained.  The Board finds that such evidence was sufficient to trigger VA's duty to obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  

The Board additionally finds that not obtaining an examination for this claim constitutes a duty to assist error which existed at the time of the August 2023 rating decision.  Consequently, remand is warranted to obtain an opinion to determine the etiology of the claimed bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy consistent with the directives herein.

Finally, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's March 2025 statement in which he stated that VA began presuming that peripheral neuropathy was associated with exposure to Agent Orange after September 6, 2013, and that "VA's new rule removed the requirement that peripheral neuropathy appear within weeks or months of exposure and resolve within 2 years."  Importantly, however, only early-onset peripheral neuropathy is subject to the herbicide agents presumption.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  To qualify for the herbicide agents presumption, early-onset peripheral neuropathy must manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of the last date on which the veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(ii).  

Here, the record does not demonstrate nor has the Veteran contended that his peripheral neuropathy disabilities manifested within one year of his military service.  See December 2024 Hearing Transcript, July 2023 VA examination.  Thus, remand is still required to obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file and all findings must be fully reported.

The examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathies are related to in-service exposure to herbicide agents.

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the fact that peripheral neuropathy (that is not of the early-onset type) is not on the list of diseases that are presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents.

The examiner is further advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms or history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all requested opinions should be provided.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation stating why this is so.  In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Coburn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.