Citation Nr: A25030975
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240417-449759
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right extremity carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left extremity carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hyperacusis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypersomnolence is remanded.

Entitlement to total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have right extremity CTS that was incurred in or due to his time in service or that is proximately due to any of his service connected disabilities. 

2. The Veteran does not have left extremity CTS that was incurred in or due to his time in service or that is proximately due to any of his service connected disabilities. 

3. The Veteran does not have hyperacusis that was incurred in or due to his time in service or that is proximately due to any of his service connected disabilities. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for right extremity CTS are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for left extremity CTS are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for hyperacusis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from July 1980 to March 1982.

These matters are on appeal from June and September 2023 rating decisions. Here the Board notes the Veteran also appealed 2018 and 2019 non-AMA decisions that are not appealable under the AMA framework.  Therefore, the Board will not address those claims in this decision. The Veteran is free to file the appropriate paperwork if he still wishes to pursue those claims.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June and September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for hypersomnolence, service connection for hyperacusis, and entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Generally, to prevail on a claim of service connection on the merits, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) medical evidence or other competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  See Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

To establish service connection on a secondary basis, the evidence must show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)(b) (2016), Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

Service connection can also be established through continuity of symptomatology. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (2013); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (b), 3.309. For chronic diseases shown as such in service or within the applicable presumptive period, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date are service connected unless attributable to an intercurrent cause. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b). For a chronic disease to be considered to have been "shown in service," there must be a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings. When the condition noted in service or within the presumptive period is not a chronic disease, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after discharge is required. Id.

According to VA regulations, it is incumbent upon the Veteran to submit to a VA examination regarding his receipt of VA compensation or pension benefits.  See Dusek v. Derwinski, 2?Vet. App.?519 (1992).  When necessary or requested, he must cooperate with VA in obtaining evidence.  See Wood v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?190, 193 (1991) (holding that the duty to assist is not a one-way street).  When entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination and a claimant, without "good cause," fails to report for such examination, action shall be taken.  38?C.F.R. §?3.655.  

Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant and death of an immediate family member.  When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original claim or a claim for initial increased rating claim, the claim shall be decided on the evidence of record.  38?C.F.R. §?3.655 (b).  When the examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a reopened claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.

In this case, the Veteran was scheduled for an examination pertaining to his claim for hyperacusis. However, in September 2023, the examination was canceled at the Veteran's request.  The Veteran did not give a reason for canceling his request and did not ask for the examination to be rescheduled.  Therefore, the Board will adjudicate the claim on the evidence of record.

The Veteran contends he has bilateral carpel tunnel syndrome (CTS) and hyperacusis that were incurred in or due to his time in service or that are proximately due to service connected disabilities.

The Veteran's record does not indicate he is diagnosed with these claimed disabilities.  The Veteran did not mention hyperacusis in a December 2016 tinnitus examination and in a July 2017 examination for tinnitus, while the Veteran said his tinnitus was annoying, he did not mention hyperacusis. 

Additionally, a June 2020 letter from one of the Veteran's doctors indicated there was no evidence of CTS shown on EMG studies performed in February 2018 after considering the Veteran's reported symptoms of coldness in the hand and weakness in the grip. Importantly here, the Board has reviewed the Veteran's record noting symptoms related to his left upper extremity nerve causing symptoms in his left extremity, including his wrist and hand. However, the Veteran is already service connected for a left upper extremity nerve condition associated with those symptoms.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not indicate the Veteran was seen for ongoing trouble with sensitivity to sound or for CTS problems or symptoms.  Tellingly, in his February 1982 separation examination, the Veteran reported he was in good health. He noted he had headaches and broken bones, but no sensitivity to sound, daytime fatigue, or CTS symptoms.

As discussed above, the Veteran was scheduled for an examination for his hyperacusis but he canceled without any indication for the cancelation and did not ask to reschedule. There is no evidence of record indicating the Veteran's hyperacusis is at least as likely as not due to his time in service or his service connected disabilities, to include his tinnitus. 

Simply stated, the Board cannot delay the adjudication of these issues further.

The Board notes the Veteran was not provided a separate examination and opinion as to the current nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral CTS.  However, VA need not conduct an examination with respect to the claim on appeal, as information and the evidence of record contains sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 76 (2006), VA must provide an examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.

Simply stated, the standards of McLendon are not met in this case as the Veteran is not shown to have suffered CTS while in service and there is no other competent medical evidence suggesting an association to service.  Therefore, the Board finds that no examination was necessary.

Regarding the claims above, the Board acknowledges and has considered the Veteran's statements that his conditions bother him and they are due to his time in service or his service connected disabilities.  However, while the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms of his disabilities, he is not competent to opine on matters requiring medical knowledge, such as the nature and etiology of his complex medical conditions.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Thus, while the Board has carefully considered the Veteran's statements about his symptoms, these statements must be weighed against the objective evidence of record, which does not indicate the Veteran has a diagnosis of his claimed conditions or that they were due to his time in service or his service connected disabilities.

It is important for the Veteran to understand the facts of this case provide highly probative evidence against this claim that the Board cannot, unfortunately, ignore, outweighing the Veteran's beliefs that his conditions warrant service connection 43 years ago.

Regarding all the above, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  Except as otherwise noted, because the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for hypersomnolence 

In a September 2023 opinion without the attached examination, an examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's hypersomnolence was proximately due to his service connected tinnitus. The examiner noted several relevant records, including one that indicated he was on trazadone for insomnia and that the Veteran had chronic PTSD. The examiner said the Veteran had several conditions that can cause hypersomnolence or fatigue including anemia and that trazadone lists somnolence as a common reaction in some patients. However, in his tinnitus examination, the Veteran did not mention hypersomnolence or mention any loss of sleep or anything related to fatigue and tinnitus.

There is a question as to whether hypersomnolence is a separate diagnosed disability or whether it is a symptom. This question was not addressed in the examination obtained above but the RO denied service connection in part saying hypersomnolence is a symptom.  

Upon remand, it must be clarified if hypersomnolence is a diagnosed disability subject to VA compensation or a symptom.

Additionally, the Board finds the September 2023 opinion inadequate.  While the examiner opined the Veteran's condition was not secondary to his service connected tinnitus, the examiner noted the Veteran had several other conditions that could cause hypersomnolence, including taking medication for insomnia.  The Veteran is also diagnosed with PTSD and it is unclear whether the Veteran's hypersomnolence is a symptom of such or potentially a separate diagnosed condition proximately due to his service connected disabilities.  The Board finds a duty to assist error in that the Veteran was not provided an adequate examination that addresses all theories of entitlement for his hypersomnolence as well as not being provided an answer as to whether hypersomnolence is a separately diagnosed condition.

Entitlement to a TDIU

The Board finds the matter of entitlement to a TDIU to be inextricably intertwined with the matter on remand and therefore it will also be remanded. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for his 1) hypersomnolence.  IF THE VETERAN DOES NOT WISH TO REPORT TO AN EXAMINATION, AN ADDENDUM OPINION SHOULD BE OBTAINED.

The examiner should opine as to the following:

(a)	Is hypersomnolence a separate diagnosed disability? Please explain why or why not.

(b)	If so, does the Veteran have a diagnosis of hypersomnolence? Please explain why or why not.

If the answers to A and B are yes, please answer the following:

(c)	Whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's disability was incurred in or due to his time in service?

(d)	Whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's disability is proximately due to any of his service connected disabilities.

(e)	Whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's disability was aggravated by any of his service connected disabilities.

NOTE: Aggravation in this context does not mean a permanent worsening.  Any incremental or temporary worsening constitutes aggravation.

*The examiner must consider and take into account the Veteran's lay statements about what happened to him while in service and his current symptoms.

*The examiner may not rely solely on a lack of treatment as a reason for a negative etiology opinion.

2. Readjudicate the Veteran's claims on remand.

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Snoparsky, April

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.