Citation Nr: A25030920
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 200302-71277
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

For the entire appeal period, a 70 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety, NOS, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety, NOS, PTSD, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder is manifested by, at worst, occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

For the entire appeal period, the criteria for a 70 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety, NOS, PTSD, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1-4.7, 4.10, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1967 to February 1970.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2020 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

Most recently, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) denied the Veteran's claim seeking entitlement to a higher disability rating in an August 2023 decision. The Veteran appealed the Board's August 2023 decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  Pursuant to a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR), the Court, in a November 2024 Order, vacated the Board's decision and remanded the matter to the Board for action consistent with the directives of the JMPR.  Further, the JMPR did not disturb the portion of the Board's August 2023 decision which granted entitlement to a 50 percent disability rating.  Also, the Court noted that the Veteran was not appealing the denial of entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection.  

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a Veteran's present symptomatology with criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations.  See generally, 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  Where the veteran is appealing the rating for an already established service-connected condition, his present level of disability is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  

The regulations for rating mental disorders are found in 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125-4.130.  The Board notes that such disabilities are evaluated under Diagnostic Code 9413 which is rated according to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 

A 50 percent rating is provided for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is provided for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: Suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent rating is provided for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: Gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125-4.130. 

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety, NOS, PTSD, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder.  

In December 2013, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, at which time the VA examiner diagnosed other specific anxiety disorder. The Veteran lived alone and managed his activities of daily living. He volunteered multiple days weekly at the VA hospital. He attended church weekly. He stopped attending support groups and no longer took his medication for anxiety. He denied domestic violence or acts of aggression. The examiner identified the Veteran having anxiety as his sole symptom. The Veteran reported having anxiety "a couple of times a week," and denied having depressed mood. He described his sleep as restless. He experienced anger and irritability with others with varying frequency, which causes withdrawal from others. He reported nightmares about combat once per week. He denied suicidal or homicidal plans or intent. On examination, the Veteran arrived on-time and was appropriately groomed and dressed.  He was alert and oriented in all spheres.  Affect was full range and mood was unremarkable. Speech was normal rate, tone, and volume. His thought processes were logical, and goal directed. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's anxiety disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.

In October 2016, the Veteran underwent an examination by a private physician. The Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD. The Veteran reported the following symptoms: periods of disassociation, nightmares, avoidance, and hypervigilance. During the interview, the Veteran was cooperative and appropriate without evidence of poor impulse control. Speech was soft, but otherwise normal. Mood was "okay" and affect was restricted. His thought content was positive for suicidal ideation with plan or intent. He had no homicidal ideation. Though processes were generally linear and logical. There was no evidence of delusions. He reported altered causal relationships as he survived, and others did not during war. He was cognitively intact. 

In December 2016, the Veteran underwent another VA examination. The Veteran reported intrusive distressing memories every other day, weekly distressing dreams, weekly flashbacks, and shaking when thinking about combat. He reported irritable behavior with angry outbursts, reckless or self-destructive behavior, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, limited problems with concentration and sleep impairment. While the Veteran noted other symptoms, the examiner wrote that they administered "two tests" during the examination and "the results from both of the tests were indicative of feigning symptoms." As a result, the examiner declined to diagnose him with an acquired psychiatric disorder meeting the DSM-5 criteria, as he was "uncooperative [and the examiner] was unable to differentiate possible legitimate symptoms from feigned symptoms." Thus, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran had no psychiatric disorder.

In February 2020, the Veteran underwent another VA examination. Here, the VA examiner noted a diagnosis of anxiety, NOS. The Veteran reported difficulty falling asleep. He was attending weekly VA therapy group sessions. The VA examiner noted symptoms of anxiety and chronic sleep impairment. While his mood appeared euthymic, he arrived early for the examination, was neatly dressed and groomed, maintained eye contact, was fully oriented, memory intact, speech normal, thoughts were organized and coherent, and denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, hallucinations, or delusions. Overall, the VA examiner found his psychiatric symptoms to cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.

In an April 2020 statement, the Veteran reported impaired impulse control since 2013.  He accepted not having relationships with others as he would not be hurt. He reported not having a relationship with his daughter and he divorces. 

In May 2020, the Veteran submitted another private examination. The private examiner opined that the Veteran was "overwhelmed by PTSD from at least 2013 going forward but, in reality, far earlier." Specifically, he wrote that in an employment setting he was angry, irritable, and unable to manage personal relationships. Additionally, the physician stated that the Veteran meets the criteria for Alcohol Use Disorder in sustained remission. Further, the physician noted that the Veteran has a high probability of violence, noting his prior incarceration. Additionally, he stated that the Veteran has "thoughts of killing himself and has had to resist suicidal ideation for decades." In discussing other symptoms, he wrote that the Veteran has "intrusive memories, intensity of flashbacks and nightmares" which increases his aggression. He further stated that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms would prevent employment.

In applying the doctrine of reasonable doubt, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating is warranted for the entire appeal period.  In viewing the criteria for the various rating levels, the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria for a 70 percent rating for the entire period on appeal.  The Board has considered the totality of the Veteran's symptoms as well as their frequency, severity, and duration.  The Veteran has consistently exhibited some symptoms which are more compatible with a 70 percent rating, such as suicidal ideation, hypervigilance, and impaired impulse control. These symptoms are not contemplated within a 50 percent rating and indicate a more severe disability picture.  The Board notes that the Veteran endorsed hypervigilance as early as October 2016 and impaired impulse control as early as December 2013.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating is met, but no higher.  

The Board finds that a higher 100 percent rating is not warranted because at no time during the appeal period did the Veteran exhibit total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. He was noted not to have such symptoms nor were any other symptoms compatible with such an extreme lack of functioning shown, such as symptoms reflective of psychotic manifestations, severe cognitive dysfunction, or a basic inability to function.  

The Board recognizes that the Veteran had significant mental health symptoms for which he has received regular psychiatric treatment. Also, the Board is aware that the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code criteria are examples of the type and degree of symptoms for those evaluations, and that the Veteran need not demonstrate those exact symptoms to warrant higher ratings. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 436 (2002). In this case, based on the above, the overwhelming weight of the evidence is against a rating of 100 percent.

In sum, the evidence supports a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety, NOS, PTSD, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder for the entire appeal period, but the weight of the evidence is against a rating in excess of 70 percent. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The Board finds that the issue of the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the grant of a 70 percent rating for his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety, NOS, PTSD, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder.  Accordingly, remand is warranted.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

(Continued on the next page)

?

Following the implementation of the increased rating granted herein, readjudicate the issue of the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Costello, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.