Citation Nr: A25030790
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 211116-197958
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

The claim of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine condition, to include intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) with spinal stenosis, is denied.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve, claimed as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder, is denied.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve, claimed as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder, is denied.

REMANDED

The claim of entitlement to bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, also claimed as calf muscle ache with pain, is remanded.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, to include degenerative arthritis, IVDS, and neck pain secondary to migraine headache and depression, is remanded.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to major depressive disorder and insomnia, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability, to include IVDS with spinal stenosis, began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve is related to his lumbar spine condition and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve is related to his lumbar spine condition and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a lumbar spine disability, to include IVDS with spinal stenosis, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had honorable active duty service in the United States Air Force from July 1971 to August 1971.  

The rating decision on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) was issued in October 2021, by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies to these appeals.

In August 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of decisions dated May 18, 2021 (regarding CFS and hypertension), May 13, 2021 (regarding the lumbar spine and bilateral lower extremities), and November 2020 (regarding the cervical spine).  In October 2021, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior decisions and continued to deny the claims on the merits.  

In the November 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 and November 2020 decisions as specified above, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Regarding the lumbar spine, and lower extremity radiculopathy conditions, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, a neck disorder, CFS, and hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. The claim of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine condition, to include IVDS with spinal stenosis.

See section three, below.

2. The claim of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve, claimed as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder.

See section three, below.

3. The claim of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve, claimed as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a lumbar spine disability, as well as bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  

For clarity at the outset, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has previously pursued claims for a variety of lower extremity conditions (including for his toes and varicose veins).  The Board acknowledges that in the rating decision presently on appeal, the AOJ framed the issues to include service connection for left and right "calf muscle ache painful to now include peripheral neuropathy and radiculopathy of the femoral nerve."  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that when a claimant makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled.  See Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79 (2009) (holding that a claimant may satisfy the requirement to identify the benefit sought by referring to a body part or system that is disabled or by describing symptoms of the disability); see also Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Having reviewed the Veteran's contentions and evidence of record, rather than retaining the AOJ's expansive framing of the issues, the Board finds it most appropriate to separate the claimed bilateral lower extremity conditions of radiculopathy (to include as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder) from the condition diagnosed and identified as peripheral neuropathy with painful calf muscle ache (hereafter peripheral neuropathy).  The basis for separating and remanding the peripheral neuropathy claims will be addressed further in the remand section below.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In cases where a Veteran has qualifying active service, service connection for certain chronic diseases, including arthritis, may also be established on a presumptive basis by showing that such a disease manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  In such cases, the disease is presumed under the law to have had its onset in service even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is "nearly equal" or in "approximate balance."  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Turning to the evidence in this case, the Board acknowledges that the AOJ made several favorable findings regarding each of the claimed conditions.  The Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ, unless the finding is rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  In this case, the Board finds that one of the AOJ's favorable findings is rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence and is therefore not binding on the Board.  Specifically, in the October 2021 rating decision regarding the lumbar spine disorder, the AOJ made the following finding: "You [the Veteran] have sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection.  Your personnel records confirms that you have served at least 90 continuous days of active service."  The AOJ's finding is directly contradicted by the Veteran's service records, which show that he served on active duty from July 6, 1971, to August 25, 1971.  See DD 214 (showing that 26 days of that service were further counted as "days lost.").  The introduction to the AOJ's October 2021 rating decision expressly notes that the Veteran's service spanned only from July 6 to August 25, 1971, and these service dates also correspond to those the Veteran listed on past claim applications.  See, e.g., January 2017 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim; July 2005 Declaration.  

A finding that the Veteran had adequate service to meet the 90-day requirement could have a significant impact on his claims, as a veteran must serve at least 90 days in active service to qualify for a presumption of service connection for diseases under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  See Grose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 144, 148 (1993).  However, based on review of the record, the Board finds no other evidence to establish or suggest that the Veteran had a separate service period that could entitle him to this significant presumption.  See, e.g., March 1975 Review of Discharge or Separation (denying the Veteran's request to reenlist).  As such, the Board finds that the AOJ's favorable 90-day finding is clearly and unmistakably erroneous and has been rebutted.  This finding is therefore not binding on the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Turning to the remainder of the favorable findings and merits of the underlying claims, the Board accepts that the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a lumbar spine and lower extremity disability, as a March 2019 VA examination showed a diagnosis of lumbar spine IVDS with spinal stenosis and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy affecting the femoral nerves.  

The question for the Board becomes whether the Veteran's current disabilities began during service or are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

The Board concludes that while the Veteran has currently diagnosed lumbar spine disabilities with associated lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerves, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the conditions began during active service, or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

First, the credible and probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran experienced a relevant injury, event, or illness impacting his lower extremity femoral nerves or spine during active service.  In so finding, the Board notes that the Veteran's service records show that he had no relevant medical defects at enlistment to service.  His May 1971 Report of Medical History indicates that he reported only a pre-service knuckle fracture that resulted in no ongoing consequences.  Service treatment records (STRs) do not contain complaint, diagnosis, or treatment for any of the claimed conditions or potentially relevant symptoms of the claimed conditions.  Further, at his separation from active service, personnel records show that the Veteran expressly denied having relevant symptoms such as recurrent back trouble, leg cramps, neuritis, foot trouble, arthritis, neuritis, or paralysis.  At separation, a military clinician reviewed the Veteran's reported medical history and found that the Veteran had not "experienced a significant illness or injury since induction."  He was medically cleared for separation.  

The Board observes that the Veteran's personnel records indicate that he was counseled on multiple occasions for issues related to his conduct and compliance with service obligations; however, these records do not suggest that he was physically unable to perform his duties or that he was suffering from physical disability or injury.  To the contrary, a July 1971 Basic Training Record entry indicates that the Veteran was "very capable" of completing basic training if behavioral issues could be overcome.  

While the evidence of record does not contain any relevant medical evidence dated within a year or even several years following his discharge, the evidence does show that in February 1975, the Veteran sought permission to re-enlist in the military, stating that "if allowed to reenlist in some branch of the service, I will certainly do everything that is required of me" and explaining why he did not succeed (behaviorally) during his prior enlistment.  To the Board, such a statement of readiness to re-enlist and return to the known rigors of physical training and active duty persuasively shows that the Veteran believed himself to be in sound physical condition rather than suffering from disabling spine and lower extremity conditions within several years of his separation from active service.

Further weighing against finding that the Veteran incurred relevant spine or lower extremity conditions during his active service are decades of medical service records that either do not relate his relevant conditions to active service or affirmatively attribute the cause of the conditions to other injuries.  For example, the earliest complaint of lumbar spine problems documented in the evidence of record is contained in a private treatment record from November 2000, during which the Veteran presented with a "[one] week history of pain in his back below the (R) shoulder, states that he was lifting at work and felt a burning pain under his (R) shoulder[.]"  The note indicates that "the pain increased after several days," and resulted in the Veteran leaving work early on a Friday and missing work the following Monday.  He was assessed with a paraspinal strain.  No reference is made in this record to any other history of back pain or injury, to include as during service.  No additional treatment for this injury is noted in contemporaneous records.

In June 2003, the Veteran submitted an application for state vocational rehabilitation services, identifying various psychiatric conditions as the cause of his need for services.  This application noted no physical impairments to his ability to work; instead, the Veteran reported that he regularly engaged in activities such as yard work and mowing the lawn, and reported lifting weights and riding his bike three times per week. 

The evidence of record shows that in May 2004, the Veteran presented to a VA medical center to establish medical care and provided information about his overall health and medical history.  He reported only a medical history of hypertension, depression, and head trauma as a child.  A section marked "military history" includes the Veteran's report of the branch and year of his service and includes his report of "some [posttraumatic stress disorder] related to basic training," but notes no other in-service injury or residuals.  At this appointment the Veteran expressly denied musculoskeletal pain and pain in general.  Physical examination revealed that his spinal curvature was normal to appearance, his extremities had no edema, and his cranial nerves II through XII were intact.  No cervical, lumbar spine, or lower extremity disabilities or symptoms were described or diagnosed at this time.

During a June 2008 VA psychological evaluation, the Veteran denied "any serious injuries or illnesses while in the service."  During an annual physical examination in September 2008, a VA provider noted the Veteran's spinal curvature was normal to appearance with normal range of motion, and no paraspinous pain to palpation.  He was able to "walk on heels and toes" without difficulty.  Straight leg raise testing was negative and his extremities showed no edema, cyanosis, clubbing, or surface abnormalities.  He had normal strength in all extremities, with sensation intact.  His cranial nerves II through XII were intact, with normal deep tendon reflexes and with "good vibratory and light touch sensation."  

According to a February 3, 2011, VA treatment record, the Veteran "experienced the sensation of electricity in his low back 1/13/2011 when he was lifting a file, lasting 3 minutes (timed)."  Private imaging studies revealed, among other things, mild to moderate degenerative disc disease and disc space narrowing in the lumbar spine.  The Veteran reported continuing to have lower back pain with flares of local soreness caused by twisting movements, over the preceding three weeks.  Physical examination revealed localized tenderness over lower left paraspinal muscles.  His lower extremity knee and ankle reflexes were equal and monofilament testing of the left foot were normal.  He was assessed with left lower back strain and with mild to moderate disc narrowing at L1-L2.  Several weeks later in February 2011, the Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection for a back disorder "caused by the rigors of service."  In a July 2012 Correspondence, the Veteran formally withdrew his service connection claim for a back disorder. 

In February 2019, the Veteran filed a new claim for service connection for a "back disorder," asserting that the condition was related to his military training, including as due to "marches" in "full gear" and wearing "wrong size boots in service."  He submitted a January 2019 MRI in support of his claim that did not include evidence or a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the diagnosed spine disability.  

The AOJ provided the Veteran with a VA examination in March 2019.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with IVDS, spinal stenosis, and radiculopathy due to "bilateral involvement of L2/L3/L4 nerve roots (femoral nerve)," and facet degeneration.  The examiner noted the Veteran's report that during basic training, he was forced to wear boots that were too small for him and that when he complained or "talked back" to his commanding officer, he was assigned physical tasks as punishment, such as having to "carry a smaller gentleman on his back and march for a mile" or having to stand for eight hours straight while "peeling potatoes."  The clinician opined that it was less likely than not that the lumbar spine condition was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service incidents.  The examiner opined that the short period of time the Veteran served in the military was not sufficient to cause the current spine condition decades after his discharge.  The examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's current report of spine pain was supported by diagnostic imaging; however, the examiner emphasized the difficulty in correlating the Veteran's "current condition with an event or injury that occurred during his short time in the service."  Even after considering the Veteran's report of wearing too-small boots and excessive standing and marching, the examiner stated that the "Veteran did not provide any details of a back injury while in service to establish a connection between his time in the service and this debilitating back pain he describes."  The examiner explained that it would be "mere speculation to say that the short duration of this Veteran's military service resulted in the development of this type of chronic pain" so many years later.  

The Board finds this examiner's opinion and examination report adequate for service connection purposes.  A medical opinion that "cannot be provided without resort to speculation" is adequate when it is "clear that [it] is predicated on a lack of knowledge among the 'medical community at large' and not insufficient knowledge of the specific examiner." Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 36 (2017) (quoting Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 390 (2010)).  The examiner's report makes clear that in attempting to ascertain whether there was a medical connection between the Veteran's current diagnosis and symptoms and his military service, the examiner considered the Veteran's own lay statements and his entire medical history relating to his spine.  Only after considering the full record and applying medical principles to the facts of the Veteran's case did the examiner conclude that they would have to resort to mere speculation to find a link between the Veteran's claimed condition and his service.  The Board also finds the examiner to adequately have explained that the type of condition from which the Veteran currently suffers could not be explained by the events described by the Veteran during his service period.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007).  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has submitted several medical and research journal articles in support of his contention that his training activities have caused his current spine and lower extremity conditions.  For example, along with his July 2020 Supplemental Claim, he submitted an article published by the American Journal of Preventative Medicine titled, Musculoskeletal Injuries: Description of an Under-Recognized Injury Problem Among Military Personnel, which studied military data from 2006 to catalog the type and frequency of injuries among military personnel.  He also submitted a 2016 article from the Journal of Athletic Training, titled "Description and Rate of Musculoskeletal Injuries in Air Force Basic Military Trainees."  In October 2020, the Veteran submitted a provisional report from the Army Public Health Center's Injury Prevention Program regarding "Foot Marching and Load-Carriage Injuries," regarding the types of common injuries incurred during ruck and road marches.  The Board understands these studies and reports to indicate that musculoskeletal injuries are common among military trainees and service members, and acknowledges that spine and lower extremity disorders can certainly be incurred during military service.  However, these articles do not address or help establish that the Veteran in this specific case incurred a spine or lower extremity condition during his active duty that has resulted in his current spine and associated lower extremity radiculopathy.  As these articles are general in nature and include no specific information to suggest that the Veteran in fact incurred any such injury during active service, the Board finds that these articles do not undermine or otherwise invalidate the medical opinion of the VA examiner, who expressly considered the Veteran's specific medical history and lay reports of in-service activities. 

The Board further acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to currently report that he experienced back pain during service; however, the Board finds his current reports largely not credible due to the internal inconsistency of his lay reports and inconsistency with other evidence in the record as noted above.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  As the Board has stated, several years after his discharge, the Veteran reported his willingness and ability to re-enlist in active service.  The Board finds this contemporaneous statement made for the intention of returning to military service to be more probative than (and inconsistent with) his more recent reports that his back pain began shortly after or within a year of his discharge in 1971.  As such, the Board assigns more probative value to the credible medical evidence of record, which weighs heavily against the claims.

While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief and assertion that his lumbar spine condition with associated lower extremity radiculopathy is related to his service, to include as due to marching and excessive standing, the Board reiterates that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that he experienced in-service injury due to the claimed incidents, and weighs against a finding that the conditions began during service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  The Veteran is not competent to determine that the symptoms he currently describes are related to activities completed during military service many decades ago.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claims.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for a lumbar spine condition to include radiculopathy of the femoral nerves, is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. The claim of entitlement to bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, also claimed as calf muscle ache with pain, is remanded.

As noted above, the Veteran seeks service connection for nerve disorders and pain in his lower extremities, which he currently contends is due to peripheral neuropathy, to include as caused by wearing too small boots during active service.   

The evidence of record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities.  See March 2017 private treatment record (noting an impression of "parasthesias with peripheral neuropathy of an unknown etiology.").  The evidence of record contains several VA examinations that discuss a variety of lower extremity conditions relating to the Veteran's toes, veins, and lumbar radiculopathy; however, none of these examinations adequately assesses whether the Veteran's separately diagnosed peripheral neuropathy is related to his service.  For example, in support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a Provisional report from the Army Public Health Center's Injury Prevention Program titled "Foot Marching and Load-Carriage Injuries," that discussed how military foot marches and load carrying activities common in the military can result in nerve compression injuries and paresthetica to the lower extremities.  None of the existing examinations appear to consider this evidence or address whether the Veteran's current symptoms could relate to this activity in service.

Once VA has provided a VA examination, it is required to provide an adequate one, regardless of whether it was legally obligated to provide an examination in the first place.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  As such, although the Veteran's STRs do not confirm that he incurred or complained of neuropathic pain and symptoms during service, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not obtaining a medical opinion that specifically addresses this identified disorder.  

Lastly, the Board notes that there is no other basis upon which the Board can favorably resolve this issue without remand.  In so finding, the Board acknowledges that in in the AOJ's rating decision, it favorably found that "The claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to your military service.  The claimed peripheral neuropathy is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service."  As the Board has explained above, the Veteran does not qualify for a presumption of service connection for chronic conditions contemplated by 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a) and 3.309 because his military records clearly show that he did not have 90 days of continuous active duty service.  As such, while the Veteran may have a relevant diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy, the finding that he qualifies for presumptive service connection on this basis is clearly and unmistakably erroneous.  

For further clarity regarding applicable presumptions, there is no indication from the evidence available for the Board's immediate consideration that the Veteran has been diagnosed with "early onset" peripheral neuropathy, and no indication that he had service in a location where he could be presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent, such as Agent Orange.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a), 3.309(e).  As such, the Board finds these presumptions inapplicable to the instant appeal and these matters cannot be adjudicated without remand to obtain adequate medical nexus opinions.

2. The claim of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, to include degenerative arthritis, IVDS, and neck pain secondary to migraine headache and depression, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a neck disability related to service or secondarily caused or aggravated by his service-connected migraine headache and depressive disorder.

Regarding this issue, the Board accepts the AOJ's favorable finding in its November 2020 rating decision that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a cervical spine disability, as a July 2020 VA examination showed a diagnosis of cervical degenerative arthritis and IVDS.  For purposes of secondary service connection, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been service connected for the "claimed primary disability of migraine headaches" since July 2017.  The Veteran is also service connected for major depressive disorder and insomnia.

Regrettably, this matter must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, the AOJ did not obtain a medical nexus opinion regarding whether the Veteran has a neck condition that is secondarily caused or aggravated by his psychiatric disorder, as he contends.  Remand is warranted for completion of a contemporaneous examination and medical nexus opinion that addresses direct and secondary service connection and that considers all relevant medical and lay evidence submitted by the Veteran in support of his claim.  

3. The claim of entitlement to service connection for CFS is remanded.

See section four, below.

4. The claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to major depressive disorder and insomnia, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for CFS and hypertension, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities.

Although further delay is regrettable, these matters must be remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the decisions on appeal.  Specifically, the medical opinion evidence is inadequate to determine whether the Veteran has a current CFS diagnosis.  The medical evidence also fails to adequately address whether the Veteran's hypertension was secondarily caused or is aggravated by service-connected conditions.  See March 2021 Correspondence.

Regarding hypertension, the Veteran asserts that his condition is aggravated by service-connected depressive disorder with insomnia, to include as causing him to fail to take his hypertension medication, however, the May 2021 VA examiner only addressed whether the hypertension was caused (not aggravated) by service-connected conditions.  Service connection is not limited to "single cause and effect" but also applies to conditions "that... would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability."  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  Remand is needed to address these contentions.

Additionally, regarding CFS, the medical evidence regarding whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of CFS is in conflict and fails to address relevant lay and medical evidence.  For example, a March 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran had a CFS diagnosis and stated that he took pain medication for "control of [CFS]." This examiner stated that the Veteran "has chronic fatigue syndrome" and stated that insomnia and sleep dysfunction are "part of the symptomology of CFS."  This examiner did not relate the Veteran's CFS to service, remarking instead that the cause of CFS is unknown at this time.  

In an examination report dated the same month, a different examiner stated that the Veteran did not have CFS, remarking that the Veteran's "symptoms are consistent with chronic fatigue, but have not been validated (diagnosed)" by the Veteran's primary care physician or specialists.  A July 2021 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran did not have CFS, noting that his diagnosis of insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea both prohibited a diagnosis of CFS; however, this examiner did not address evidence submitted by the Veteran that insomnia and sleep disturbances are also symptoms seen in individuals with CFS.  See online information dated 2011 from the Sleep Health Foundation Australia regarding CFS and sleep, submitted in June 2021.   

The Board observes that the evidence submitted directly by the Veteran appears to indicate that one or more of his other diagnosed disabilities (whether service connected or not) would rule out a CFS diagnosis.  See, e.g., article from American Family Physician (stating that CFS "is a clinical diagnosis that can be made only when other disease processes are excluded.").  However, based on the Board's review of the evidence of record, assessing the existence and etiology of CFS is medically complex, and the Board is prohibited from making medical determinations on its own.  As such, remand is needed to resolve conflicting medical evidence and assess the existence and etiology of the claimed CFS condition.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Bilateral Lower Extremity Peripheral Neuropathy (claimed to include calf muscle ache with pain):

(a.) Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the bilateral lower extremity disorder, to include peripheral neuropathy with calf muscle ache and pain).  The examiner must review all relevant lay and medical evidence of record, to include all STRs, medical treatment records, past VA examinations, and a copy of this remand.  The examiner should take a lay history from the Veteran to record and identify the lower extremity nerve and pain symptoms he associates with his service.

(b.) The examiner should identify all relevant lower extremity nerve disorders reasonably encompassed by the Veteran's description of his claimed condition.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

(c.) For each identified disability, the examiner should opine whether the disability is at least as likely as not related to service, including as due to (1) wearing too small boots during active duty; or (2) due to the Veteran's in-service activities such as road/ruck marching and physical training.  

The examiner should provide a full rationale for the opinions that considers the lay and medical evidence submitted by the Veteran.  See e.g., March 2017 medical record (diagnosing peripheral neuropathy of unknown etiology); Provisional report from the Army Public Health Center's Injury Prevention Program titled "Foot Marching and Load-Carriage Injuries," submitted in October 2020 (discussing how military foot marches and load carrying activities common in the military can result in nerve compression injuries and paresthetica to the lower extremities.).

2. Neck/Cervical Spine Disorder (to include as secondary to service-connected migraine headaches and/or depressive disorder with insomnia):

(a.) Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed neck/cervical spine condition.  The examiner must review all relevant lay and medical evidence of record, to include all STRs, medical treatment records, past VA examinations, and a copy of this remand.  The examiner should take a lay history from the Veteran to record and help identify the nature and etiology of the neck pain and symptoms he associates with his service.

(b.) The examiner should identify all current neck and cervical spine disorders.  If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

(c.) For each identified disorder, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to service, including as due to in-service training activities, such as ruck and road marching and carrying heavy equipment. 

(d.) For each identified disorder, the examiner should opine whether is at least as likely as not that the condition is due to service-connected migraine headaches AND/OR due to his depressive disorder with insomnia.

(e.) For each identified disorder, the examiner should opine whether the disability is at least as likely as not aggravated, i.e., made worse, by service-connected migraine headaches AND/OR due to his depressive disorder with insomnia.  In so opining, the examiner should address research articles submitted by the Veteran suggesting a link between neck pain and migraine headaches.  See, e.g., Journal of Headache and Pain research article submitted in April 2020. 

3. Hypertension, as secondary to service-connected depressive disorder with insomnia:

(a.) Obtain an addendum medical opinion that addresses whether the Veteran's hypertension is due to or aggravated by service-connected depressive disorder with insomnia.  The examiner must review all relevant lay and medical evidence of record, to include all STRs, medical treatment records, past VA examinations, and a copy of this remand.  The examiner should address relevant lay and medical evidence submitted by the Veteran, to include his March 2021 Correspondence that his service-connected conditions cause him to forget to take his hypertension medication, and the March 2000 article linking depression and anxiety to hypertension (submitted in February 2020).  

To be adequate, the opinion must address whether it is at least as likely as not that the hypertension is due to the service-connected condition, and must separately address whether hypertension is due to the service-connected condition, and must separately address whether it is aggravated, i.e., made worse, by the service-connected condition.

4. CFS: 

(a.) Please clarify whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of CFS.  If no diagnosis can be made, please provide a clear opinion as to why no diagnosis can be assigned that addresses and reconciles any conflicting evidence of record.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

In reconciling this diagnosis, the examiner should review and consider all prior VA examinations. E.g., March and July 2021 examinations and opinions).  The examiner should also review and consider medical articles submitted by the Veteran.  E.g., Sleep Health Foundation Australia regarding CFS and sleep, submitted in June 2021 (indicating that people with CFS can still have sleep disturbances and insomnia); Articles submitted in January 2021 regarding brain abnormalities in CFS patients (Stafford) and sleep abnormalities in CFS sufferers (Journal of Sleep Medicine).

(b.) If the examiner finds the Veteran to have a current diagnosis of CFS, they should opine whether the CFS is at least as likely as not related to his active service, to include whether it is due to a service-connected disability AND/OR aggravated by a service-connected disability.  A full rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Hart, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.