Citation Nr: A25030356
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231116-395155
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to July 1, 2013, for temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMJ) with arthritis is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to July 1, 2023, for a cervical strain (neck disability) is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 30 percent, after July 1, 2023, for a neck disability is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, from October 5, 2022, for lumbar intervertebral disc syndrome with arthritis (back disability) is denied.

Entitlement to a 20 percent rating for left lower radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for a left thigh impairment is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent, after July 1, 2013, for TMJ dysfunction with arthritis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to July 1, 2013, the Veteran's TMJ dysfunction with arthritis has not shown to have an interincisal range less than 21 millimeters or require any dietary restrictions.

2. Prior to July 1, 2023, the Veteran's neck disability was not shown to have been manifested by forward flexion of the cervical spine limited to 30 degrees or less; combined range of motion less than 170 degrees.

3. Throughout the rating period on review, the Veteran's neck disability was not shown to have been manifested unfavorable ankylosis.

4. Throughout both rating periods on review, the Veteran's back disability was not manifested by forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 30 degrees or less or ankylosis.

5. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve has been manifested by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

6. Throughout the rating period on review, the Veteran's right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome has manifested painful motion and at worst a limitation of flexion to 100 degrees, extension to 0 degrees.

7. The Veteran's tension headaches have not been manifested by characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over last several months.

8. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's left hip adduction did not prevent him from crossing his legs and rotation of his left leg was not limited to toeing-out more than 15 degrees.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to July 1, 2013, for TMJ dysfunction with arthritis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.159, 4.150, DC 9905.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to July 1, 2023, for the neck disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.71 Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 30 percent, after July 1, 2023, for the neck disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.71 DC 5237.

4. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to October 5, 2022, for the back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.159, 4.71a, DC 5243.

5. The criteria 20 percent rating, but no higher, for left lower radiculopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

6. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.159, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5260.

7. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for tension headaches have not been met 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.20, 4.124a, DC 8100.

8. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for left thigh impairment have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5253.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2017 to April 2020.

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran expressed disagreement with issues addressed in two separate rating decisions and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the evaluation of the back disability, the neck disability prior to July 1, 2023, and the rating for TMJ before November 1, 2023. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision for the evaluation of the back disability, an increased rating for the neck disability from July 1, 2023, and the evaluation for TMJ after November 1, 2023. Any evidence submitted after the relevant AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of TMJ dysfunction after July 1, 2023, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Ratings

Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in the parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, it is necessary to consider, along with the schedular criteria, functional loss due to flare-ups of pain, fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, and weakness. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part which becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. Pain on movement, swelling, deformity or atrophy of disuse as well as instability of station, disturbance of locomotion, interference with sitting, standing and weight bearing are relevant considerations for determination of joint disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.45. These determinations are, if feasible, be expressed in terms of the degree of additional loss-of-motion due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, flare-ups, or pain. Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011). Ameliorative effects of any medications must be considered whenever, the disability ratings do not include medication effects in the rating criteria. 

The Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012). More specifically, if the diagnostic code does not specifically contemplate the effects of medication, the Board is required to discount the ameliorative effects of medication. McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267 (2016).

The intent of the rating schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. Painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. 

1. Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to July 1, 2013, for TMJ with arthritis

The Veteran has appealed two separate rating decisions: January 2023 and November 2023. The Board will consider the appeal from the January 2023 rating decision here; the appeal for the other period must remand remanded. 

The Veteran submitted a claim for increased rating in October 2022 and that appeal was adjudicated in the January 2023 rating decision. The AOJ denied a rating in excess of 20 percent for the TMJ. The current appeal ensued. 

The Veteran's service-connected TMJ dysfunction is currently evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, DC 9905, which addresses the function of temporomandibular articulation. 

Pursuant to DC 9905, a 30 percent evaluation is warranted for interincisal ROM limited to 30 to 34 mm of maximum unassisted vertical opening with dietary restrictions to full liquid or pureed foods; or 21 to 29 mm of maximum unassisted vertical opening with dietary restrictions to soft and semi-solid foods; or interincisal ROM limited to 11 to 20 mm of maximum unassisted vertical opening without dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods. A 40 percent evaluation is warranted for interincisal ROM limited to 21 to 29 mm of maximum unassisted vertical opening with dietary restrictions to full liquid or pureed foods; or 11 to 20 mm meters of maximum unassisted vertical opening with dietary restrictions to all mechanically altered foods; or interincisal ROM limited to 0 to 10 mm of maximum unassisted vertical opening without dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods. A maximum 50 percent evaluation is warranted for interincisal ROM limited to 0 to 10 mm of maximum unassisted vertical opening with dietary restrictions to all mechanically altered foods. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.

The Veteran was given a VA examination in October 2022. The Veteran reported experiencing jaw pain. The Veteran also reported flare-ups. The TMJ flare-ups are moderate and occur about once a week and last about two hours. The Veteran reported that the TMJ flare-ups are random and are alleviated by massage, time and rest. The Veteran's initial ROM was an interincisal distance greater than 34 millimeters (mm). His right and left lateral excursion was greater than 4 mm. The Veteran exhibited pain on mouth opening. Passive ROM was also showed an interincisal distance greater than 34 mm and his right and left lateral excursion was greater than 4 mm. Passive ROM exhibited pain on mouth opening and lateral excursion. Estimated ROM for repeated use over time was an interincisal distance of 30 to 34 mm and his right and left lateral excursion was 0 to 4 mm. The examination was not conducted during a flare-up. The estimated ROM during flare-ups was interincisal distance of 21 to 29 mm and his right and left lateral excursion was 0 to 4 mm. The examiner noted a functional impact in that the Veteran finds it more difficult to concentrate and communicate whenever he is having a flare-up. The examiner noted the Veteran had no dietary restrictions.    

In summary, for the period prior to July 1, 2023, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted under DC 9905 for the Veteran's TMJ dysfunction. The Veteran's ROM was limited to 21 to 29 mm during flare ups, with no dietary restrictions. The examiner considered the frequency, severity and duration of flare-ups as described by the Veteran and the Board finds this ROM to reflect the disability at its worst during the rating period on review. As the weight of the evidence is against the claim for rating in excess of 20 percent prior to July 1, 2023, the claim is denied. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).   

2. Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, prior to July 1, 2023, for the neck disability

3. Entitlement to a rating greater than 30 percent, after July 1, 2023, for the neck disability

The Veteran is seeking higher disability ratings for his service-connected neck disability. The appeal before the Board encompasses two separate appeals. The first appeal period stems from an October 2022 claim for increased rating, decided in the January 2023 rating decision; and a July 2023 claim for increased rating, decided in November 2023 rating decision. The January 2023 rating decision denied a rating in excess of 20 percent; the November 2023 rating decision increased the rating to 30 percent. The Veteran timely appealed both rating decisions to the Board.

The service-connected neck disability is rated 20 percent before July 1, 2023; and 30 percent after that date. 

The Veteran's neck disability is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, DC 5237. Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees, or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees, or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, or vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.

A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees, or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees, or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

A rating of 30 percent is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine 15 degrees or less, or, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 40 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the cervical spine.

Per Note (2) to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5235-5242, (See also Plate V), for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the cervical spine is zero to 45 degrees, extension is zero to 45 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 45 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 80 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the cervical spine is 340 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion.

Note (4): each range of motion measurement is rounded to the nearest five degrees.

Note (5): For VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

Prior To July 1, 2023

The Veteran filed a claim for increased rating in October 2022 and was afforded a VA examination in October 2022. The Veteran reported experiencing neck pain, stiffness, and tenderness. The Veteran also reported experiencing flare-ups that occur several times per week and characterized by the Veteran as mild in nature. The flare-ups last a few hours and are precipitated by prolonged sitting, sudden head turning and are alleviated by rest. During flare-ups the Veteran has difficulty with lifting, holding items, pushing/pulling items, and neck pain. The Veteran was not taking any medications. 

The Veteran's initial range of motion (ROM) was forward flexion of 40 degrees and a combined ROM of 280 degrees, with pain on all motions. ROM was the same on active and passive ROM testing. Observed repetitive use ROM was forward flexion 35 degrees and a combined ROM of 250 degrees. The examiner estimated ROM after repeated use over time A forward flexion of 30 degrees and a combined ROM of 220 degrees. The examiner opined that the Veteran's ROM during flare-ups and repeated use over time would be forward flexion of 25 degrees, with a combined range of motion of 190 degrees. The Veteran did not have muscle spasm, guarding or localized tenderness resulting in an abnormal gait. There was no muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5); all reflexes were normal (+2) as well as his sensory examinations. The examiner did not find any radiculopathy or ankylosis. The Veteran did not use any assistive devices. His cervical strain has a functional impact of difficulty with lifting, holding items, pushing/pulling items, neck pain.

The Board finds that a higher 20 percent rating is not warranted for the Veteran's cervical spine disability. At no time during the rating period on review has the Veteran demonstrated forward flexion of the cervical spine less than 30 degrees or combined range of motion less than 170 degrees to include during flare-ups. The Veteran does not have muscle atrophy, sensory or muscle function loss, ankylosis, or radiculopathy. Since the Veteran is not taking medications for the neck disability, the Board can decide the claim because there are no ameliorative impacts of medication to discuss and discount. Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 56; see also Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, (March 12, 2025). 

After July 1, 2023

In the November 2023 rating decision, the AOJ increased the rating for the neck disability to 30 percent, effective July 1, 2023, the date of a new claim for increase rating. The question for the Board is whether the criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent are more or more closely approximated. 

In connection with the July 2023 claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination in October 2023. The examiner noted the Veteran had undergone another VA neck examination in October 2022 and there were noted related to any neck issue after that date. On current examination, the Veteran reported to the examiner that his neck pain is worse when he turns right or left. The neck pain is also achy and stiff, with intermittent sharp pain. The Veteran also reported experiencing flare-ups that occur daily and lasts for 20 hours. The flare-ups are moderate to severe while turning his head to right or left side or while flexing the neck. The flare-ups limit lifting over 20 pounds and limit repetitive movement of the neck. 

The examiner specifically noted that the Veteran was examined during a flare-up. The Veteran was not taking any medications. The Veteran's initial active ROM was forward flexion of 10 degrees and a combined ROM of 105 degrees. Estimated repeated use over time and during flare-ups was the same as the initial active ROM. The Veteran did not have muscle spasm, guarding or localized tenderness resulting in an abnormal gait. The Veteran did not have any muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5), All reflexes were normal (+2) as well as his sensory examinations. The examiner did not find any radiculopathy or ankylosis. The Veteran did not use any assistive devices. His cervical strain has a functional impact of his neck pain causing him to miss 10 days of work in the past 12 months.

The Board finds that the criteria for the next higher 40 percent rating are not met or more closely approximate for the rating period on review. At no time from July 2023 has the Veteran demonstrated unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine. The October 2023 examiner specifically noted there was no ankylosis. There is no evidence the entire cervical spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results any of the related complications identified in Note 5. Additionally, the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy, sensory or muscle function loss, ankylosis, or radiculopathy. The Board notes that the Veteran's October 2023 VA examination was performed during an actual flare-up which the Board finds presents the Veteran's disability picture at its worse. The Veteran does not have muscle atrophy, sensory or muscle function loss, ankylosis, or radiculopathy. Since the Veteran is not taking medications for the neck disability, the Board can decide the claim because there are no ameliorative impacts of medication to discuss and discount. Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 56; see also Ingram, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, (March 12, 2025).

In summary, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim for a rating greater than 20 percent prior to July 1, 2023, and greater than 30 percent thereafter for the service-connected neck disability. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

4. Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent, from October 5, 2022, for the back disability 

The Veteran is seeking higher disability ratings for his service-connected back disability. He submitted two separate claims for increased rating which were adjudicated separately and he appealed both to the Board. In the January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ increased the rating to 20 percent; the November 2023 rating decision denied a rating in excess of 20 percent. 

Historically, the Veteran's back disability has been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243. See e.g., April 2020 rating decision. Under the rating criteria currently in effect, DC 5243 is assigned only when there is disc herniation with compression and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root. DC 5242 if assigned for all other disc diagnoses.

The rating schedule directs that intervertebral disc syndrome (preoperatively or postoperatively) is evaluated either under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine or under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under § 4.25.

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine a 100 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5242. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, if there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees, but not greater than 60 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the entire thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, if there is muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

Note (2): (see also Plate V.) For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees.

Under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes, a 40 percent rating requires evidence of incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. A 60 percent rating requires evidence of incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.

Note (1): For purposes of evaluations under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.

The Veteran filed the first claim for increased rating in October 2022 and in the January 2023 rating decision the AOJ increased the rating from 10 to 20 percent, effective October 5, 2022. 

In connection with the claim, the Veteran was given a VA back examination in October 2022. The Veteran was diagnosed with lumbar IVDS. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he experiences difficulty with prolonged walking running, standing, and lifting items and bending over from his back pain. The Veteran also reported experiencing flare are-ups of the back that occur several times per week and last a few hours and which he characterized as moderate. The back flare-ups are precipitated by prolonged walking, standing, sitting and heavy lifting and are alleviated by rest. During the examination, initial ROM testing showed forward flexion of 75 degrees and a combined ROM of 200 degrees, with pain on all motions. Repetitive use testing ROM was 70 degrees forward flexion and a combined ROM of 170 degrees. Estimated ROM after repeated use was 60 degrees forward flexion and a combined ROM of 135 degrees and estimated ROM during flare-ups was 50 degrees forward flexion and a combined ROM of 100 degrees. The examiner specifically noted that the examination was not being performed during a flare-up. The Veteran did have bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy (discussed in next section below). The Veteran did not have muscle spasm, guarding or localized tenderness resulting in an abnormal gait. The Veteran did not have any muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5), All reflexes were normal (+2). Sensory examination was decreased in his right and left upper thigh; thigh/knee; lower leg and foot/toes. The examiner specifically answered "no" to whether there was any ankylosis. The examiner also noted that the IVDS did not require any physician prescribed bed rest. The examiner noted that the Veteran's back disability has a functional impact of back pain causing difficulty with prolonged walking running, standing, and lifting items and bending over.

Based on the results of that examination, the AOJ increased the rating to 20 percent, effective October 5, 2022. See January 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran filed a claim for increased rating in July 2023 and was given a VA back examination in October 2023. The Veteran was diagnosed with degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he experiences achy and sharp pain that radiates to both lower extremities. The Veteran also reported experiencing flare are-ups of the back, described as achy and sharp pain that radiates to both lower extremities. The flare-ups occur daily and last for 24 hours and are precipitated by lifting anything greater than 20 pounds, prolonged sitting, prolonged standing, prolonged walking and bending or squatting. During the examination, initial ROM testing showed forward flexion of 50 degrees and a combined ROM of 150 degrees, with pain on all motions. Estimated ROM after repeated use was 45 degrees forward flexion and a combined ROM of 145 degrees and estimated ROM during flare-ups was 50 degrees forward flexion and a combined ROM of 150 degrees. The examiner specifically noted that the examination was performed during a flare-up. The Veteran did have bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy (discussed in next section below). The Veteran did not have muscle spasm, guarding or localized tenderness resulting in an abnormal gait. The Veteran did not have any muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5), as well as his sensory examinations. All reflexes were hypoactive (+1). The examiner did not identify any ankylosis. The examiner noted that the functional impact of Veteran's back disability has caused him to miss 14 days of work in the past 12 months. The Veteran had not had any IDVS episodes that requested bed rest prescribed by a physician in the last 12 months. 

The Board finds that throughout the rating periods on review (from the first claim in October 2022 and the second in July 2023), the criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent based on limited motion are not met or more closely approximated. 

The Veteran's back disability was not manifested by ROM of less than 30 degrees forward flexion or favorable ankylosis of the entire lumbar spine. At worst during the October 2022 examination, ROM on flare-ups was estimated to be limited to 50 degrees forward flexion. While that examination was not conducted during a flare-up, the examiner specifically noted the Veteran's report of the frequency, duration and severity of the flare-ups. The October 2023 VA examination was performed during an actual flare-up and ROM was, at worst, showing flexion limited to 50 degrees. Both examiners specifically answered "no" to whether there was ankylosis. The Veteran clearly retained some motion of the lumbar spine, albeit restricted somewhat by pain. 

The requirement of establishing ankylosis for purposes of assigning a higher rating can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare-up. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). This is because "ankylosis is, in essence, a complete limitation of motion." Thus, an evaluation based on ankylosis may be assigned if there is functional loss that is the equivalent of ankylosis. Id. at 11. Accordingly, the assignment of the maximum rating based on limitation in range of motion does not preclude consideration of functional loss under sections 4.40 and 4.45 of the regulations where a diagnostic code provides for a higher rating based on ankylosis. Id.

However, even considering pain, flare ups, and other functional factors, there is no indication that the limitation of motion resulted in the functional equivalent of favorable ankylosis as defined in the rating schedule (fixation of the lumbar spine). The VA examiners considered the frequency, severity, and duration of flare-ups and one examination was conducted during a flare up and there is no evidence of complete limitation of motion consistent with ankylosis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, Note (5); Chavis, 34 Vet. App. at 4. 

Thus, since the Veteran is not taking medications for the back disability, the Board can decide the claim because there are no ameliorative impacts of medication to discuss and discount. Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 56; see also Ingram, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, (March 12, 2025). 

There is no basis for an increased rating under the Formula related to IVDS as there is no evidence the Veteran had any episodes related to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician. 

VA back examinations have documented right and left lower extremity radiculopathy. However, the Veteran is already in receipt of separate ratings for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to his service-connected back disability. The Veteran has separately appealed the rating of his left lower extremity radiculopathy (addressed in the next section below); the Veteran did not appeal his right lower extremity radiculopathy.

The persuasive evidence of record is against the claim for an increased rating greater than 20 percent for the service-connected back disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

5. Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for left lower radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve. He is currently rated at 10 percent and has been service-connected for his left lower extremity radiculopathy since April 16, 2020. The increased claim on appeal has been pending since the  July 1, 2023, claim for increased rating.

The lower extremity radiculopathies are evaluated as affecting the sciatic nerve and rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a , DC 8520, which provides for rating paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Complete paralysis is rated at 80 percent (the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost); severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy, 60 percent; moderately severe incomplete paralysis, 40 percent; moderate incomplete paralysis, 20 percent, and; mild incomplete paralysis, 10 percent.

VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. Although the Board is not bound by the M21-1, the standards provided in the M21-1 are "relevant guidance promulgated for the purpose of facilitating the efficient and proper resolution of claims," which the Board must consider and address as part of its duty to provide a reasoned explanation for its decision. Healey v. McDonough, 33 Vet. App. 312 (2021); Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257 (2018).

The Board finds these definitions to be instructive. Per the M21-1, moderate is described as the maximum evaluation reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment, in which symptoms will likely be described by the claimants and graded as significantly disabling, and in which a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected. Other symptom combinations that may fall into the moderate category include the following: combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate. M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c.

A "moderately severe" evaluation level includes motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability, and may include atrophy.

To be described as "severe," it would be expected that there is motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy, and marked muscular atrophy is expected in cases involving the sciatic nerve. Id. 

The term "incomplete paralysis" with peripheral nerve injuries indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for mild, or at most, moderate degree. Note preceding diagnostic codes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The Veteran was given a VA examination for his back in October 2022. The Veteran was diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. Focusing on the neurological examination, the Veteran had a positive leg test in both legs. There was no muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5) and all reflexes were normal (+2). On sensory examination. There was decreased sensation to the left upper thigh; thigh/knee; lower leg and foot/toes. The Veteran had mild intermittent pain (usually dull) paresthesias and numbness on the left. The examiner identified the Veteran as having bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve.

The Veteran was given a VA examination for his back in October 2023 after which the examiner diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. On neurological examination, the Veteran had a negative straight leg test in both legs. The examiner said there was no muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5), as well as his sensory examinations. Reflexes were hypoactive (+1) at the left knee and ankle. The Veteran reported symptoms of severe constant pain (may be excruciating at times), paresthesias and numbness on the left. The examiner identified the Veteran as having left lower extremity radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve.

The Veteran was also given a VA peripheral nerves examination in October 2023. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he had difficulty with prolonged walking running, standing, and lifting and his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy causes constant pain, numbness & tingling. The Veteran reported symptoms of  severe constant pain (may be excruciating at times) paresthesias and numbness. The Veteran did not have any muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing was normal (5 out of 5). His reflex examination was hypoactive in the left knee and ankle (1+). Sensory examination was normal in all extremities. There was no atrophy or trophic changes and the Veteran's gait was normal. The examiner diagnosed the moderate incomplete paralysis of left sciatic nerve. The Veteran reported missing 14 days of work out of the previous 12 months, due to lower back pain radiating to his bilateral lower extremities.

The Board finds that beginning July 1, 2023, the Veteran is entitled to a 20 percent rating, but no higher for his left lower extremity radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve. The Board finds the October 2023 VA examination for the peripheral nerves to be probative in that the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is moderate in nature; corresponding to a 20 percent rating under DC 8620. In addition to the VA examiner's characterization of moderate left lower extremity radiculopathy involving the sciatic nerve, the examiner also noted severe constant pain paresthesias and numbness in the left lower extremity. 

The criteria for a higher, 40 percent rating are not met or more closely approximated for the sciatic nerve impairment in the left lower extremity. The 40 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. There is no evidence that the left lower extremity was more than wholly sensory that would reflect a higher level of limitation or disability and no evidence of atrophy. There is no evidence of muscle atrophy. Muscle strength testing has been normal and reflexes were hypoactive. Thus, the level of motor and/or reflex impairment does not reflect a high level of limitation or disability.

The Board finds that an increased, 20 percent rating is warranted for the left lower extremity. 

6. Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome

The Veteran is seeking a rating higher than his current 10 percent evaluation for his right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome disability (right knee disability). The increased claim on appeal has been pending since July 1, 2023. 

The right knee disability is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5260.

Separate ratings may be assigned for compensable limitation of both flexion and extension, or for limitation of motion and instability or subluxation of the knee, or meniscal pathology. However, a separate rating can only be assigned where additional compensable symptomatology is shown that is not duplicative of that used to assign another rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; VAOPGCPREC 09-04 (2004), 69 Fed. Reg. 59990 (2004); VAOPGCPREC 23-97 (1997), 62 Fed. Reg. 63604 (1997); VAOPGCPREC 9-98 (1998), 63 Fed. Reg. 56704 (1998); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).

Under Diagnostic Code 5260, a noncompensable rating is warranted for flexion limited to 60 degrees; 10 percent, flexion limited to 45 degrees; 20 percent, flexion limited to 30 degrees, and; 30 percent, flexion limited to 15 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5260

Under Diagnostic Code 5261, a noncompensable rating is warranted for extension limited to 5 degrees;10 percent, limitation of extension to 10 degrees. A rating of 20 percent is warranted for extension to 15 degrees; 30 percent, extension to 20 degrees; 40 percent to 30 degrees, and; 50 percent, extension to 45 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5261

Under DC 5257, for recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, a 30 percent rating is assigned for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation. A 20 percent rating is assigned for one of the following: (a) Sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 10 percent rating is assigned for sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.

In cases of patellar instability, a 30 percent rating is warranted for diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker. A 20 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker. A 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.

Under Note (1): For patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon.

Per Note (2): A surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration). 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257 (2021).

The Veteran filed a claim for increased rating in July 2023 and was afforded a VA knee examination in October 2023. The Veteran was diagnosed with right patellofemoral pain syndrome. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he has severe throbbing and sharp pain to his knees. The Veteran further reported experiencing flare-ups described as sharp throbbing pain. The flare-ups occur daily and last for 20 hours. The flare-ups are precipitated by prolonged sitting, prolonged walking and prolonged standing. The flare-ups are alleviated by gentle massaging. The Veteran denied instability of the knee. The examiner specifically noted that the examination was conducted during a flare-up. ROM for the right knee was measured as follows: active motion flexion to 100 degrees, extension to 0; passive ROM to 120 degrees flexion, extension to 0 degrees. The examiner noted pain on flexion. The Veteran had pain on both active and passive motion. There was no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the knee joint. Estimated ROM during repeated use over time was flexion to 100 degrees; extension to 0 degrees. Estimated ROM during flare-ups was flexion to 100 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. There was no atrophy or ankylosis noted on examination. There was no recurrent subluxation, patellar instability, ligament tear or persistent joint instability. The Veteran did not have any physician prescribed assistive devices. The Veteran did not have any shin splints or leg length discrepancy. The examiner described the functional impact were reports that the Veteran had missed 2 work days in the past 12 months due his right knee disability. He was currently working in auto part sales. 

The Board finds that the persuasive evidence of record is against a rating in excess of 10 percent for limitation flexion. At no time during the rating period on review has flexion been limited to 30 degrees. The October 2023 examination was conducted during a flare-up and flexion was limited to, at worst, to 100 degrees. The criteria for a separate, compensable rating for limitation of extension are not met or more closely approximated. Extension has been to, at worst, 0 degrees. Absent extension limited to 10 degrees, a compensable rating is not warranted. 

In summary, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim for a rating greater than 10 percent for limitation of flexion of the right knee. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

7. Entitlement to a compensable rating for tension headaches

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for his migraine headaches. The appeal has been pending since the July 1, 2023, claim for increased rating.

The Veteran's tension headache disability is evaluated by analogy to DC 8100, for migraine headaches. 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a. Under that DC, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating, the maximum schedular evaluation, is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" was defined as describing migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018). The distinction between the 10 and 30 percent disability levels is the frequency of the headaches. A 10 percent rating is warranted when the prostrating headaches occur once every 2 months; 30 percent when the prostrating headaches occur once a month. 

These criteria are conjunctive; for a 50 percent evaluation, each of the following factors must be present. The headaches must be: (1) very frequent; (2) completely prostrating; (3) prolonged; and (4) productive of severe economic inadaptability. Id.

The 50 percent rating level also includes additional distinct criteria that are not found elsewhere in the DC. To satisfy the 50 percent rating criteria, the headache attacks must occur "very" frequently. Though the 10 and 30 percent ratings specify the number of headaches that must occur within a specific period, the 50 percent rating does not provide this level of detail. The phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency greater than once a month, which is enumerated in the 30 percent rating level, and once every 2 months, which is enumerated for the 10 percent. Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  Additionally, because the 50 percent rating requires "very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability," the use of the conjunctive "and" makes clear that the headaches must be long in duration. See Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360 (2007). "Prolong" is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Webster's New World Dictionary of American English 1080 (3d ed. 1986). Finally, the 50 percent rating criteria requires the headaches to produce or be capable of producing "severe economic inadaptability," which is interpreted as meaning either "producing" or "capable of producing" severe economic inadaptability. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440 (2004).

In rating headaches or migraines under DC 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).

The Veteran was given a VA examination in October 2023 during which the examiner noted a diagnosis of tension headaches from 2017. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he experiences daily bitemporal and frontal headaches lasting 2 hours. His treatment plan consists of taking two 500 milligrams (mg) of acetaminophen daily. The Veteran described his related symptoms as pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of his head. The Veteran denied experiencing any non-headache symptoms; no nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, changes in vision or sensory changes (such as feeling of pins and needles in extremities). The Veteran indicated the duration of typical head pain was less than one day. The Veteran also did not endorse prostrating or completely prostrating attacks. The examiner noted that the Veteran lost 1 week of work in the previous 12 months.

The Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted. A 10 percent rating is assigned for characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several  months. At no time during the period on appeal has the Veteran's headache disability manifested prostrating attacks (defined as causing extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, debilitation or incapacitation with substantial inability to engage in ordinary activities). At worst the Veteran has complained of throbbing pain to both sides of his head. The Board points out that VA's Headache Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) form itself includes the definition of  the term "prostrating" for VA purposes and the examiner was instructed to use that definition when answering whether the Veteran had such attacks, and if so, the frequency. Given those instructions, the October 2023 VA examiner checked "no" as to whether the Veteran had prostrating attacks of headache pain. The Veteran missed one week of work in the previous 12 months due to headache pain. The examiner noted that the Veteran takes two 500 mg. of Acetaminophen daily for his headaches. However, there's no indication the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report nor did the Veteran indicate he was on any pain medications at the time of the examination. There is no indication the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication and indeed, factored in the Veteran's description of his right and left throbbing head pain without discounting these symptoms. Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 56. Further, the Board, resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor.  As such, the Board concludes the examination of record is adequate to base a decision.      

Accordingly, persuasive evidence of record is against a compensable rating for tension headaches. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. The claim for a compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.

8. Entitlement to a compensable rating percent for left thigh impairment

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for left thigh impairment. The appeal has been pending since the July 1, 2023, claim for increased rating. The Veteran's left thigh impairment is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5253. Of note, the Veteran is separately service connected for limitation of extension for a left hip strain DC 5251.

DC 5253 relates to impairment of the thigh. A 10 percent rating is assigned for limitation of rotation of the thigh, such that the veteran cannot toe-out more than 15 degrees by the affected leg. A 10 percent rating is also assigned for limitation of adduction of the thigh such that the veteran cannot cross their legs. A 20 percent rating is assigned for limitation of abduction such that motion is lost beyond 10 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

The Veteran was given a VA examination in October 2023 for his hip and thighs. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with trochanteric pain syndrome and left hip strain. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he has left hip pain that is increasing in severity. The Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups to his left hip described as moderate to severe, with achy and sometimes sharp pain that occurs daily and last for 20 hours. The flare-ups are precipitated by lifting anything greater than 20 pounds, prolonged sitting, prolonged standing, prolonged walking, climbing stairs and laying on his left side. The Veteran reported his current treatment plan was use of topical "icy hot" once weekly. The flare-ups are alleviated by weekly use of topical icy hot and gentle massage that gives minimal relief. 

On examination, initial ROM measurements for the left hip were flexion endpoint of 115 degrees, extension endpoint of 30 degrees, abduction 20 of degrees, adduction endpoint of 20 degrees, external rotation endpoint of 40 degrees and internal rotation endpoint of 20 degrees. The examiner noted pain was exhibited during flexion. Passive ROM was flexion endpoint of 120 degrees, extension endpoint of 25 degrees, abduction 25 of degrees, adduction endpoint of 25 degrees, external rotation endpoint of 45 degrees and internal rotation endpoint of 25 degrees. The examiner noted that passive adduction does not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs. The examiner noted that there was localized tenderness or pain to the greater trochanter during palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue, but no crepitus noted. Estimated ROM for repeated use over time was flexion endpoint of 110 degrees, extension endpoint of 20 degrees, abduction 20 of degrees, adduction endpoint of 20 degrees, external rotation endpoint of 40 degrees and internal rotation endpoint of 20 degrees. The examiner noted that limitation in adduction after repeated use does not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs. The examiner noted that the examination was completed while the Veteran was experiencing a flare-up. Estimated ROM during flare-ups was documented as flexion endpoint of 115 degrees, extension endpoint of 20 degrees, abduction 20 of degrees, adduction endpoint of 20 degrees, external rotation endpoint of 40 degrees and internal rotation endpoint of 20 degrees. The examiner noted that limitation in adduction during flare-ups does not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs. The examiner noted that there was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, malunion or nonunion of femur, flail hip joint or leg length discrepancy. The functional impact of the Veteran's left thigh impairment caused the Veteran to miss 10 days in that previous 12 months.

The Board finds that the criteria for a compensable rating for the Veteran's left thigh impairment are not met or more closely approximated at any time during the rating period on review. There is no evidence that the left thigh impairment manifested limitation of rotation of more than 15 degrees (cannot toe-out) or the inability to cross legs during adduction, even during flare-ups, or a limitation of abduction beyond 10 degrees. The Veteran's limitation of rotation was at worst 20 degrees internal and 40 degrees external. The Veteran's abduction was at worst limited to 20 degrees. The Board also notes that the Veteran is in receipt of a separate 10 percent rating for his service-connected left hip strain for painful motion under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

Accordingly, persuasive evidence of record is against a compensable rating for left thigh impairment. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. The claim for a compensable rating for left thigh impairment is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent, after July 1, 2013, for TMJ with arthritis is remanded. 

The claim must be remanded for a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The October 2023 VA examination for TMJ is inadequate. During the examination, the Veteran reported that he experiences TMJ flare-ups that are described as sharp pain and occur daily and lasting about 15 to 16 hours. The Veteran reported that the TMJ flare-ups are random and are alleviated by two tablets of over-the-counter acetaminophen daily. The VA examiner did not appear considered any ameliorative impacts of the acetaminophen the Veteran takes daily to relieve his TMJ pain, which may affect his TMJ ROM. See Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, (March 12, 2025). On remand, a new examination is necessary to provide ROM measurements while considering any ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for the appropriate VA examination to assess the severity of his service-connected TMJ dysfunction. Copies of all pertinent medical records should be made available to the examiner for review. All necessary diagnostic testing should be performed using the appropriate DBQ if available.

In examining he Veteran, the examiner asked to identify and discuss any medications the Veteran takes to treat the symptoms of his TMJ dysfunction and any ameliorative effects that the medications have on the Veteran's ROM measurements or other manifestations of the Veteran's TMJ dysfunction.

 

 

M.E. Larkin

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. G. Perkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.