Citation Nr: A25030908
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 250303-522564
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 1959 to June 1962 and from September 1962 to February 1963.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for hypertension.  

By way of history, in a September 2022 rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's original claim of service connection for hypertension.  The Veteran did not exercise any of the available review options within one year of notification of that decision.  

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking readjudication of the September 2022 rating decision denying service connection for hypertension.  In the September 2024 rating decision referenced above, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been received, readjudicated the claim on the merits, and confirmed the denial of service connection for hypertension.  

In December 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-526EZ, seeking service connection for hypertension.  In a December 2024 letter, the AOJ informed the Veteran that his request had been received, but that VA regulations required him to file this request on the proper form.  

Later that month, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, again seeking readjudication of the September 2022 rating decision denying service connection for hypertension.  On the same day, however, the Veteran also submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on which he also identified the September 2022 rating decision denying service connection for hypertension.  In a January 2025 letter, the Board advised the Veteran that he could not elect multiple review options simultaneously for the same claim and instructed him to clarify whether he intended to appeal the issue to the Board or elect another review option.  

In March 2025, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 10182 on which he again identified the September 2022 rating decision denying service connection for hypertension and elected the Direct Review docket.  In a March 2024 letter, the Board advised the Veteran that his appeal had been docketed.  Although the Veteran's March 2025 VA Form 10182 is untimely as to the September 2022 rating decision, it is timely as to the September 2024 rating decision, which adjudicated the same issue.  Construing the Veteran's March 2025 VA Form 10182 liberally, the Board finds that the September 2024 rating decision is the one on appeal and will proceed accordingly.   

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran asserts multiple theories of entitlement with respect to his claim for service connection for hypertension.  His original VA Form 21-526EZ offered no specific contentions explaining his theory of entitlement.  More recently, the Veteran has contended that he developed hypertension as a result of his in-service exposure to jet fuel fumes, and/or that his hypertension is secondary to his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus.  See April 2024 VA Form 20-0995; April 2024 Veteran statement.  

In support of his April 2024 Supplemental Claim, the Veteran submitted an April 2024 private medical opinion authored by John W. Ellis, M.D., of "Ellis Clinic, PC, Fair and Compassionate Occupational and Legal Medicine."  Dr. Ellis noted that the Veteran reported that, while in the Navy, he was "constantly" exposed to jet fuel fumes due to his job working on fighter jets on the flight line.  The Veteran also reported that within a year of discharge, he started having occipital headaches and lightheadedness and that he was diagnosed with hypertension shortly after discharge.  The Veteran reported that his blood pressure became worse from frustration and agitation related to his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus.  Dr. Ellis opined that "it is more likely than not, that the [Veteran's] hypertension is service connected because of the exposure to jet fuel fumes when he [sic] serving in the U.S. Navy."  He reasoned that:

Exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons has been associated with an elevated blood pressure and heart rate contributing to atherosclerosis.  The exhaust fumes released carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, sulfur, and sulfur-based compounds.  Sulphur compounds have been shown to cause hypertension and weakening of the heart muscles. 

Dr. Ellis also opined that "it is more likely than not, that the [Veteran's] hypertension is secondary to his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus because of the occurrence of his symptoms when he was serving in the U.S. Navy.  The agitation and frustration related to his hearing loss and tinnitus led to severe anxiety contributing to his high blood pressure."  

The Veteran also submitted a print-out of a blog post from the website of Hill & Ponton, a law firm that specializes in veterans law.  The blog, entitled "Jet Fuel Exposure Syndrome Symptoms Explained!" discusses Jet Propellant-4 exposure in Vietnam.  The Veteran also submitted an abstract of a February 2011 article entitled, "Past, present and emerging toxicity issues for jet fuel", as well as an abstract of a September 1997 article entitled, "Short-term exposure to JP-8 jet fuel results in long-term immunotoxicity."

In June 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination, at which time the examiner noted that the Veteran had been diagnosed with hypertension in September 2019.  The Veteran reported that he was first told he had hypertension some time in the 1960's during a physical for a job.  In separate opinions, the examiner determined that the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected tinnitus and hearing loss.  She noted that there is no evidence of a hypertension diagnosis until approximately 56 years after service and there is no medical literature to support a causal relationship between hypertension and either tinnitus or hearing loss.   

In August 2024, VA issued a memorandum confirming the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) by virtue of his MOS of aircraft engine mechanic apprentice, which resulted in exposure to jet fuel fumes and probable exposure to asbestos.

Following issuance of the August 2023 VA TERA memorandum, the Veteran was afforded a TERA examination.  The examiner conducted a records review and opined that the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not caused by his TERA's.  She offered the following rationale: 

After review of the available evidence (see above), the following conclusion was established: The claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the April 2024 private medical opinion offered by Dr. Ellis fails to provide a basis upon which to grant the claim.  With respect to whether the Veteran's hypertension is the result of his in-service exposure to jet fuel fumes, Dr. Ellis states that exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons "has been associated with an elevated blood pressure. . . ."  To begin, while exposure to a certain contaminant may be associated with an elevated blood pressure, it does not follow that such exposure is associated with a diagnosis of hypertension.  Moreover, even assuming this statement could support an association between exposure to the contaminant in question and hypertension, it is insufficient to establish service connection as the applicable legal criteria requires a causal relationship.  The Board also finds that Dr. Ellis' secondary service connection opinion is not adequately supported.  He stated that the Veteran's hypertension "is secondary to his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus because of the occurrence of his symptoms when he was serving in the U.S. Navy."  It is unclear, however, what in-service symptoms Dr. Ellis is referring to.  The Veteran's service treatment records contain no indication that hypertension, tinnitus or hearing loss had their inception during active duty  Rather, these records included multiple examinations, including at separation in February 1963, showing normal blood pressure readings and audiometric findings.  Additionally, Dr. Ellis cited no reputable medical sources to support his conclusion that the agitation and frustration that the Veteran experiences because of his service-connected tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss "led to severe anxiety contributing to his high blood pressure."  

After reviewing the remaining evidence, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the AOJ failed to obtain adequate medical opinions.  In this regard, although the June 2024 VA examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus and/or bilateral hearing loss caused his hypertension, she did not address the question of aggravation.  This renders the opinions inadequate.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (holding that a secondary service connection opinion that addresses a causal relationship, but does not address the question of aggravation, is inadequate).  

The Board also finds that the September 2024 VA TERA opinion is inadequate as the rationale offered was simply a recitation of the negative opinion.  The examiner engaged in no analysis of the medical evidence, no discussion of the Veteran's in-service exposures, and provided no rationale for the negative opinion rendered.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (stating that a medical opinion must contain clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned explanation connecting the two).  

The failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion in this case constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that once VA provides a medical examination, even where such an examination is not required by law, VA must ensure that the examination is adequate).  

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion in connection with the claim of service connection for hypertension.  Access to the claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the opinion.  If the clinician determines that an examination is necessary to provide the opinion requested, one should be scheduled.

After reviewing the evidence of record, and examining the Veteran if deemed necessary, the clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension had its onset in service, was manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation, or is otherwise causally related to an in-service disease or injury, to include the conceded TERA of exposure to jet fuel fumes and probable exposure to asbestos?

In providing this opinion, the clinician should consider the relevant evidence of record, to include the blog and abstracts provided in the Veteran's April 2024 submission.  

The clinician should also consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments, as well as the synergistic, combined effects of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

(b)	If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension is caused by, or the result of his service-connected bilateral hearing loss and/or tinnitus?

(c)	If neither, its it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension is aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected bilateral hearing loss and/or tinnitus?  If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the disability prior to aggravation.   

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Madison, Siobhan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.