Citation Nr: A25030840
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240404-430432
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received and the claim for service connection left knee injury / pain shall be readjudicated.

New and relevant evidence has been received and the claim for service connection right knee injury / pain shall be readjudicated.

REMANDED

The claim for entitlement to service connection for left knee injury / pain is remanded.

The claim for entitlement to service connection for right knee injury / pain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Evidence received during the evidentiary window, specifically the Veteran's May 2023 lay statement submitted with the supplemental claim application, is new and relevant as it tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim of service connection for left knee injury / pain.

2. Evidence received during the evidentiary window, specifically the Veteran's May 2023 lay statement submitted with the supplemental claim application, is new and relevant as it tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim of service connection for right knee injury / pain.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for left knee injury / pain have been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?5108, 7104(b), 7105(c);?38?C.F.R. §§?3.156(d), 3.2501(a)(1). 

2. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for right knee injury / pain have been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?5108, 7104(b), 7105(c);?38?C.F.R. §§?3.156(d), 3.2501(a)(1). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1981 to September 1981 and from November 1987 to October 1990.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In November 2023, the Veteran filed a request for a higher-level review. In March 2024, the RO issued a higher-level review rating decision. In April 2024, the Veteran filed a VA form 10182. In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 RO decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for left knee and right knee injury / pain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This matter is now properly before the Board.

1. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to warrant readjudication of the claim for service connection for left knee injury / pain. 

See paragraph 2 below.

2. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to warrant readjudication of the claim for service connection for right knee injury / pain. 

The Veteran initially filed a claim for service connection for left and right knee injury / pain in 1991. The Veteran's claim for service connection was denied in February 1991. In April 2002 it was again denied due to failure to provide new and material evidence. In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim application with supporting lay statements regarding pain in his left and right knee in and since service. In October 2023, the RO denied the Veteran's claim indicating that new and relevant evidence was not received. In April 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, notice of disagreement.

The evidence necessary for VA to readjudicate the Veteran's claim must be "new and relevant." In this regard, the AMA defines "relevant evidence" as "evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue." Pub. L. No. 115-55 §2(a). The "relevant evidence" standard is a lower standard than the "material evidence" standard because the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the new evidence relate to an unestablished fact or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim. The Board will consider this lower standard in deciding the Veteran's appeal. 

Based on the foregoing, for the Board to readjudicate the previously denied claims, the Veteran must provide or identify new evidence that tends to prove or disprove that he has current disabilities that began in service, manifested to a compensable degree within a year of separation from service, or are otherwise medically related to a disease or injury in service, or were caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. See 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1112, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.303, 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a), 3.310 (describing the requirements to establish service connection on a direct, presumptive, and secondary basis). 

Under the AMA, a claimant may continuously pursue a claim or issue by filing a supplemental claim following notice of a decision by the RO or the Board. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2500(c). If?new?and?relevant evidence?is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the RO will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record.?38?C.F.R. §?3.2501.?New?evidence is evidence not?previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators 38?C.F.R. §?3.2501(a)(1).?Relevant evidence?is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim, including evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.?38?C.F.R. §?3.2501(a)(2). If?new?and?relevant evidence?is not presented or secured, the RO will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim.?Id. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's May 2023 lay statement is both new and relevant. It is new evidence because it was not previously before the RO prior to the May 2023 supplemental claim, and it is relevant because it is evidence that tends to prove or disprove that the Veteran has had knee pain in his left and right knees in and since service. The Veteran's statement shows that he has had ongoing knee pain and trigger's the RO's duty to assist. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's lay statement is sufficient evidence to readjudicate the Veteran's claim for service connection for his left and right knee injury/pain. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for left knee injury / pain.

See paragraph 2 below.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee injury / pain.

The Veteran contends that he should be service connected for his left and right knee injury / pain. 

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the Veteran's claims file. The Veteran contends that he should be afforded a VA examination for is claimed left and right knee injury / pain. In May 2023, the Veteran provided a lay statement indicating that he had pain in and since service. The Board has considered evidence of record and notes that the Veteran's representative submitted argument that indicated the Veteran hurt his knee while running in service. The Veteran contends he has had knee pain in and since service. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's service records are absent of reports of an injury; however, the Board notes that the absence of contemporaneous records does not preclude granting service connection for a claimed disability. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). As a lay person, the Veteran is competent to attest to injuring his knees while running during service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report injuring his left and right knees in service. 

When a claim is made, the Veteran is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled. See Clemons v. Shinseki,?23?Vet. App.?1, 5?(2009). Here, the Veteran is seeking service connection for his left and right knee pain. The Board finds that the RO made a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to afford the Veteran a VA examination to fully develop the Veteran's claims. The VA must provide an examination when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 C.F.R. §3.159(c)(4)(i) (2018).

The Board finds that in this matter the Veteran is competent to report pain as an in-service injury, the Veteran's lay statement is sufficient evidence to establish an in-service injury, the Veteran has also indicated that he has had pain in and since service, and the Board finds that there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. 

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the RO for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

Therefore, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct the RO's pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed left and right knee injury / pain. 

If possible, the examiner should review the entire claims file. Otherwise, the RO should ensure that the examiner is provided a copy of the VA Form 10182 and the Veteran's May 2023 lay statement in support of his claim.

The examiner must respond ot the following: 

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left and right knee injury / pain was caused by or otherwise related to an in-service event, injury, or disease? 

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left and right knee injury / pain was caused by or aggravated by a service-connected condition? 

Causation and aggravation must be addressed. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.?? 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.?? 

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the Veteran's claim.

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Counsel, H. Hailu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.