Citation Nr: A25030450
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 200313-73933
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1986 to June1991.

In a February 2017claim, the Veteran sought service connection for bilateral hearing loss and for tinnitus. In an April 2017 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ),  a Department of Veterans' Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) denied service connection for bilateral hearing loss and for tinnitus. The Veteran appealed those denials to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board). 

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) became effective February 19, 2019. This law creates a new framework, or modernized review system, for veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claims to seek review. The review system in place before the AMA is referred to as the legacy review system.

After the RO issued a January 2020 statement of the case (SOC) on the above-listed matters on appeal in the legacy review system, the Veteran opted into the modernized (AMA) review system by submitting a March 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal. Therefore, the January 2020 SOC is the decision on appeal.

In the March 2020 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the SOC, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. §20.303. The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the date of the SOC and before the VA Form 10182 was received, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the VA Form 10182 was received. 38C.F.R. §20.303.

In a November 2023 decision, the Board denied service connection for bilateral hearing loss and for tinnitus. The Veteran appealed those denials to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).

In December 2024, the Veteran and VA (the parties) submitted to the Court a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR), asking the Court to vacate the part of the November 2023 Board decision that denied service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus and remand those matters for readjudication. In January 2025 the Court granted the JMPR.

In February 2025 the Veteran waived any remaining time to submit additional evidence or argument to the Board.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. However, as a remand of these matters is warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

1. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

2. Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran contends that noise exposure in service caused hearing loss and tinnitus.

VA has a duty to assist claimants to obtain evidence needed to substantiate a claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). The Board has a duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, or to correct any other error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

In the December 2024 JMPR, the parties discussed an April 2017 VA examination in which the examiner expressed the opinions that the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus each were less likely than not related to claimed noise exposure in service. The parties agreed that the examiner, in considering the Veteran's noise exposure in service, noted his noise exposure as a clerk attached to an artillery battalion. The parties found, however, that the examiner did not explicitly note records reflecting that the Veteran was qualified for and familiar with various weapons systems, and that hearing conservation data reports were required due to exposure to weapon testing or shipyard noise.

The Board concludes that the April 2017 VA opinion is inadequate because it is based on an incomplete factual basis. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (an opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). The failure to obtain an adequate opinion was a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. To correct that error, the Board is remanding the matters for additional opinions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an opinion from a clinician who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion in his case, regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. The remand and claims file should be provided to the examiner, and the examination report must reflect that the claims file was reviewed.

The examiner is to provide opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus began during service or is otherwise related to his noise exposure in service.

The examiner must specifically address the following: 

(a)	the Veteran was assigned to a Naval Security Force or Navy Sea Systems Company; 

(b)	the Veteran was qualified for and familiarized with various weapons systems; 

(c)	his assignment to special duties required hearing conservation data reports for accompanying exposure to weapon testing or shipyard noise; and 

(d)	during service the Veteran held clerk duties while attached to an artillery battalion.

All opinions are to be accompanied by complete, clearly stated rationale. 

An opinion based solely on the lack of treatment either during or after service is not sufficient.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. J. Kunz, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.