Citation Nr: A25030933
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220830-272193
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's PFB has not been manifested by characteristic lesions affecting at least five percent of total or exposed body area, systemic therapy, painful or unstable scars, visible or palpable tissue loss, gross distortion or asymmetry of features, or any characteristics of disfigurement. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a compensable rating for PFB have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.21, 4.126, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7813.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from July 1983 to August 1987 and in the Marine Corps from February 1988 to June 1989.

In a September 2022 administrative decision, VA determined that the Veteran's service from February 2, 1988 to June 22, 1989 was under dishonorable conditions and is a bar to VA benefits under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(4).  The Board will therefore only consider the Veteran's period of active duty service from July 1983 to August 1987 for the purposes of service connection.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider with regard to the PFB claim, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the hypertension and low back disability claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any issue with the duty to notify or duty to assist with regard to the issue being decided on the merits below that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.???See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board.");?Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying?Scott?to a duty to assist argument).? 

1. PFB

The Veteran contends that his service-connected PFB warrants a higher rating than that currently assigned.  His PFB is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7813, for dermatophytosis, with a noncompensable rating on and after March 3, 2022.  The full period of service connection is on appeal.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate Diagnostic Codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Given the nature of the present claim?for a?higher initial evaluation, the Board has considered all evidence of severity from the effective date?for the award?of service connection.??Fenderson?v. West, 12?Vet. App.?119 (1999).?? 

Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Diagnostic Code 7813 provides for rating under the General Rating Formula for the Skin (General Formula).  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7813.  Ratings are based on either the surface area of the body affected or the type and frequency of medication used.

With regard to surface area, the General Formula provides for rating as follows: a 60 percent rating with more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected, a 30 percent rating for 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or exposed areas affected, a 10 percent rating for at least 5 percent but less than 20 percent of the entire body or exposed areas affected, and a noncompensable rating for less than 5 percent of the entire body or exposed areas affected.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating Formula for the Skin.

With regard to medication, the General Formula provides for rating as follows: a 60 percent rating for constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA), or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period, a 30 percent rating for systemic therapy required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period, a 10 percent rating for intermittent systemic therapy required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period, and a noncompensable rating for no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period.  Id.  VA regulations state that systemic therapy is treatment that is administered through any route other than the skin, and topical therapy is treatment that is administered through the skin.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118(a).  

The General Formula also provides for the option of rating as disfigurement of the head, face, or neck, or scars, depending upon the predominant disability.  

Scars or disfigurement of the head, face, or neck are evaluated as follows: with visible or palpable tissue loss and other gross distortion or asymmetry of three or more features or paired sets of features or with six or more characteristics of disfigurement (80 percent); with visible or palpable tissue loss and either gross distortion or asymmetry of two features or paired sets of features or four or five characteristics of disfigurement (50 percent); with visible or palpable tissue loss and either gross distortion or asymmetry of one feature or paired set of features or two or three characteristics of disfigurement (30 percent); and with one characteristic of disfigurement (10 percent).  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7800.  The "paired sets of features" are the nose, chin, forehead, eyes (including eyelids), ears (auricles), cheeks, and lips.  Id.

Diagnostic Code 7800, Note (1) lists the eight characteristics of disfigurement as: scar 5 or more inches (13 or more cm.) in length; scar at least one-quarter inch (0.6 cm.) wide at widest part; surface contour of scar elevated or depressed on palpation; scar adherent to underlying tissue; skin hypo- or hyper-pigmented in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.); skin texture abnormal (irregular, atrophic, shiny, scaly, etc.) in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.); underlying soft tissue missing in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.); and skin indurated and inflexible in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.).  Id.

Diagnostic Code 7800, Note (4) allows for separate rating of any disabling effects other than disfigurement, such as pain, instability, and residuals of associated muscle or nerve injury, under the appropriate diagnostic code(s).  Id.

38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7801 and 7802 pertain to scars that are not of the head, face, or neck and are therefore not pertinent to this appeal.   

Unstable or painful scars are evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7804, which provides for a 20 percent rating for three or four unstable or painful scars and a 10 percent rating for one or two unstable or painful scars.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7804.  An unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar.  Id. at Note (1).  

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7805 apply to other scars, including linear scars, and "other effects of scars evaluated under diagnostic codes 7800, 7801, 7802, and 7804."  Diagnostic Code 7805 contains the instruction "Evaluate any disabling effect(s) not considered in a rating provided under diagnostic codes 7800-04 under an appropriate diagnostic code."

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for skin diseases in April 2022.  The clinician diagnosed PFB.  The Veteran reported that his symptoms had improved since active duty service but that he continued to get irritation of the face and raised bumps to the neck.  He added that he only shaved once a week.  He did not report any medication or other treatment for his PFB in the preceding 12 months.  On examination, his PFB affected less than five percent of the total and exposed body area, in the form of raised bumps to the neck.  The clinician found that the Veteran's PFB would have no effect on his ability to work.

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination for scars and disfigurement on in April 2022.  The clinician diagnosed PFB scars.  The Veteran did not report any symptoms attributable to his scars.  The clinician found that the scarring was neither painful nor unstable.  On examination, there was diffuse scarring on the neck, too numerous to count, but only affecting approximately 0.01 square centimeters in total.  None of the characteristics of disfigurement were present.  There was no gross distortion or asymmetry of facial features or visible or palpable tissue loss.  The scarring did not result in any limitation of function and the clinician found that it would have no effect on the Veteran's ability to work.  

The most persuasive evidence weighs against finding that the Veteran's PFB warrants a compensable rating at any point during the period on appeal.  The record contains nothing to indicate that any characteristic of disfigurement is present.  There is no evidence of visible or palpable tissue loss or gross distortion or asymmetry of features.  There is no evidence that his scars are painful or unstable.  There is also no evidence of other disabling effects from scarring or disfigurement caused by the Veteran's PFB.  The affected area was also less than five percent of his total body area or exposed area; a 10 percent rating requires at least five percent of total or exposed areas to be affected.  The Veteran did not report receiving any treatment, whether topical or systemic. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements.  The Veteran is competent to report his own observations with regard to the symptoms of his service-connected PFB.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  Those statements are also credible.  Nothing in those statements is inconsistent with the rating assigned.  

Because the Board considered the applicable ratings under the prior criteria for the Veteran's skin disability, the General Formula, and every Diagnostic Code pertaining to the Veteran's service-connected PFB, including scars and disfigurement, the Board finds that there are no other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes by which a higher rating can be assigned.

REASONS FOR REMAND

With regard to all of the claims remanded below, the Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's lay statements, including whether he had continuity of symptoms, are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  Although the Board is requesting medical opinions regarding the lay contentions, this is for thoroughness and not based on a finding that the contentions are credible.  

1. Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

VA must provide an examination with regard to a claim for disability compensation when there is competent evidence of a disability that may be associated with an in-service disease, injury or event, but there is insufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  

VA has conceded that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of hypertension.  VA regulations define hypertension as diastolic blood pressure that is predominantly 90mm or greater.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, at Note (1).  The Veteran's service treatment records note two blood pressure readings with diastolic blood pressure of 90mm or greater.  The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one.  Id. at 83.  This evidence meets that threshold.  Because this error in the duty to assist occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal, a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran a VA examination.  

In addition, in a January 2025 memorandum, VA found that there was evidence that the Veteran had been exposed to asbestos during his active duty service and that this constitutes toxic exposure risk activity.  In general, such a finding requires VA to obtain a medical opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the claimed disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1)(B).  For this reason, the Board finds that it is also necessary to obtain an opinion regarding a nexus to toxic exposure for this claim.  This is to correct an error in satisfying a statutory duty where correction would have a reasonable possibility in aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

2. Service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for back conditions in April 2022.  The clinician opined that the Veteran's low back disability was not incurred in or caused by active duty service, but based this opinion on a lack of chronicity of care and on a finding that the Veteran's scoliosis "was not identified in-service and can not be confirmed as being present in service."  The former is not an adequate rationale and the latter is inaccurate: his service treatment records repeatedly note scoliosis.  A medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has limited, if any, probative value.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  Because these errors in the duty to assist occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal, a remand is warranted to obtain an additional VA medical opinion.  

In addition, as stated above, in a January 2025 memorandum, VA found that the Veteran's service included a toxic exposure risk activity.  In general, such a finding requires VA to obtain a medical opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the claimed disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1)(B).  However, this requirement does not apply "if the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran submitted evidence."  38 U.S.C. § 1168(b).  In sub-regulatory guidance issued on June 12, 2024 (VBA Letter 20-24-06), the Veterans Benefits Administration determined that an exception to the need to obtain a toxic exposure opinion applied to claims based on physical trauma, including blunt force trauma, penetrating trauma, and trauma due to repetitive use.  Although this guidance is not binding on the Board, the Board finds it persuasive and accepts its determination as appropriate.  The Veteran attributes his symptoms to in-service wear and tear from repetitive use.  For this reason, the Board does not find that it is necessary to obtain an opinion regarding a nexus to toxic exposure for this claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Arrange for an examination by an appropriate clinician for the purpose of determining the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension.? The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician for review.? 

The clinician must provide opinions as to the following:

a. Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension began during active service, is related to an incident of service, or began within one year after discharge from active service. 

b. Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension was due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service.  

In rendering these opinions, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures, including asbestos. 

The clinician is advised that, for the purposes of this opinion, only the Veteran's period of service from July 1983 to August 1987 may be considered as active service.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the Board calls the clinician's attention to July 1985 and April 1986 service treatment records noting diastolic blood pressure of 90mm or greater.  

The rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided.  Note that an absence of records of treatment or a diagnosis in service cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding and that chronicity of care is not a requirement for service connection.  If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the clinician should so state and provide reasoning as to why a conclusion would be so outside the norm that such an opinion is not possible.

2. Arrange for an opinion by an appropriate clinician who has not previously examined the Veteran for the purpose of determining the etiology of his low back disability.  The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician for review.  

The clinician must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) any current low back disability began during active service, is related to an incident of service, or began within one year after discharge from active service. 

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the Board calls the clinician's attention to the following:

a. Service treatment records from December 1983, May 1984, October 1984, April 1985, and January 1987 noting treatment for low back pain, including scoliosis.  

b. The Veteran's October 2001 claim, reporting a lumbar spine disability.  

c. A February 2012 VA treatment record noting the Veteran's report of intermittent lower back pain.  

d. An August 2013 VA treatment record noting the Veteran's report of lower back problems with scoliosis for years.  

e. The Veteran's reports regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms during an April 2022 VA examination.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided.  Note that the fact that a disability is not mentioned or diagnosed in treatment records cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding and that chronicity of care is not a requirement for service connection.  If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the clinician should so state and provide reasoning as to why a conclusion would be so outside the norm that such an opinion is not possible.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Frank, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.