Citation Nr: A25030972
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-456622
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis C (also claimed as dizziness and weight loss, loss of appetite, fatigue and bloating, liver disease) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and abdominal pain as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for back condition as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for depression as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine as secondary to depression is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1974 to July 1976.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis C (also claimed as dizziness and weight loss, loss of appetite, fatigue and bloating, liver disease) is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for GERD and abdominal pain as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for back condition as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for depression as secondary to hepatitis C is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for migraine as secondary to depression is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  For reasons explained below, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional AOJ duty to assist error.

The Veteran contends that he was diagnosed with hepatitis C during service.  See August 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

The Veteran's June 1976 separation medical examination noted needle track scars, and the Veteran had stated he was no longer on drugs.

A February 2003 VAMC treatment record noted a positive screening for hepatitis C.  A December 2003 VAMC treatment record noted that the Veteran had a social history related to hepatitis C that included injection drug use, intranasal cocaine, high-risk sexual history, Vietnam-era veteran, ETOH use, but no tattoos or body piercings.

In the October 2021 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran stated, "The following risk I have encounter since being diagnose with Hep. C: high risk of sexual activity, drug use, liver resection surgery, sleep disorder, fatigue, alopecia (hair thinning), dry skin."  

The December 2021 VA examination noted that VA diagnosed the Veteran with hepatitis C in 2004 and after several rounds of treatment, a new drug cured the disease; the Veteran's hepatitis C risk factors were intravenous drug use or intranasal cocaine use, high risk sexual activity, piercing, shared toothbrushes, and shaving razors.

The December 2021 VA examiner opined that hepatitis C was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service.  The rationale was that there was no chronic diagnosis of hepatitis C during service; service treatment records are silent for hepatitis C; the Veteran claimed he was exposed to shared razors, needles, toothbrushes, and high risk sexual activity while in the service but did not develop symptoms or test for hepatitis C until routine lab work from a primary care provider revealed the diagnosis in 2004; the Veteran was cured from hepatitis C    in 2018, an objective examination was normal, and the Veteran's symptoms were subjective only. 

In a March 2022 Higher-Level Review Return, VA sought a new examination and opinion to account for the Veteran's drug use and high-risk sexual activity. 

The April 2023 VA examination noted that during service, the Veteran began using intravenous drugs but could not recall whether he had shared needles; after separating from service, the Veteran stopped using intravenous drugs but did snort cocaine; the Veteran did not recall having symptoms of hepatitis C prior to his 2004 diagnosis; from 2003 to 2018, the Veteran had issues with dizziness, bloating, and fatigue.

The April 2023 VA examiner opined that hepatitis C was at least as likely as not related to high-risk drug activity during service.  The rationale was that the Veteran admitted to intravenous drug use during service, which was corroborated by right and left antecubital track scars on the separation medical examination; according to the CDC, transmission of hepatitis C occurs most commonly through sharing drug injection equipment, such as needles and syringes, transmission during sex is not as common, though it is reportedly more common among men who have sex with men, and Vietnam-era veterans have higher incidences of hepatitis C that non-Vietnam-era veterans and non-veterans.

The Board finds that both the December 2021 and April 2023 VA examiners' opinions are insufficient for the Board to decide this appeal.  The medical opinions account for all high-risk factors together but not separately, and the Board cannot read them together because they provide opposite conclusions based on opposing premises regarding the lack of symptoms from service to diagnosis.  The December 2021 VA examiner's negative nexus opinion was largely based on the lack of symptoms from service to diagnosis, which was approximately 27 years.  The April 2023 VA examiner provided a positive nexus opinion that linked the Veteran's hepatitis C to intravenous drug use, which ceased no later than 1976, and discounted his high-risk sexual activity as a less likely cause.  There is some confusion in the record regarding the Veteran's risk factors and when they occurred: the Veteran's October 2021 Statement in Support of Claim indicated that his risk factors of high-risk sexual activity, drug use, liver resection surgery, sleep disorder, fatigue, alopecia (hair thinning), and dry skin occurred after his 2003 diagnosis; in the December 2021 medical opinion, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran shared razors, needles, toothbrushes, and engaged in high-risk sexual activity during service; the December 2021 VA examination noted a risk factor of piercing; and a December 2003 VAMC treatment record noted no body-piercings.  

Regardless, if the April 2023 VA examiner's positive nexus opinion linked in-service intravenous drug use from no later than 1976 to the 2003 diagnosis despite no showing of symptoms during the intervening 27 years, the AOJ should have sought clarification as to whether the other in-service risk factors that were noted in the record, to include shared razors, toothbrushes, and piercings (if piercings occurred during service) could be linked to the Veteran's eventual diagnosis.  The Board understands from the March 2022 Higher-Level Review Return that when the AOJ sought a new medical examination and opinion, it was attempting to account for all in-service risk factors.  However, again, because the April 2023 VA examiner returned a positive opinion that accounted only for high-risk sexual activity and intravenous drug use, it then became necessary to seek clarification to resolve the discrepancies between the opinions.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  

The remaining service connection claims for (1) left lower extremity, (2) right lower extremity, (3) GERD and abdominal pain, (4) back condition, (5), depression, and (6) migraine rely on the Veteran receiving service connection for hepatitis C.  See August 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ; September 2023 rating decision, Favorable Findings.  Therefore, the claims are inextricably intertwined, and the appropriate remedy is to remand those claims.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (two or more issues are inextricably intertwined if one claim could have significant impact on the other).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's hepatitis C is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service.  The clinician should discuss each of the Veteran's in-service risk factors in addition to any other relevant information.

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Shealy, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.