Citation Nr: A25030252
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210824-179887
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty for the United States Army from July 1969 to July 1971 during the Vietnam War Era, including serving in the Republic of Vietnam from September 1970 to July 1971. He received the Combat Infantryman Badge, Bronze Star Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Service Medal, Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal, and the Good Conduct Medal.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2021 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) of the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In April 2021, the Veteran filed a claim for PTSD Combat - Mental Disorders. In a May 2021 rating decision, the claim was denied. In June 2021, the Veteran continued his pursuit by filing VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for PTSD and submitted additional evidence. In July 2021, despite finding new and relevant evidence was received, the AOJ again denied the Veteran's claim. 

In August 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) and selected the evidence docket; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the notification of the July 2021 AOJ rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the NOD in August 2021. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is remanded.

Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

More specifically, to establish entitlement to service connection for PTSD, the record must contain the following: (1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f). 

If the evidence establishes that the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that combat, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary; and, provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the Veteran's service, the Veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor, element (2). 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f). Additionally, a presumption is afforded a Veteran if they are shown to have engaged in combat with the enemy in active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b).

The Veteran contends that he has an acquired psychiatric disability as a result of events that occurred during service. Based on the evidence discussed below, the Board has expanded and recharacterized the claim as a claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, more precisely define the scope of the Veteran's claim regarding which, if any, acquired psychiatric disability/disabilities may be present. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (stating that the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record).

In both the May 2021 and July 2021 rating decisions, the AOJ made a favorable finding the Veteran's personnel records document he served in the Republic of Vietnam from September 1970 to July 1971. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). Furthermore, the Veteran's military records show the Veteran received the Combat Infantryman Badge (CIB) medal for engaging in combat with the enemy.  

Additionally, the Veteran submitted two separate lay statements in April 2021 in which he detailed at length multiple in-service events he asserts cause his current symptoms and claimed disability, and the Veteran even provided contemporaneous newspaper clippings. Hist statements outlined (1) witnessing his fellow C Troop service members' helicopters explode resulting in their death and thereafter asking permission daily to go and retrieve their bodies. Once the attempt to retrieve their bodies was finally made, enemy gunfire broke out and the Veteran was close enough to see the faces of his enemies after he shot them to death, (2) being shot down by the enemy while in a helicopter and narrowly escaping, (3) witnessing his fellow service members suffering in a makeshift clinic as burn victims, and (4) seeing dead bodies littering the hills of Vietnam as he flew reconnaissance missions, provided protection for retreating troops, and rescued fellow service members. The Veteran's in-service experiences were also substantiated by fellow service member, G.S., in a June 2021 buddy statement.

In sum, the Veteran's service department records reflect that he was stationed in the Republic of Vietnam as a member of the USARV, providing logistical and operational support to the U.S. Army forces in Vietnam and a member of the C Troop 2/17 Air Calvary 101st Airborne Division, which is congruent with the duties described in the Veteran's in-service stressor events. As the record does not include clear and convincing evidence contrary to his reported in-service stressor events, such events are conceded. Given the Veteran's receipt of the CIB, the added presumption afforded to combat Veterans, and the Veteran's lay evidence, the Board concludes that evidence of an in-service incurrence, element (2) necessary to establish service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, has been abundantly satisfied.

Armed with the above finding, the crux of the Veteran's appeal concerns whether the Veteran has a diagnosable acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, element (1); and a medical nexus opinion connecting the Veteran's current symptoms, element (3), with what has been conceded happened in service.

In April 2021, after the Veteran first filed his claim on appeal, the AOJ requested a Psych PTSD medical examination. In May 2021, the examination was conducted over video telehealth. The examiner noted that the Veteran served in combat in Vietnam with an original MOS of reconnaissance. The examiner noted one stressor event adequate to support the diagnosis of PTSD, but then left black the second or third stressor event in the spaces specifically identified on the DBQ form. The examiner found that the Veteran's symptoms do not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD under DSM-5 criteria and that the Veteran does not have a mental disorder[s] that conforms with DSM-5 criteria and opined, "for the claimant's condition of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder there is no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs and or symptoms to support a diagnosis." As rationale, the examiner stated, "It is this examiner's understanding that the Veteran must show that he or she currently suffers from a disability that began in service" and "As noted above, a thorough page-by-page review of his records renders NO findings that would substantiate any CONSISTENT findings longitudinally." [Emphasis as in the original].  

In light of the above, the Board finds that the May 2021 VA examiner's rationale is based on an inaccurate factual premise, appearing to believe that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, had to have begun in service, and thus, the medical opinion is inadequate. Sklar v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 140 (1993); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993). 

In the modernized review system (AMA), the Board's jurisdiction to remand is limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

In sum, the VA examiner's statements regarding the nature and probable etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disability are found to be inadequate. Downstream from the above, the Board finds that the AOJ's failure to obtain adequate assessments of the nature and probable etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disability prior to adjudicating the claim represents a pre-decisional error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist the Veteran that must be corrected on remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); see also Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (VA examination must be based on an accurate factual premise).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must request that the Veteran be scheduled for appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD. The complete electronic record must be made available to, and reviewed by, the VA examiners prior to conducting the examinations. All necessary tests and studies should be conducted.

*In addressing the above, the examiner is specifically asked to ensure the Veteran can hear and perceive all questions in view of his decreased hearing acuity and is given sufficient time to fully recount these difficult memories and the related symptoms the Veteran has experienced, in order to complete all sections of any disability benefits questionnaire. 

After completion of the above, the examiners are requested to address the following:

a. Identify all acquired psychiatric disabilities, to include PTSD, during or contemporaneous to the appeal period.  

*In addressing the above, the examiner is specifically asked to confirm or rule out a diagnosis of PTSD.

b. For each acquired psychiatric disability identified in part (a), provide an opinion concerning whether such is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) etiologically related to his active-duty service, to specifically include the conceded in-service stressor events and resulting symptoms therefrom, as identified in the Veteran's (2) April 2021 lay statements.

A complete rational must be provided for any opinion offered.

If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

2. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's appealed issue in light of the totality of evidence of record.  If any benefit sought is not granted to the fullest extent, the AOJ must provide the Veteran and his 

representative with a copy of the readjudication and afford them an appropriate period to respond. 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Prevost, Katherine L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.