Citation Nr: A25030594
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-431035
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbances, as a separate disability, is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder and general anxiety disorder with panic symptoms with sleep disturbances (hereinafter "acquired psychiatric disability") is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

1. The Veteran's currently diagnosed OSA had its onset in service.

2. The Veteran's claimed sleep disturbances are a symptom of his service-connected acquired psychiatric disability and are not a separate disability for which service connection can be granted.

3. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability was manifested by symptoms that most closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, including symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbances, as a separate disability, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for acquired psychiatric disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1 4.7, 4.21, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service with the United States Army from October 1994 to October 2000 and from February 2003 to March 2004.  This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2023 (psychiatric disorder and sleep disturbances) and May 2023 (OSA) rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran submitted a March 29, 2024, and an April 3, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)).  In both NODs, the Veteran included incorrect dates of decisions being appealed, which led the Board to send the Veteran a letter notifying him that the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement was untimely with regard to all issues. The Board then docketed the appeal related to the April 2024 Notice of Disagreement.  

Upon review, the Board finds that the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement was timely with regard to the issues of service connection for OSA, which was decided in the May 2023 rating decision on appeal, and service connection for sleep disturbances, which was decided as an increased rating claim for his acquired psychiatric disability in the March 2023 rating decision.  

All other issues noted in the March 2024 and April 2024 Notices of Disagreement were not timely.  As such, the Board has characterized the current appeal to include the issues of service connection for OSA, service connection for sleep disturbances, and increased evaluation for acquired psychiatric disability.  

In his Notices of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 and May 2023 AOJ decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  For the issues of service connection for sleep disturbances and increased evaluation for acquired psychiatric disability, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 rating decision.  For the issue of service connection for OSA, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision.  Any evidence submitted after the relevant AOJ decision on appeal for each particular issue cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

A claim for increased evaluation includes a claim for a finding of total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) where there are allegations of worsening disability and related unemployability.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  As the Veteran reported he is working during the appellate period, with no indication such is less than substantial employment, entitlement to TDIU is not inferred.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Determinations as to service connection will be based on review of the entire evidence of record, to include all pertinent medical and lay evidence, with due consideration to VA's policy to administer the law under a broad and liberal interpretation consistent with the facts in each individual case.  38 U.S.C. § 1154 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA must determine whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event.  The evidence is not in approximate balance, or nearly equal, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

Sleep Apnea

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosed disability of OSA.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  A current disability is established.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for a diagnosis or treatment of OSA in service.  However, lay statements of record support a finding that the Veteran had in-service OSA symptoms of loud snoring, daytime hypersomnolence, and stopping breathing during sleep that continued until his diagnosis via sleep study in June 2022.

In a statement submitted in December 2021, a fellow service member, Mr. KZ, reported that he was deployed to Kuwait with the Veteran in 2003 and 2004.  Mr. KZ reported that during their deployment he slept approximately eight feet from the Veteran and witnessed the Veteran snoring very loudly and stopping breathing.  Mr. KZ also observed the Veteran to be very tired during the day.

In another statement submitted in December 2021, the Veteran's wife reported that she met the Veteran in 2004 upon his return from deployment in Kuwait and Iraq.  She reported witnessing the Veteran snoring and stopping breathing in his sleep, and that he has suffered from this condition since 2004.  She noted that she cannot sleep due to his loud snoring and that she worries when he stops breathing throughout the night.  

In a January 2023 VA sleep apnea examination, the examiner noted the Veteran has a diagnosis of mild OSA.  The Veteran reported an in-service onset of symptoms in when the Veteran was told by his roommates that he was snoring extremely loudly.  The Veteran further reported that his wife informed him that he stopped breathing during sleep upon his return from deployment in 2004.  The examiner attributed the symptom of persistent daytime hypersomnolence to the Veteran's OSA.  The examiner provided opinions only regarding whether the Veteran's OSA was due to or aggravated by his acquired psychiatric disability.

The Board finds the lay statements of record competent and credible concerning the existence of sleeping problems and symptoms now associated with OSA since active service.  Symptoms of OSA, including snoring, daytime hypersomnolence, and cessation of breathing at night, are observable symptoms which are capable of being identified by lay witnesses.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011).  These statements are afforded significant probative value as to the in-service onset.  

Therefore, direct service connection for OSA is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Competent and credible lay statement establish onset of symptoms attributed to OSA in service that continued until diagnosis in 2022.  While the claims file also includes positive evidence of a secondary nexus to the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability, the Board need not discuss this alternative theory of entitlement.  The Veteran is entitled to service connection for OSA, and the appeal is granted.

Sleep Disturbances

The Veteran contends that he has sleep disturbances related to his military service, including as secondary to his service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.  In the rating decision on appeal that denied entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbances, the Veteran's claimed sleep disturbances were noted as a symptom of his service-connected acquired psychiatric disability evaluated at 50 percent disabling.

In January 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination to evaluate the connection, if any, between the claimed sleep disturbances and his service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.  The VA examiner noted chronic sleep impairment as a symptom of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability but did not note any current sleep disorder that had a separate and distinct manifestation of symptoms from his diagnosed mental disorders.  The VA examiner specifically opined that the Veteran's claimed sleep disturbances or sleep disorder is subsumed under his service-connected acquired psychiatric disability, as sleep disturbance is a major symptom of his diagnosed mental disorders.  The symptom of chronic sleep impairment was then considered by VA when evaluating the Veteran's adjustment disorder as 50 percent disabling.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's claimed sleep disturbances are a symptom of his acquired psychiatric disability for which the Veteran is already service-connected and receiving compensation.  The Veteran's psychiatric disability is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 9400 which specifically contemplates chronic sleep impairment as part of the evaluation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.125, Diagnostic Code 9400.  Therefore, the Veteran's symptom of sleep disturbances is contemplated pursuant to the appropriate rating schedule for that disability and separate compensation for sleep disturbances would constitute double compensation for the same symptoms and violate the rule against pyramiding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

The Board also notes that the Veteran is also service connected for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, which provides compensation for his daytime fatigue symptoms, and as of this Board decision, is also service connected for OSA, which provides further compensation related to poor sleep.

For these reasons, the claim for a separate disorder manifested by sleep disturbances must be denied.  Because the evidence is against the claim and remand is not necessary to decide the case, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.  Therefore, the appeal of entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbances, as a separate disability, is denied.

Increased Evaluation

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing the Veteran's current symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted.  A claim will be denied only if the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990).  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to a higher disability evaluation for his acquired psychiatric disability, which has been evaluated at 50 percent disabling since December 13, 2021.

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is rated pursuant to the general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 C.F.R § 4.130 ("General Rating Formula").  A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time and place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or name.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the Veteran's occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 426, 442 (2002).  Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442; see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-27 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Nevertheless, all ratings in the General Rating Formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in January 2023.  The VA examiner noted three diagnosed mental disorders, opining that it is not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each individual diagnosis.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran to be alert and oriented in all spheres, well-groomed with reported good hygiene.  His thought processes were intact with no evidence of hallucinations or delusions, and his speech was normal.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that he lives with his wife and three children, has a good relationship with his mother, and texts his brother occasionally.  He reported socializing with friends one or two times per month and spending his free time with his children doing their activities.  The Veteran further reported maintaining full time employment with the Federal Aviation Administration, although he reported having difficulty completing work in a timely manner due to poor concentration and focus.  At the time of the examination, the Veteran denied being in therapy or taking any psychotropic medications.  He also denied any suicidal ideations, and there is no record of any violence toward others.  The VA examiner documented the following symptoms attributable to the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability:  depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; panic attacks that occur more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  The VA examiner characterized the Veteran's level of impairment as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  

After a thorough review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder symptoms do not more nearly approximate the criteria for a rating in excess of the 50 percent disability rating he currently receives.  The Veteran's symptoms predominantly manifested in depressed mood, anxiety with panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances.  Due to the foregoing, the evidence persuasively supports finding a disability picture where the severity, frequency, and duration more closely approximates a 50 percent rating, as the Veteran clearly exhibits occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

However, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding a disability picture where the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment consistent with a rating higher than 50 percent.  Throughout this period, the Veteran was noted as alert and oriented, with appropriate behaviour and appropriately groomed.  The evidence shows that the Veteran does not experience impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; inability to establish or maintain effective relationships; illogical speech; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; neglect of appearance or hygiene; or obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  The Veteran was able to maintain relationships with his family and friends and has maintain full-time employment without any report of difficulties maintaining relationships with coworkers.  He denied any suicidal ideation.  No reports or findings of memory loss rise to the level of forgetting the names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  As such, despite the VA examiner's notation, the Veteran's total functional impairment does not rise to the level of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

Considering the record as a whole, the Veteran's deficiencies due to his acquired psychiatric disability more closely approximates a disability picture no worse than a 50 percent rating for the period on appeal.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the weight of the evidence is against the claim for a higher rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.21.  Due to the foregoing, an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is denied. 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Welsh, Brigid C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.