Citation Nr: A25030096
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240605-450021
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for unspecified depressive disorder (also claimed as anxiety, sleep disturbance, mental disorders, and bipolar disorder) (hereinafter referred to as "acquired psychiatric disability") is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a finding of total disability based upon individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability manifests as, at worst, occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood; there is not total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial evaluation in excess of 70 percent for the acquired psychiatric disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Navy from December 2018 to April 2022.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

By way of procedural background, on January 23, 2023, VA received the Veteran's Intent to File a compensation claim, which the Veteran formalized with the filing of a VA Form 21-526EZ requesting service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability in August 2023. This claim was decided in a January 2024 rating decision.

In February 2024, VA received another the Veteran's VA Form 21-526EZ requesting an increased rating for his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder. This form is not an option for review of a prior decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500, but the AOJ nevertheless appears to have accepted it as such and reconsidered the initial evaluation assigned in the January 2024 rating decision when issuing the March 2024 decision on appeal here.

In June 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) and requested direct review by the Board, listing both the January and March 2024 decisions. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202. To afford the Veteran the greatest possible evidentiary window for review and for clarity, the Board will consider the January 2024 decision subsumed by the March 2024 decision on appeal. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of the March 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

A claim for increased evaluation includes a claim for a finding of total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) where there are allegations of worsening disability and related unemployability.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Here, while the evidence of record indicates the Veteran has been employed since service, as an equipment operator and then as a teacher assistant/substitute, he indicated his current employment was less than full time (30 hours a week) and by its nature (substituting) may be less than "substantially gainful" employment.  A claim for TDIU is therefore inferred as part and parcel of the claim for increased rating.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing the Veteran's current symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted.  A claim will be denied only if the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990).  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

The General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provides that occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as:  suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, is rated 70 percent disabling.

Total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as:  gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, is rated 100 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

The rating formula is not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather is intended to provide examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the Diagnostic Code.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a Veteran's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, and assign an evaluation based on the overall disability picture presented.  However, the impairment does need to cause such impairment in most of the areas referenced at any given disability level.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F. 3d. 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

On his August 2023 claim form, the Veteran reported that since joining the military he was always "in my head overthinking...." He reported depression and anxiety, as well as sleep disturbances.

At a December 2023 VA mental disorders examination, the Veteran reported he was close with parents and brothers, and had a girlfriend as well as school and service friends. He was working as an equipment operator for the power company, and had done so for the past six months. He endorsed depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and impaired impulse control.  No examples of violent outbursts were noted or referred to. The examiner opined the criteria for a 50 percent evaluation were met, and reasoned that the Veteran would have difficulty trusting and getting along with coworkers, adapting to stressful environments, and follow direction or make decisions on the job. 

A VA initial Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) examination was conducted in February 2024, by the same examiner.  Unspecified Depressive Disorder was diagnosed. In-service treatment for adjustment disorder, with anxiety, depression, and suicidal thoughts for several months was noted. He was close with parents and brothers, and had a girlfriend as well as school and service friends, though he stated he was becoming increasingly isolative. After discharge from service, he had worked as an equipment operator for the power company for eight months, and currently worked as an assistant teacher and substitute about 30 hours a week. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and impaired impulse control. He denied any suicidal ideation or plan.  The examiner opined the criteria for a 70 percent evaluation were met, and reasoned that emotional instability, relationship problems, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances would limit his ability to function in an occupational environment. 

February 2024 VA treatment records reveal that the Veteran had recently begun working as a PE teacher and coach. He denied depressed mood, anxiety, sleep disturbances, or homicidal or suicidal ideation. The Board notes this was a physical top get medical clearance for his job. 

The evidence of record does not support an evaluation in excess of 70 percent. His thought processes and communication are good.  He endorses no delusions or hallucinations, and denies thoughts or plans of hurting himself or others. His behaviors have been appropriate.  He maintains relationships with his family and has friends, including a romantic relationship. He certainly has difficulty with new and stressful relationships, manifesting as irritability and anger, or suspiciousness, but this does not totally impair him in either a work or social setting.  

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent is not warranted at any time during the appeal period. While a general worsening from December 2023 to February 2024 is reflected in the examination reports, at no time is he shown to be totally impaired.  The evidence is persuasively against the claim; there is no doubt to be resolved.

REASONS FOR REMAND

As is noted above, under Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) a request for TDIU is part and parcel of an increased rating claim when raised by the record.  For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ.

The assignment of a 70 percent evaluation itself signifies a significant impairment of occupational functioning.  Additionally, between the December 2023 and February 2024 VA examinations, the evidence indicates the Veteran switched jobs and career fields, going from apparently full time employment with the power company to lesser hours as a coach and teacher. At the same time, the examinations reflect some increase in subjectively reported symptoms.

Prior to adjudicating the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for unspecified depressive disorder, the AOJ should have requested that the Veteran complete a VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, to obtain information about his employment, earnings, and educational history, to determine whether he meets the criteria for TDIU.  The evidence of record raises questions as to the nature of his employment and ability to work full time in a competitive market, and the Form 21-8940 is necessary in reaching a determination with regard to TDIU.

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Send the Veteran a VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, for completion, with instructions to return the form to the AOJ.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. M. Gill, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.