Citation Nr: A25030476
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240306-422746
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve involvement is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

For the period on appeal, the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve involvement was manifested by mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve involvement have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1993 to October 1996.

This matter comes before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal from a January 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), that was later subject to higher-level review in June 2023. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve involvement

The Veteran contends that his right lower extremity radiculopathy is more severe than his currently assigned 10 percent rating reflects.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.?38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §?4.1. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.?38?C.F.R. §?4.10. 

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran's disability.?38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?589, 595?(1991). 

If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned.?38?C.F.R. §?4.7. It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances.?38?C.F.R. §?4.21. 

In deciding this appeal, the Board has considered whether separate ratings for different periods of time, based on the facts found, are warranted, a practice of assigning ratings referred to as "staging the ratings." See Fenderson v. West,?12?Vet. App.?119?(1999); Hart v. Mansfield,?21?Vet. App.?505?(2008).? 

For initial increased rating claims, those stemming from the decision granting service connection, the most relevant evidence is "the evidence of record from the time of a veteran's application" for service connection. Fenderson v. West,?12?Vet. App.?119, 127?(1999). 

Ratings with respect to neurological conditions ordinarily are assigned in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory, or mental function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. The Veteran's sciatic radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520 for paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Under DC 8520, an 80 percent rating is applicable where there is complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve (i.e., the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost). Lesser ratings are applicable to incomplete paralysis.

Specifically, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis. A 20 percent rating is warranted where there is moderate incomplete paralysis. A 40 percent rating is assigned for moderately severe incomplete paralysis. A 60 percent rating is assigned for severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a , DC 8520.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.120-4.124 a. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, VA must evaluate all evidence, to the end that decisions will be equitable and just. 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. Although the use of similar terminology by medical professionals should be considered, it is not dispositive of an issue.

For reference and illustrative purposes only, the definitions for "mild" includes not very severe. A synonym for "mild" is "slight," and definitions for "slight" include small in size, degree, or amount. The definitions for "moderate" include being of average or medium quantity, quality, or extent. Finally, definitions for "severe" include being extremely intense. Webster's II New College Dictionary (1995). These definitions, combined with the regulatory definition of what "complete paralysis" entails, informs the Board's analysis.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.

In VA treatment records from October 2022, the Veteran reported low back pain radiating down both legs. 

Lay statements, including a statement from the Veteran regarding his disability, and private medical records submitted in November 2022 did not include statements regarding the severity or frequency of the Veteran's radiculopathy. 

VA treatment records from December 2022 reflect that the Veteran reported some numbness and tingling that shot down both legs. His radicular symptoms were greater in the right leg than in the left. The Veteran stated that this pain was not new for him.

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms he experiences. His statements are credible because they are generally consistent throughout the period on review. The statements are not specific with regard to the severity or frequency of his right lower extremity radiculopathy, so their probative value in the instant analysis is limited. Nevertheless, the Board assigns them high weight. 

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, which diagnosed radiculopathy of the right lower extremity. The VA examiner noted mild intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right lower extremity. The Veteran did not experience constant pain in his right lower extremity. Reflex examination was normal at the knee and ankle. Muscle strength testing was normal throughout the entire lower extremity as well. There was decreased sensory results at the thigh/knee level, the lower leg/ankle level, and the foot and toes. However, there was no evidence of atrophy.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's back pain was the likely cause of his radiculopathy. 

The January 2023 VA examiner is competent to record the observations found in the examination report. The examination is credible because it is based upon an in-person examination of the Veteran, and an application of the examiner's medical training and experience to the observations recorded during that examination. The Board therefore assigns high weight to the examiner's conclusions regarding the severity of the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy. 

The January 2023 VA examiner assessed the severity of the Veteran's intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness as mild. As discussed above, the Board considers these conclusions to be highly credible, and they constitute probative evidence of record on the issue of the severity of the Veteran's condition. The conclusions are supported by the evidence, in the lack of constant pain, lack of effect on reflexes or strength, and the absence of atrophy.  The Veteran's symptoms are wholly sensory in nature.  The Board finds these manifestations to be, at most, indicative of mild incomplete paralysis.

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3D. 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, the most probative evidence of record establishes that the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy is manifested by mild incomplete paralysis. Under DC 8520, such manifestation warrants a 10 percent disability rating. That is the rating currently assigned, and the Board finds it is the correct one. The Veteran's claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve involvement is therefore denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine is worse than his 40 percent rating currently reflects.

In?Correia v. McDonald, the Court held that, when possible, examiners must include range of motion (ROM) testing on active and passive motion and in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing conditions. 28?Vet. App.?158, 168?(2016).

In June 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to assess the severity of his degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine. The examiner did not observe evidence of pain on both weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing, but did not identify ROM measurements for the Veteran's right hip in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing. The examiner also did not explain why such testing could not be performed. 

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to assess the severity of his degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine. The examiner observed evidence of pain on both weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing, but did not identify ROM measurements for the Veteran's right hip in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing. The examiner also did not explain why such testing could not be performed. 

In addition, the Court recently held that the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when rating the severity of a musculoskeletal disability in accordance with Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims?(March 12, 2025) (mem dec) (Bartley).  Here, both the June 2022 and January 2023 VA examination reports indicate that the Veteran treated his degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine with pain medication.  However, the examiners did not indicate whether the Veteran's ROM improved with medication use (and, if so, to what extent) or specify whether flare-up frequency lessened with medication (and, if so, to what extent).

For the above reasons, the June 2022 and January 2023 examinations are inadequate for rating purposes. The failure to obtain an adequate medical examination of the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Remand is therefore necessary to obtain a new medical examination which corrects this error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the current severity of his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine. Following the examination and a review of the claims file, the examiner should provide a full description of the disabilities and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine under the rating criteria.

(a.) The examiner should specifically note ranges of motion actively and passively and in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing, if possible. 

(b.) The examiner should also indicate whether the Veteran's ROM improved with medication use (and, if so, to what extent). 

(c.) The examiner should also indicate whether the Veteran's flare-up frequency lessened with medication (and, if so, to what extent). 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinions, including measurements of additional range of motion lost during flare-ups, and/or range of motion measurements for active motion, passive motion, and/or in weight bearing and non-weight bearing circumstances, without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given the medical science and known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

If the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, the examiner should specify the nature of the deficiency and identify what if any clarifying factor(s) would need to be gathered to provide a non-speculative opinion. If the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the record, the examiner should specify as to what if any additional fact(s) would need to be gathered to provide a non-speculative opinion. 

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gibbons, Douglas K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.