Citation Nr: A25030285
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240430-437469
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for persistent depressive disorder, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent for persistent depressive disorder is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee pain is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's persistent depressive disorder more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, without total social or occupational impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating of 70 percent for persistent depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.6, 4.10, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served active duty from September 1988 to January 1999, October 2000 to June 2001, March 2004 to July 2004 and from March 2009 until February 2010.

In February 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an October 2022 decision.  In May 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior October 2022 decision.  

The May 2023 decision is now on appeal before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board).

In April 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Psychiatric disorders, however diagnosed, are rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, and the criteria under this formula shall be considered no matter which diagnostic code is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, the General Rating Formula for Mental Health provide the following ratings for psychiatric disorders:

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms such as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understand complex commands, impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to symptoms such as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

Under the General Formula, the Board must determine the frequency, severity, and duration of the symptoms associated with a specific disability percentage.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  The evaluation must be based on evidence that affects the veteran's occupational and social functions.  Id. The Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 113, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The "symptoms as" language of the diagnostic codes for mental disorders in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 means "for example" and does not represent an exhaustive list of symptoms that must be found before granting the rating of that category. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  However, as the Court also pointed out in that case, "without those examples, differentiating a 30% evaluation from a 50% evaluation would be extremely ambiguous."  Id.  The Court went on to state that the list of examples "provides guidance as to the severity of the symptoms contemplated for each rating."  Id.  Accordingly, while each of the examples needs not be proven in any one case, the particular symptoms must be analyzed in light of those given examples.

Increased rating for persistent depressive disorder.

The Veteran's depressive disorder is presently rated as 50 percent disabling.  He seeks a higher rating of at least 70 percent.  See April 2024 Third Party Correspondence. 

In March 2020, the Veteran was provided a VA examination.  The examiner opined the Veteran's depressive disorder caused occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational task only during periods of significant stress.  The Veteran reported his marriage was good and his relationships with his kids were good as well.  He noted his social support was his wife, a few close friends, and his younger brothers.  He goes to sporting events and music concerts with his wife and in his free time he does work around the house.  At the time of the examination, the Veteran worked full time for the railroad.  He endorsed occasional problems with attending work but otherwise worked 40 hours a week.  He denied trouble with attendance and got along well with coworkers and supervisors.  

The Veteran asserted he would avoid going to social gatherings often because he lacked interest and when he did go to social gathering, he would leave because his mood was low. The Veteran described having reduced energy and enthusiasm for the past few years. The examiner noted he had passive, fleeting suicidal ideation off and on for the past 10 years but denied any history of intent or plan.

The examiner noted the Veteran's feels depressed intermittently and endorsed feeling mentally drained and physically sluggish.  The examiner noted the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of mood and motivation.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in April 2021 to determine the severity of the Veteran's depressive disorder.  The examiner opined the Veteran's depressive disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  The examiner noted that since the Veteran's March 2020 examination, he had been seeing a counselor, socially drinking, and had increased problems with his wife.  The examiner noted the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, disturbances of mood and motivation, and suicidal ideation.  

The Veteran submitted a Statement in Support of Claim in March 2021 outlining his mental health symptoms.  The Veteran endorsed anxiety, anger, depression, intrusive thoughts, memory loss, problems at work, and specifically underlined and endorsed suicidal feelings and thoughts.  

The Board acknowledges that the March 2020 and April 2021 examination found the Veteran's disabilities would qualify him for a 30 or 50 percent disability rating.  However, both examinations and the Veteran's lay statements, noted the Veteran continued to have passive or fleeting thoughts of suicide although no active attempt.  The severity, frequency, and duration of suicidal ideations, along with irritability, lack of motivation and interest, depression and anxiety more closely approximate symptomatology supportive of the assignment of a 70 percent rating.

However, the Board finds that at no point during the appeal period has the Veteran demonstrated total occupational and social impairment.  The evidence shows that while there were some problems with his job, engaging in social events, and martial issues; however, the Veteran had a wife, been oriented, and at times intentionally worked to keep busy, and had a good relationship with family and friends.  Accordingly, at no point has the Veteran shown symptoms of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior and persistent danger of hurting self or others.  In addition, the Veteran himself, has not explicitly advanced the argument that a 100 percent rating is warranted.  

Considering the above and providing the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran, an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but not higher, for his psychiatric disabilities is appropriate.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), once the RO issues a decision on the claim, the Board does not have a duty to assist but can remand an issue for a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.151(d). 

The VA has a duty to assist veterans and must provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(1).  The medical examination or opinion must also be adequate.  A medical opinion is adequate when it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311. 

VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81.  The third prong, which requires that evidence of record indicate that the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with the established event is a low threshold. Id. at 83.   

Here, the Veteran was afforded a Gulf War examination, and an opinion was obtained.  However, a VA examination for his right knee was not provided and a direct service connection opinion was not obtained.  Under McLendon, an examination is warranted as the Veteran has a right knee disability, the RO found a qualifying event or injury, the Veteran's representative states it is due to his service, and there is insufficient evidence to decide the claim.  As such, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error to not obtain a VA examination and opinion for his right knee.

The Board also finds a remand is warranted to obtain records and clarify the Veteran's lay statements and when the injury occurred.  The Veteran submitted a March 2021 Statement in Support of his Claim where he states, "knee onset 2010-2011 treated by Dr. Steven Satthoff not reported as L.O.D."  There does not appear to be any records from Dr. Satthoff.  Therefore, the Board finds it a pre-decisional duty to assist error to not obtain medical records from Dr. Satthoff. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for Dr. Steven Satthoff.  Make two requests for the records and obtain the records, if possible.  

2. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's right knee disability. The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinion.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

3. Following a complete review of the claims file, including the evidence discussed in the narrative potion of the Remand section above, the examiner shall provide the following opinion:

Is the Veteran's right knee disability at least as likely as not related to service?

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bond, Tyana N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.