Citation Nr: A25030613
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240115-499794
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant had active service in the United States Army from April 1968 to January 1970. This appeal has been advanced on the Board of Veterans' Appeals' (Board) docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c).

This matter comes before the Board on appeal from a November 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration (the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ)), which denied entitlement to a TDIU.

In January 2025, the appellant submitted a notice of disagreement (NOD (via VA Form 10182)), appealing the November 2024 rating decision to the Board, and requesting Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  

Evidentiary Window

When an appellant selects the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

In the modernized review system, VA's duty to assist ends when VA issues the notice of decision on a claim or returned claim and does not recommence unless a supplemental claim is submitted, or a claim is returned to the AOJ for correction of an error. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Remand by the Board is only appropriate for correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors); and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

While additional delay is regrettable, remand is necessary in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Although the opinions of record discuss the functional impact of the appellant's service-connected disabilities individually, the AOJ should have obtained an opinion regarding how the appellant's service-connected disabilities, in combination with one another, impact his ability to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation. The AOJ's failure to obtain such opinion was a pre-decisional duty to assist error. On remand, an opinion regarding the impact of the appellant's service-connected disabilities, in combination with one another, must be obtained.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an opinion from a qualified VA clinician on the functional effects of the combination of the appellant's service-connected disabilities on his ability to secure or follow gainful employment. The clinician must consider the combined effects and symptoms of the appellant's service-connected disabilities. If it is determined that additional examinations are necessary to render a complete opinion, such examinations should be scheduled. In proffering this "combined effects" opinion, the clinician should review the claims file and take into consideration the appellant's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not age or any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. A complete rationale must be provided for any opinion(s) expressed.

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the claim.

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Camille NeSmith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.