Citation Nr: A25033254
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-433953
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence supports a finding that right and left knee disabilities are related to service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disabilities are met.  38 U.S.C. § 3.303, 3.304; 38 C.F.R. § 1110, 5107.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1976 to April 1979 and April 1979 to April 1982.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In April 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested review of a May 2022 rating decision which denied entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disabilities.  An October 2023 rating decision continued to deny entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disabilities.

In April 2024, the Veteran requested direct review of the appeal by the Board on VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  As the current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket by a Veterans Law Judge, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based upon the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the previous RO decision on the issue on appeal, only evidence of record on the date of the October 2023 rating decision will be considered.  VA will not seek additional evidence on behalf of the Veteran as part of the review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability.

Service connection may be established for a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service, resulting in a current disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  A disability which is due to, the result of, caused by, or aggravated by a service-connected disability shall be service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

To establish service connection for a disability, a veteran must show (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship, or nexus, between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

To prevail on the issue of service connection there must be medical evidence of a current disability; medical evidence, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and medical evidence of an etiological relationship between an injury or disease in service and the current disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

The Board must assess the competence and credibility of evidence.  A Veteran is competent to testify to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.  Lay testimony is competent if it is limited to matters that the witness has actually observed and is within the realm of the personal knowledge of the witness.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  The Board finds that the Veteran is credible and competent to report that he experienced knee pain during and after service.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).

The Board acknowledges that lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, can be competent, despite the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  In making a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which the Board finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for the rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

A Veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail.  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim.  Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518 (1996); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

The Veteran contends that currently diagnosed right and left knee disabilities are the result of service.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that physical training and a training accident caused a right knee disability and that physical training exercises and a fall down stairs during service caused a left knee disability.  The Veteran asserts that he has experienced bilateral knee pain and locking in both knees since service.

An October 2023 rating decision found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service for both the right and left knees.  The rating decision also found that the Veteran was diagnosed with a baker cyst in the right knee, meniscus degeneration in the left knee, and a bilateral knee strain.  The Board is bound by those favorable findings.

An October 2023 VA examiner diagnosed a baker cyst and meniscus degeneration in the right knee and meniscus degeneration in the left knee.  The examiner found that the right and left knee disabilities were less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by an injury, event, or illness in service.  The VA examiner reasoned that there was a lack of substantiating evidence to support a nexus between the disabilities and the Veteran's service.  Specifically, the examiner found that there was no chronicity during or after service and that an event, illness, or injury after service was more likely to have caused the Veteran's disabilities.  The October 2023 VA examiner acknowledged the Veteran's complaint of bilateral knee pain in service, but stated that the Veteran's file was silent for knee pain until 2023.

A March 2022 VA examination found that the Veteran's knee disability was acute, there was no evidence of chronicity of care, and the Veteran's symptoms were subjective.  The VA examiner opined the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities were not related to his service.  The examiner recognized that the Veteran was tentatively diagnosed with bilateral knee chondromalacia in 1982.  At the March 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that intermittent knee pain with locking and crepitus began in and continued since service.

In two separate April 2023 medical opinions, a certified physician assistant, diagnosed right and left knee strain.  The examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not (a 50 percent probability) that the right and left knee strains were due to, related to, a progression of, or a continuation of knee injuries that occurred during service.  The examiner relied on the Veteran's lay statements, reported medical history, and medical literature to reach that conclusion.  The examiner included several excerpts of medical literature which were used to reach that determination.  The examiner referred to medical literature which documented that prior knee injuries caused chronic knee pain and instability due to post-traumatic pathological processes and changes.  

The record indicates that the Veteran sought treatment for bilateral knee pain at the San Antonia VA Clinic in December 2022 and May 2023.  The Veteran also sought treatment for right knee pain at a VA Emergency Department in June 2022.  At those visits, the Veteran reported that he had experienced bilateral knee pain since service.

The service medical records contain complaints of knee pain in service.  Specifically, in March 1982, the Veteran sought treatment for bilateral knee pain.  The examiner stated that the Veteran might have chondromalacia.  Later in March 1982 during a separation examination, the Veteran reported that he experienced a tricked or locked knee.  Additionally, the examiner noted chronic knee pain and possible chondromalacia.  Notably, the Veteran reported that his lower extremities were normal during a service entrance examination in August 1976 and that he did not have a trick or locked knee during a routine examination in May 1986.

While the Board appreciates the analysis and discussion of the VA examiners, the Board finds that those examinations are incomplete.

When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  An opinion that relies only on the absence of symptoms or treatment in service is not adequate.  A lack of medical evidence in service medical records does not preclude service connection.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an absolute bar to the service connection claim).  

Additionally, both VA examinations are conclusory because they do not provide an adequate rationale to support the opinions.  A mere conclusion without an underlying rationale is of no probative value.  Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998).  The examiners offer no explanation or discussion concerning the Veteran's specific circumstances or claimed disabilities.  Moreover, the October 2023 VA examiner incorrectly stated that there was no record of reported knee pain after service until 2023.  However, the record shows that the Veteran reported recurrent bilateral knee pain in 2022.

Although the VA medical opinions are inadequate concerning the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities, the Board finds that is it not necessary to obtain additional VA medical opinion.  The Board assigns great probative weight to the April 2023 private medical opinions because of the training, experience, and thoroughness of the reports.  Among the factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion is thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60 (1993) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility and weight to be given the evidence); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1992).  The probative value of medical evidence is based on the provider's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the ultimate medical conclusion reached.  As is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).

The private April 2023 opinions are consistent with the evidence in the case and provides adequate reasons and bases in support of the conclusions.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities were more likely than not caused by the Veteran's service.  The private examiner's opinions are highly probative because they are supported by rationale and provided by a trained medical professional, with citation to medical research.  The examiner specifically identified and discussed the Veteran's contention that his right and left knee disabilities were the result of injuries sustained in service.  Thus, the Board finds the private April 2023 medical opinions to be competent and credible.

The Board cannot ignore the medical evidence opining that the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities are related to service.  Because of the private medical opinion and the Veteran's consistent reports of bilateral knee pain during and since service, the Board finds the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether current knee disabilities are related to service.

The Board acknowledges that there may be contradictory evidence of record, such as the VA medical opinions from March 2022 and October 2023 and the Veteran's negative report of a locked or trick knee in May 1986.  However, the Board cannot ignore the medical evidence finding that the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities are due to service.  Because of the detail and thoroughness of the April 2023 private opinion and citation to medical research, the Board finds that the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether right and left knee disabilities are related to the Veteran's service.

The Board finds that the evidence supports a finding that it is as likely as not that the Veteran has current right and left knee disabilities that are related to injuries and physical training in service.  The Veteran credibly reported pain during in service and continuing pain following service.  The medical evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the current knee pain is related to service, and the evidence supports a finding of continuity of symptomatology based on the Veteran's credible assertion of knee pain during and since service.

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the competent medical evidence supports a finding that current right and left knee disabilities are due to, the result of, or caused by service.  Therefore, service connection for right and left knee disabilities is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marissa R. Harper

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.