Citation Nr: A25033250
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-465528
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's cause of death was myelodysplastic syndrome, and the evidence is at least in relative equipoise regarding whether the Veteran's myelodysplastic syndrome was related to his military service.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1952 to May 1982. The Veteran died in December 2010, and the Appellant is his surviving spouse.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 supplemental review decision.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for cause of death is granted.

The death of a veteran will be considered as having been due to a service-connected disability when the evidence establishes that such disability was either the principal or a contributory cause of death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312.  The service-connected disability will be considered as the principal (primary) cause of death when such disability, singly or jointly with some other condition, was the immediate or underlying cause of death or was etiologically related thereto.  To establish service connection, the Appellant must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

At the time of the Veteran's death, service connection had been established for the following conditions: gout; shelf fragment wound scar, left shoulder; hypertension; tinnitus; left ear hearing loss; kidney stone; and shell fragment wound scar, left hip.  October 2009 rating decision - codesheet.  Incident to a special review conducted after his death, service connection was granted for diabetes mellitus, Type II.  February 2012 rating decision.

The Veteran's cause of death was determined to be myelodysplastic syndrome.  February 2023 death certificate.  

A VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's myelodysplastic syndrome was less likely than not caused by or related to his service-connected conditions of diabetes mellitus, Type II, and hypertension.  March 2024 C&P exam (Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ)).  Another VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's myelodysplastic syndrome was less likely than not related to these as well as all of the Veteran's potentially relevant service-connected conditions.  July 2024 C&P exam (Medical Opinion DBQ).  

There is no evidence connecting the Veteran's myelodysplastic syndrome to any of the conditions for which service connection has already been established.  Accordingly, the Board turns to the question of whether the myelodysplastic syndrome that caused the Veteran's death was related to service.

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had participated in toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) while in service, to include herbicide/Agent Orange exposure in Vietnam.  August 2024 rating decision.  Absent clear and unmistakable error, which is not present here, this finding is binding on the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

The Board notes that a range of conditions are presumptively linked to herbicide exposure.  However, myelodysplastic syndrome is not one of them.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  Service connection must be based on the facts adduced in this case rather than on a presumptive link between myelodysplastic syndrome and herbicide or other toxic exposures.    

The Appellant has provided a private medical opinion supporting a nexus in this case.  The doctor cited a medical article which stated that Agent Orange exposures "have likely contributed to the development of acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome that has affected many veterans."  Based on this article, the doctor stated that "[e]xposure to agent orange [sic] during military service was at least as likely as not to have contributed" to the Veteran's diagnosis of myelodysplastic syndrome, and thus his cause of death.  September 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. 

The Board acknowledges there are also negative medical opinions of record regarding the question of a nexus between myelodysplastic syndrome and the Veteran's TERAs.  However, the medical opinion provided by the Appellant places the evidence at least in relative equipoise regarding whether there is a causal relationship between myelodysplastic syndrome and the Veteran's in-service exposures.  Therefore, resolving reasonable doubt in the Appellant's favor, all elements necessary to establish service connection are met.  The Board finds that myelodysplastic syndrome was service connected and that it was the cause of the Veteran's death.  

Service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is granted.  

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Dunn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.