Citation Nr: A25033685
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240427-434886
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 50 percent, but no more, for unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 50 percent, but no more, for unspecified depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130 DC 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2011 to September 2018.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023.  In April 2024, the appellant submitted VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), choosing to continue his appeal via Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Direct review is the appeal option to the Board in which a Board decision is issued based on evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  The Board cannot hold a hearing or accept into the record additional evidence in its direct review.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified depressive disorder

A disability rating is determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  Separate DCs identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

VA has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable through the assertions and issues raised in the record, and to explain the reasons and bases for its conclusions.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings."  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-27 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the veteran's capacity for adjustments during periods of remission.  The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on the social and occupational impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the time of examination.  The rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely based on social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

Although the Veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the Veteran's level of impairment must be in "most areas" applicable to the relevant percentage rating criteria.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  A claim will be denied only if the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990).  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder has been rated under DC 9435.  Diagnostic Code 9435 is subject to the criteria listed under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  

Under the General Formula, a 30 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and/or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The psychiatric symptoms listed in the above rating criteria are not exclusive but are examples of typical symptoms for the listed percentage ratings.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Analysis 

The Veteran contends that his disability is more severe than the rating depicts.  

In his November 29, 2023, statement, the Veteran stated that he suffered from anxiety-induced panic attacks.  This continued to impact his already severe depression and further caused him distress in the form of digestive issues, lack of intimacy, and poor sleep.

Also, on November 29, 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine the severity of his disability.  Since his last VA exam, the Veteran got married, and at the time of the 2023 exam, he had been married for nearly four years.  He has two children.  He denied any history of social problems or difficulties getting along with others and any relevant legal/behavioral history.  The Veteran was employed as a crane operator.  He has a bachelor's degree in cyber security, and, at the time of the 2023 VA exam, he was finishing his master's degree in Logistics.    

The examiner confirmed the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder diagnosis.  The Veteran did not have more than one disorder diagnosed.  His mood was depressed, and his affect was congruent to his mood.  He was polite and cooperative, and rapport was easy to establish.  He appeared to answer all questions in a forthright manner.  He was oriented times three.  The Veteran's recent and remote memories were intact, and he appeared to be a good historian.  His thought process, thought content, and speech were unremarkable.  His symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran could manage his own financial affairs.  

Based on the evidence of record, and after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that a rating of 50 percent, but no more, is warranted.  In this case, the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment.  Additionally, during the VA exam, the examiner noted that the Veteran was polite and cooperative; rapport was easy to establish; and his thought process, thought content, and speech were unremarkable.  The Veteran was oriented times three, his recent and remote memories were intact, and he appeared to be a good historian.  He was also in the process of completing his master's degree.  The Board notes that these symptoms correlate to a 30 percent rating.  However, in his November statement, the Veteran reported suffering from anxiety-induced panic attacks which continued to impact his already severe depression and further caused him distress in the form of digestive issues, lack of intimacy, and poor sleep.  Additionally, the Veteran's other symptoms included flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  As such, after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that his symptoms more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity or a 50 percent rating.  

However, the Board finds that a higher rating is not warranted.  During the period on appeal, the evidence of record does not show that his symptoms more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating, but no more, is warranted under DC 9435.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.