Citation Nr: A25033918
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-436616
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left elbow strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right elbow strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity nerve disability secondary to cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cardiac disability, claimed as enlarged heart, shortness of breath, and racing heartbeat, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disability claimed as IBS is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Navy from March 2005 to December 2006, and from May 2014 to May 2015. See DD Form 214. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 and May 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The April 2024 rating decision in pertinent part denied entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, and the May 2024 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for the remaining claims on appeal. In May 2024, the Veteran appealed the above denials, and he selected the direct review docket on his Notice of Disagreement. See May 2024 VA Form 10182. 

The Board acknowledges that the period to switch Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) dockets per?38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not yet elapsed. However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to?Williams?v. McDonough,?37?Vet. App.?305?(2024) is not necessary because this remand does not represent an adverse decision regarding any of the issues on appeal and therefore, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding without additional delay.

Notably, the Veteran did not submit evidence showing a formal diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but did report gastrointestinal symptoms, to include diarrhea, stomach cramps, and occasional constipation. Accordingly, the Board recharacterized the claim for IBS as a claim for a gastrointestinal disability. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). Similarly, the Veteran did not submit evidence showing a formal diagnosis of enlarged heart. Accordingly, the Board recharacterized the claim for enlarged heart as for a claim for a cardiac disability, shortness of breath, and racing heartbeat, to account for the symptoms he reported in his April 2024 Fully Developed Claim. Id.

APPLICABLE EVIDENTIARY WINDOW

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. The appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. See Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for left elbow strain.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for right elbow strain.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain.

5. Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain.

6. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain.

7. Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain.Will

8. Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain.

9. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder strain.

10. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder strain.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral hip and knee disabilities are related to a fall during service, as well as the physical training exercises and the heavy loads he had to carry while working as a machinist. See August 2023 Statements in Support of Claim. Moreover, the Veteran reported that his bilateral hip and knee pain started during service and continued since, and he admitted that he did not report his pain thinking that it would resolve on its own. Id. 

Similarly, the Veteran contends that he injured his shoulders during service and that the disabilities are related to the strenuous physical activity working as a machinist. Id. Furthermore, he indicated that he also injured one of his shoulders while playing basketball and could not raise his arm for three months. Id. He did not specify which shoulder was injured during this basketball game. Id. 

With respect to his claims for service connection for a cervical and lumbar spine disability, the Veteran contended that the disabilities are related to the strenuous physical activity as a machinist and the required physical training exercises. Id. Again, he indicated that his cervical and lumbar spine pain started during service and continued since. Id. 

The AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of cervical strain, lumbar strain, bilateral elbow strain, bilateral hip strain, bilateral knee strain, bilateral shoulder strain, and that the Veteran participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) and was exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes (solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. See May 2024 Rating Decision and December 2023 TERA Memo. 

As these are findings favorable to the Veteran, they are binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Therefore, the outstanding question for the Board is whether these current disabilities are related to service, to include the Veteran's TERAs. 

In April 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his bilateral shoulder, knee, hip, and elbow disabilities, as well as for his cervical spine and lumbar spine disabilities. See April 2024 VA Examination Reports. At that time, the VA examiner opined that left and right shoulder strain, left and right knee strain, left and right hip strain, left and right elbow strain, cervical spine strain, and lumbar spine strain, are disabilities with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis, and that they are more likely related to the Veteran's age and age-related changes, as well as wear and tear. See April 2024 VA Opinions. 

Here, the Board finds that the April 2024 etiology opinions regarding the bilateral shoulder, knee, hip, and elbow disabilities, as well as for the cervical and lumbar spine disabilities are inadequate. Specifically, the Board finds that the opinions, which all have the exact same language, consist of mere conclusory statements without providing a thorough medical analysis to support the conclusions. The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the case to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295,304 (2008) (holding that a medical report cannot merely draw conclusions from data; it should include "a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007) (holding "a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to a doctor's opinion")."

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the AOJ's reliance on the inadequate VA opinions from April 2024 amounted to pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors that needs to be corrected on remand. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.802. 

As a result, the claims for entitlement to service connection for left elbow strain, right elbow strain, left knee strain, right knee strain, cervical strain, lumbosacral strain, left shoulder strain, right shoulder strain, left hip strain, right hip strain, must be remanded. 

11. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity nerve disability secondary to cervical strain. 

The Veteran contends that his cervical spine disability caused his left upper extremity nerve disability, which manifests with numbness, tingling, aching radiating down to his fingers, and a "pins-and-needle sensation." See August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran indicated that his disability started at the same time as his cervical spine disability, during active-duty service. Id. 

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b). Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted). Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id. 

In April 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his service connection claim for left upper extremity nerve disability. At that time, the examiner indicated that a diagnosis of left upper extremity neuro disability could not be confirmed as "the available medical records are silent for the claim of any upper extremity nerve conditions." See April 2024 VA Examination Report. However, during the examination the Veteran reported that since 2014, he experiences moderate numbness in his left and right upper extremity during overhead movements, starting from his elbow and radiating down to his hand. Id. As indicated above, the Veteran had already submitted a statement reporting numbness, tingling, aching radiating down to his fingers, and a "pins-and-needle sensation." See August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. Notably, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran presented with normal gait, his reflexes, strength, and sensory exam was normal. Id. No diagnostic testing was ordered. Id. Finally, the VA examiner recommended the Veteran to follow up with his primary care about his symptoms. Id. Separately, the examiner provided two negative opinions, a secondary service connection opinion and a TERA opinion, based on findings that "the available medical records are silent for the claim of left upper extremity nerve condition," and "[s]ymptoms are per veteran report only and are not sufficient to support chronicity of care for this claim." See April 2024 VA Opinion. 

The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of numbness and tingling, while in this case he is not competent to provide a diagnosis or determine whether his symptoms were manifestations of a nerve disability, which needs to be established by medical evidence. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1377.

On the other hand, when a VA examiner provides a medical opinion, it needs to be adequate. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295,304 (2008).

In this case, the Board finds that the April 2024 VA examination and opinions are inadequate as the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's subjective symptoms of numbness and tingling in his left upper extremity. Moreover, it is unclear whether the VA examiner simply relied on existing medical treatment records to find a diagnosis of a left upper extremity nerve disability, instead of providing a diagnosis based on the Veteran's physical examination. 

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the AOJ's reliance on the inadequate VA examination and opinions from April 2024 amounted to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error that needs to be corrected on remand. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.802. 

As a result, entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity nerve disability must be remanded. 

12. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

The Veteran contends that his obstructive sleep apnea is related to his service. See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim. 

The AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, and that he participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) and was exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. See April 2024 Rating Decision and December 2023 TERA Memo. 

As these are findings favorable to the Veteran, they are binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Therefore, the outstanding question is whether the obstructive sleep apnea is related to the Veteran's service, to include his toxic exposures. 

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his sleep apnea claim. At that time, the Veteran reported his symptoms started in 2011, but he received a formal diagnosis only in March 2024. See March 2024 VA Examination Report. Finally, the VA examiner opined that the sleep apnea was not related to his toxic exposure because medical literature does not support a link between sleep apnea and toxic exposure. See March 2024 VA Opinion. Moreover, the VA examiner indicated that "more definite" risk factors for sleep apnea include upper airway soft tissue abnormalities, obesity, and craniofacial abnormalities. Id. Then, the examiner abstractly discussed obesity and craniofacial and upper airway soft tissue abnormalities as risk factors for sleep apnea, but he did not indicate whether the Veteran presented with one of these risk factors. Id. 

Here, the Board finds that the March 2024 opinion appears to consist of mere conclusory statements without providing a thorough medical analysis to support the conclusions. The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the case to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295,304 (2008) (holding that a medical report cannot merely draw conclusions from data; it should include "a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007) (holding "a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to a doctor's opinion")."

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the AOJ's reliance on the inadequate VA opinion from March 2024 amounted to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error that needs to be corrected on remand. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.802. 

As a result, entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea must be remanded. 

13. Entitlement to service connection for a cardiac disability, claimed as enlarged heart, shortness of breath, and racing heartbeat.

In April 2024, when he filed his claim, the Veteran contended that he recently had a chest x-ray done at an urgent care, which revealed a diagnosis of enlarged heart. See April 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim. Moreover, he endorsed experiencing rapid heart beating during exertion, as well as shortness of breath around 2020, after he received a mandatory Covid-19 vaccine. Id. 

Here, while there is no evidence of a formal diagnosis of a cardiac disability, the Veteran reported cardiac symptoms to include shortness of breath and racing heartbeat. The Board has recharacterized the claim accordingly. Clemons, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

The AOJ did not develop for the Veteran's private treatment record from the urgent care, but denied the claim based on a lack of a diagnosis. See May 2024 Rating Decision. 

In the May 2024 rating decision, however, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA), and that he was exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. See May 2024 Rating Decision and December 2023 TERA Memo.

Pursuant to Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), VA must provide a VA examination and/or medical opinion when there exists evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) when such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). 

The examination requirement does not apply if the VA Secretary has determined that there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran has submitted evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). The PACT Act sub-regulatory guidance clarified that claims based on physical trauma, claims for a mental disorder disability, and claims that manifested during service or with an etiology not associated with toxic exposure, are exempted from the TERA examination and medical opinion requirement. See VBA Letter 20-24-06, Updated Guidance on Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, (Jun. 17, 2024), p.12.

Here, a cardiac disability, or symptoms thereof, is not one of the disabilities listed as exempt from the TERA examination and opinion requirement pursuant to the PACT Act. In this case, the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of shortness of breath and racing heartbeat. Moreover, the Veteran reported that a doctor diagnosed him with enlarged heart. 

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that it was a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error to deny the claim without first obtaining the private treatment record, and without affording the Veteran a VA examination and etiology opinion. As such, a remand to correct the error is now necessary. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.802. 

14. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction.

The Veteran contends that his erectile dysfunction (ED) is related to service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-4138. 

In May 2024, the RO made the favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA), and that he was exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. See May 2024 Rating Decision and December 2023 TERA Memo.

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim for service connection for ED. At that time, the Veteran reported that ED started in 2023, and that testosterone replacement therapy helped with the symptoms, but due to some of its side effects, he had to stop this treatment. See January 2024 VA Examination Report. The Veteran refused physical examination by the VA examiner, who ultimately concluded that a diagnosis could not be confirmed based on the Veteran's reported subjective symptoms. Id. 

Subsequently, in April 2024, a different VA examiner opined that the disability was not related to the Veteran's toxic exposure because "there is no medical or scientific evidence available that identifies a causal relationship between the TERA(s) and the development of the claimed condition of erectile dysfunction." See April 2024 VA Opinion. Moreover, the examiner did not discuss possible alternative causes for the Veteran's ED. 

Here, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of ED. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377. In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the January 2024 VA examiner's conclusion that the Veteran does not have a disability is inadequate. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295,304 (2008); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007) (holding "a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to a doctor's opinion")."

Moreover, with respect to the April 2024 VA opinion, the Board finds it inadequate because it consists of mere conclusory statements without providing a thorough medical analysis to support the conclusions. The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the case to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295,304 (2008); see also Stefl, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007). Here, the VA examiner did not discuss possible alternative caused for the Veteran's ED.

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the AOJ's reliance on the inadequate VA opinions from January 2024 and April 2024 amounted to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error that needs to be corrected on remand. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.802. 

15. Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disability, claimed as IBS.

The Veteran contends that he has a diagnosis of IBS that is related to his service. See April 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim. Specifically, the Veteran indicated that he experiences diarrhea, stomach cramps, and occasional constipation, which worsened over the last several years. Id. 

In May 2024, the RO made the favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA), and that he was exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. See May 2024 Rating Decision and December 2023 TERA Memo.

Pursuant to Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), VA must provide a VA examination and/or medical opinion when there exists evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) when such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). 

The examination requirement does not apply if the VA Secretary has determined that there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran has submitted evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). The PACT Act sub-regulatory guidance clarified that claims based on physical trauma, claims for a mental disorder disability, and claims that manifested during service or with an etiology not associated with toxic exposure, are exempted from the TERA examination and medical opinion requirement. See VBA Letter 20-24-06, Updated Guidance on Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, (Jun. 17, 2024), p.12.

Here, while there is no evidence of a formal diagnosis of IBS, the Veteran reported gastrointestinal symptoms to include diarrhea, stomach cramps, and occasional constipation. The Board has recharacterized the claim accordingly. Clemons, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Moreover, gastrointestinal disabilities are not listed as exempt from the TERA examination and opinion requirement pursuant to the PACT Act. In this case, the Veteran is competent to report gastrointestinal symptoms that may be related to his in-service exposure.

Based on the above, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to afford the Veteran with a VA examination and etiology opinion prior to deciding the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain etiology opinions for the Veteran's bilateral hip and knee disabilities on whether they related to a fall during service, or to the physical training exercises and the heavy loads he had to carry while working as a machinist. 

Moreover, provide an opinion on whether the Veteran's bilateral hip and knee disabilities are respectively related to his in-service exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

2. Obtain an opinion on whether the Veteran's claimed bilateral shoulder strain is related to the strenuous physical activity as mechanist. 

Moreover, provide an opinion on whether the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disability is related to his in-service exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

3. Obtain an opinion on whether the Veteran's cervical spine, lumbar spine, and bilateral elbow strain disabilities are related to the strenuous physical activity as mechanist and the required physical training exercises. 

Moreover, provide an opinion on whether these disabilities are related to his in-service exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his claimed left upper extremity nerve disability, and obtain opinions responsive to the following:

(a.) Whether, but for the Veteran's cervical strain, he would not have a left upper extremity nerve disability.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's left upper extremity nerve disability would be result in less functional impairment but for the cervical strain. 

If the examiner opines that the left upper extremity nerve disability would be result in less functional impairment but for the cervical strain, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the cervical strain. 

5. Obtain an opinion on whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to service, to include his toxic exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

6. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for a cardiac disability claimed as enlarged heart, with shortness of breath and racing heartbeat. The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.

After reviewing the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following: whether the Veteran has a cardiac disability that his related to service, to include his toxic exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, possible asbestos dust, and Covid-19 vaccine.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

Moreover, the AOJ should obtain that treatment record from the urgent care where the Veteran was diagnosed with enlarged heart. All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records are not available, or the Veteran identifies sources of treatment but does not provide authorization to obtain records, appropriate action should be taken (see 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)-(e)), to include notifying the Veteran of the unavailability of the records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file.

7. Obtain an opinion on whether the Veteran has erectile dysfunction that his related to service, to include his toxic exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. The need for a physical examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

8. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for a gastrointestinal disability. The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review. After reviewing the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following: whether the Veteran has a gastrointestinal disability that his related to service, to include his toxic exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JO-8, JP-4, industrial solvents in cleaning, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, various chemicals, such as acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, fluxes ( solder), glues, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric zinc chloride, tars greases, oils & various distillation products, inorganic lead, solvents, thinners solvents present in glues, formaldehyde, carbon dioxide and hydrogen cyanide, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, hexavalent chromium, lead, r manganese into the atmosphere, welding gasses, such as helium or argon in the air, oil mist, and possible asbestos dust. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance, including citation to any supporting medical treatises.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fiorito, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.