Citation Nr: A25033967
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240519-441108
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for anxiety/insomnia is remanded.

The claim for service connection for frequent urination is remanded.

The claim for service connection for headaches is remanded.

The claim for service connection for a lower back condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 2019 to October 2023.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for anxiety/insomnia, service connection for frequent urination, service connection for headaches, and service connection for a lower back condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection: Anxiety/Insomnia, Frequent Urination, Headaches, and Lower Back Condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for anxiety/insomnia, frequent urination, headaches, and a lower back condition.  He was scheduled for VA examinations in December 2023 regarding the claimed lower back condition, headaches, and frequent urination, however, the examinations were cancelled with a notation that the Veteran was unavailable.  He was scheduled for a VA examination in January 2024 concerning the claimed anxiety/insomnia, however, the examination was cancelled with a notation for "no show."  

A review of the record does not show that any additional attempts were made to reschedule the Veteran for the VA examinations.  The initial exam scheduling request in December 2023 lists the Veteran's military address, and the Veteran was separated from the military in October 2023.  Mail sent to the military address within a couple months of the scheduled VA examinations was returned with the stamp "return to sender no such number unable to forward."  There is no outgoing mail within the record either before or at the time of the scheduled examinations, so it is unclear whether the Veteran received notification of the examination.

Additionally, on the Veteran's VA Form 10182 Board appeal, he reported that he had not been evaluated and that at the time he did not have a home.  As the record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision makes it questionable as to whether the Veteran received any notifications of the examinations, and there are no indications that any additional attempts were made to reschedule the examinations, a remand is necessary due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error to schedule the Veteran for additional examinations to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed anxiety/insomnia, frequent urination, headaches, and lower back condition.

The Board notes that while VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in substantiating his claims, that duty to assist is not a one-way street, and it is important that the Veteran make efforts to assist VA in gathering evidence relevant to his claim, which includes attending scheduled VA examinations.  See Woods v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 214, 224 (2000).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed anxiety/insomnia.  The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed anxiety/insomnia began in or was otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed frequent urination.  The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed frequent urination began in or was otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed headaches.  The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed headaches began in or were otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed lower back condition.  The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed lower back condition began in or was otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Lutgens-Staley, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.