Citation Nr: A25033815
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240722-458621
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right hip strain including as secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with right leg pain is denied.

Service connection for a left hip strain including as secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with left leg pain denied.

Service connection for a right knee strain including as secondary to rhabdomyolysis with right leg pain is denied.

Service connection for a left knee strain including as secondary to rhabdomyolysis with left leg pain is denied.

Service connection for a right wrist strain is denied.

Service connection for a left wrist strain is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for an eating disorder as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence shows current diagnoses of right and left hip, knee, and wrist strains; there were no right or left hip, knee, or wrist injuries, diseases, or events during service; the current right and left hip, knee, and wrist strains are not etiologically related to service.

2. The current right and left hip and knee strains were not caused or worsened in severity by the service-connected rhabdomyolysis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right hip strain including as secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with right leg pain are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303, 3.310(a).

2. The criteria for service connection for a left hip strain including as secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with left leg pain are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303, 3.310(a).

3. The criteria for service connection for a right knee strain including as secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with right leg pain are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303, 3.310(a).

4. The criteria for service connection for a left knee strain including as secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with left leg pain are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303, 3.310(a).

5. The criteria for service connection for a right wrist strain are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for a left wrist strain are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, who is the appellant, had active service from January to February 2023.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) or modernized review system, created a new framework of review for veterans who disagree with VA's decision on their claim.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct docket.

In this AMA case, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal (June 4, 2024).  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider for the issues denied in this decision, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for an eating disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

To date, the Veteran has not designated an individual or Veterans Service Organization as a representative; therefore, the Board recognizes the Veteran as proceeding pro se in this appeal.

SERVICE CONNECTION LEGAL AUTHORITY 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  As a general matter, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in service, and; (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service.  

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability.

1. Service connection for a right hip strain is denied.

2. Service connection for a left hip strain is denied.

3. Service connection for a right knee strain is denied.

4. Service connection for a left knee strain is denied.

5. Service connection for a right wrist strain is denied.

6. Service connection for a left wrist strain is denied.

The Veteran appeals for service connection for right and left hip, knee, and wrist strains, diagnosed by VA in October 2023, as directly due to constant running and lunging uphill with weights on the back in an upright position, intense two-hour physical trainings (also known as "smoke sessions") until the legs gave out, overwork, and pain from the wrists constantly being in the "starting" position.  See July 2024 substantive appeal to the Board.  The Veteran alternatively contends that the hip and knee strains are due to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with pain in the legs.  See March and September 2023 VA Forms 21-526EZ; October 2023 VA examination report; September 2023 correspondence to VA.  Rhabdomyolysis is a rare muscle injury where muscles break down, which leads to muscle death. 

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding of a right or left hip, knee, or wrist injury, disease, or event during service.  The complete service treatment records show treatment for lower leg and thigh (but specifically not a hip) pain, dehydration, a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis in January 2023, but no similar reports of a right or left hip, knee, or wrist injury, disease, or event.  As the Veteran sought treatment for a variety of symptoms including joint pains and joint injuries, neck pain would have ordinarily been recorded during service had it occurred; therefore, the lay and medical evidence generated contemporaneous to service is likely to reflect accurately the Veteran's physical condition, so provides evidence against a finding of a hip, knee, or wrist injury, disease, or event during service.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011) (stating that VA may use silence in the service treatment records as evidence contradictory to a veteran's assertions if the service treatment records appear to be complete and the injury, disease, or symptoms involved would ordinarily have been recorded had they occurred) (Lance, J., concurring).

The Veteran contends that the January 2023 service treatment record indicating "lower body gave out, cannot walk, run, or stand for long periods of time" followed by a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis serves as an in-service hip, knee, and wrist injury.  See id.  However, that service treatment record specifically indicates there was no hip pain on palpation or hip symptoms reported and does not show that the Veteran reported knee pain.  Additionally, rhabdomyolysis is a disease of the muscles, characterized by muscle breakdown and the release of toxins into the blood and kidneys, and is not specifically a hip, knee, or wrist joint injury or disease.  See "Rhabdomyolysis," Cleveland Clinic, my.clevelandclinic.org-/health/diseases/21184-rhabdomyolysis.  To count the same symptoms as injuries to the hips, knees, or wrists would potentially create a pyramiding of compensation, as it would create distinct diagnoses based on identical symptoms, potentially resulting in separate ratings for the same symptoms as muscle disability and as joint disability.  For these reasons, the Board cannot find that such treatment serves as an in-service injury for the conditions on appeal.

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the current right and left hip, knee, and wrist strains are etiologically related to service.  As the Board has found no in-service hip, knee, or wrist injury, disease, event, or symptoms, there is no in-service injury, disease, or event to which the later diagnosed strains could be directly related, and direct service connection must be denied.  The duty to assist under the direct service connection theory ends, and examination and/or opinion is not required because the persuasive weight of the evidence shows no in-service injury, disease, or event to which the current diagnoses could be related by further medical opinion.  See Bardwell v. Shinseki,?24?Vet. App.?36?(2010) (holding that where VA finds no in-service injury or disease during service, the claim will be denied on the merits, and there is no further duty to assist with examination or medical opinion). 

Asking a VA examiner to link the current right and left hip, knee, and wrist strains to service would be a futile exercise, creating purported opinions of no probative value because they would be based on inaccurate factual assumptions that some injuries, diseases, or events occurred during service.  Such factual assumptions would be inaccurate as they would be contrary to the Board's findings in this case (based on a weighing of all lay and medical evidence).  Such factual inaccuracies would render the purported opinions of no probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?458, 461?(1993) (holding that an opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). 

As to the?secondary?service connection theory (38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a)), the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence is against a finding that the currently diagnosed right and left hip and knee strains were caused or worsened in severity by the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with pain in the right and left legs.  The Veteran contends that the service-connected rhabdomyolysis caused the current left and right hip and knee strains due to muscle trauma/muscles wasting away in the lower extremities and the need to use the hips to walk.  See March and September 2023 VA Forms 21-526EZ; September 2023 correspondence to VA.

In October 2023, a VA examiner opined that the current right and left hip and knee strains were not caused or worsened by the service-connected rhabdomyolysis because strains are caused by overuse when a muscle or tendon has slowly become weakened over time by repetitive movements or injury to muscles or tendons from rolls, twists, stretching, direct blows, or from falls.  The Board affords probative weight to these medical opinions because the examiner implicitly differentiated strains that are caused by injuries from rhabdomyolysis which is a separate disease affecting the appropriate functioning of the muscles with no relationship between the two.  The Board also notes that in April 2024 VA treatment, the Veteran reported believing that the current hip and knee pain instead could have been caused by recent weight gain.  Thus, the Board cannot find that the current right and left hip and knee strains were caused or worsened in severity by the service-connected rhabdomyolysis with pain in the legs.

For the forgoing reasons, the Board finds that the criteria are not met for service connection for right and left hip, knee, and wrist strains on direct basis or as secondary to (38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)) the service-connected rhabdomyolysis; therefore, the appeals must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

7. Service connection for an eating disorder is remanded.

In the December 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran contended that the PTSD, for which service connection was granted in June 2024, contributes to the current eating disorder due to symptoms of anxiety, depression, and stress.  In May 2024, the RO obtained a medical opinion as to whether the current eating disorder is secondary to the service-connected rhabdomyolysis but did not obtain a medical opinion regarding a connection to the current PTSD.  At the August 2023 VA examination for PTSD, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had an eating disorder which would be (and was) evaluated in a separate Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The Board will remand to obtain a secondary medical opinion as to whether the current eating disorder was caused or worsened by the service-connected PTSD.

The issue of service connection for an eating disorder is REMANDED for the following action:

Request that a VA medical professional review the electronic file and provide the medical opinions requested below.? The relevant documents in the electronic file should be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner.? The VA examiner should provide the following opinions:?? 

Is it at least as likely as not that the currently diagnosed eating disorder was caused by the service-connected PTSD?

Is it at least as likely as not that the currently diagnosed eating disorder was worsened in severity by the service-connected PTSD?

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	I. Comis

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.