Citation Nr: A25033997
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240522-442187
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for left knee degenerative joint disease, status post anterior cruciate ligament repair (hereinafter left knee disability), is denied.

Entitlement to a separate disability rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee disability (limitation of extension), from August 9, 2023, is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability (instability), is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with major depressive disorder is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the rating period, the Veteran's left knee disability has been manifested by swelling, painful motion, forward flexion to 95 degrees at worst, and extension limited to 10 degrees.

2. Throughout the rating period, the Veteran's left knee disability has been manifested by slight instability.

3. The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is not productive of incapacitating episodes, ankylosis or the functional equivalent thereof, muscle spasm or guarding resulting in an abnormal gait or contour, forward flexion limited to 60 degrees or less, or combined motion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 120 degrees or less.

4. The Veteran's PTSD with major depressive disorder has not been manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Diagnostic Code 5260.

2. From August 9, 2023, the criteria for a 10 percent rating, but no higher, for left knee disability, limitation of extension, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

3. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability, instability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

4. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

5. The criteria for an initial disability rating higher than 50 percent for PTSD with major depressive disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Air Force National Guard of West Virginia from March 1988 to November 2012, with multiple periods of service characterized as active duty, active duty training, and inactive duty training. For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations), the Air Force Commendation Medal, the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award with Valor Device with 1 oak leaf cluster, and the Southwest Asia Service Medal with 1 service star. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) thanks the Veteran for his service to our country.

This matter is before the Board on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The May 2024 VA Form 10182 purports to appeal the following issue: The grant of service connection for right hip bursitis with an evaluation of 10 percent, effective June 2, 2009. The Board notes this issue was adjudicated in the October 2009 rating decision. The May 2024 VA Form 10182 also purports to appeal the following issues: The grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with an evaluation of 10 percent, effective July 2, 2013; the evaluation of left knee instability, which was continued as 10 percent disabling; and the evaluation of left knee degenerative joint disease (formerly 5261), which was continued as 10 percent disabling. The Board notes these issues were adjudicated in the August 2014 rating decision.

A claimant, or his or her representative, must file a properly completed notice of disagreement with a decision by the AOJ within one year of the date that the agency mails notice of the decision. Extensions may be granted on written motions showing good cause. 38 C.F.R. § 20.203. The Veteran has neither requested an extension nor shown why his appeal should be accepted more than 14 years after the October 2009 rating decision, or more than 9 years after the August 2014 rating decision. As such, these issues are not before the Board.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

The determination of whether an increased rating is warranted is based on review of the entire evidence of record and the application of all pertinent regulations. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

When there is a question as to which of two evaluations will be assigned, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

VA shall consider all information, lay and medical evidence of record, in a case before it with respect to benefits under the law administered by the VA. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Musculoskeletal Disabilities

In determining the appropriate evaluation for musculoskeletal disability, particular attention is focused on functional loss of use of the affected part(s). Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, functional loss may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior on motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.45, factors of joint disability include increased or limited motion, weakness, fatigability, or painful movement, swelling, deformity or disuse atrophy. Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is an important factor of joint disability, and actually painful joints are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.

Where functional loss is alleged due to pain upon motion, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 and § 4.45 must be considered. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). Within this context, a finding of functional loss due to pain must be supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant. Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80, 84-85 (1997). Pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by § 4.40 and § 4.45 but may result in functional loss only if it limits the ability to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, coordination, or endurance. Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011).

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the Veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of the examination.

In Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, ___ Vet. App. ___ (2025), the Court held that the Board is to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted in assessing musculoskeletal ratings as such effects are not contemplated therein and, therefore, taking medication may make a veteran appear less disabled than in reality.

1. Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability is denied.

2. Entitlement to a separate disability rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee disability, limitation of extension, from August 9, 2023, is granted.

3. Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability, instability, is denied.

The Veteran contends his left knee disability warrants a higher rating.

On August 9, 2023, VA received an intent to file a claim for compensation. On August 14, 2023, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) seeking an increased rating for his service-connected left knee disability. Therefore, the relevant period for consideration is from one year prior to receipt of the intent to file a claim for compensation, from August 9, 2022.

The Veteran's left knee degenerative joint disease, status post anterior cruciate ligament repair, is currently rated as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Codes 5003-5260.

Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. In this case, the hyphenated code indicates that the Veteran's left knee disability is evaluated as degenerative arthritis (other than post-traumatic) under diagnostic code 5003, and limitation of flexion under diagnostic code 5260.

The general rating schedules for limitation of motion of the knee are set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Under DC 5260, flexion limited to 60 degrees warrants a 0 percent rating; flexion limited to 45 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating; flexion limited to 30 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating; and flexion limited to 15 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5260.

Under DC 5261, extension limited to 5 degrees warrants a 0 percent rating; extension limited to 10 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating; extension limited to 15 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating; extension limited to 20 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating; extension limited to 30 degrees warrants a 40 percent rating; and extension limited to 45 degrees warrants a 50 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5261.

Flexion of the knee to 140 degrees is considered full, and extension to 0 degrees is considered full. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate II.

Separate ratings are not precluded for limitation of motion (5003, 5260 and 5261), meniscal disability (5258 and 5259) and instability (5257). Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded a VA Knee and Lower Leg examination in December 2023. During the examination he reported worsening of symptoms over time. He reported pain and swelling daily. He reported crepitus and that his knee feels unstable. He reported the use of a left knee brace on and off. He denied recent evaluations. He denied flare-ups. He reported functional impairment described as increased pain with working out/sports, squatting, cutting movements, and awkward movements. He was treated with over-the-counter ibuprofen.

Initial active and passive range of motion testing for left knee flexion was measured from 0 to 105 degrees, and extension was normal to 0 degrees. There was evidence of pain on active and passive motion. There was objective evidence of crepitus. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions. The examiner stated pain significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner estimated range of motion after repetitive use as flexion to 95 degrees, and extension to 10 degrees. The examination was not conducted during a flare-up. There was no muscle atrophy. There was no ankylosis. There was no recurrent subluxation or persistent instability. There was no ligament tear (sprain). There was no recurrent patellar instability. There was no recurrent patellar dislocation, shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome), stress fractures, or any other tibial or fibular impairment. There was no meniscus (semilunar cartilage) condition. The Veteran required occasional use of a brace due to left knee instability. Regarding functional impact, the examiner stated the Veteran's left knee disability impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks. Lastly, the examiner remarked, joint stability testing was performed for the left knee. Anterior instability, posterior instability, medial instability, and lateral instability testing were all normal.

The Board finds the requirements of Correia, and Sharp have been adequately satisfied in the VA examination. During the VA examination, the examiner measured active range of motion, passive range of motion, as well as range of motion on repetitive use testing. The examiner provided estimated ranges of motion after repetitive use.  The Veteran denied experiencing flare-ups. 

Regarding Ingram, the December 2023 VA examiner merely noted the Veteran reported he takes over-the-counter ibuprofen for pain but did not indicate that he was taking anything at the time of the actual examination. The examiner considered the Veteran's lay description of functional impairment due to pain and range of motion limitations in all worst case-scenarios. There is no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication and indeed, factored in the Veteran's description of when his pain is at its worst, i.e., discounted such effects. As such, the Board concludes the December 2023 VA examination is adequate for adjudication purposes and gives it great probative weight.

Analysis: Left Knee Disability: Diagnostic Code 5260

As noted above, the Veteran's left knee degenerative joint disease, status post anterior cruciate ligament repair, is currently rated as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Codes 5003-5260.

Given the totality of the evidence when considering the Veteran's competent and credible reports of left knee pain and functional loss or functional impairment, the Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to a rating higher than 10 percent at any time during the appeal period for limitation of motion under DC 5260. Even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by his statements would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating flexion limited to 30 degrees.

The Board has considered the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, and the holdings in DeLuca and Mitchell. However, an increased evaluation for the Veteran's left knee disability is not warranted on the basis of functional loss due to pain, less movement than normal, or interference with sitting, standing, and weight-bearing, as his symptoms are supported by pathology which do not indicate that a rating higher than 10 percent is warranted. There is no indication that pain resulted in further limitation of motion than what was shown on examination, and without clinical medical evidence indicating further functional limitation, the Board is unable to find the Veteran's pain is so disabling that it limits flexion of the left knee to such an extent as to warrant assignment of a higher rating.

In reaching its conclusion, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his left knee disability is more severe than the current rating reflects. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide statements regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). In determining the actual degree of disability, the examination findings are more probative of the degree of impairment.

In sum, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the assignment of a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected left knee degenerative joint disease, status post anterior cruciate ligament repair. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

Analysis: Left Knee Disability: Diagnostic Code 5261: Limitation of Extension

Based on the above, the Board finds that a 10 percent rating, but no higher, for left knee disability, is warranted under diagnostic code 5261 based on limitation of extension for the period on appeal from August 9, 2023.

In determining whether a separate rating is warranted under diagnostic code 5261, the Board must decide whether separate and distinct symptoms exist or whether there is overlapping symptomatology such that only a single rating is appropriate. The critical element in permitting the assignment of more than one evaluation under different diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping of the symptomatology of another condition. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; see also Lyles, 29 Vet. App. 107.

During the December 2023 VA examination, initial active and passive range of motion for left knee extension was normal to 0 degrees. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions. The examiner stated pain significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner described the functional loss in terms of range of motion as extension to 10 degrees. The Veteran denied flare-ups.

Because the December 2023 VA examination determined that extension was limited to 10 degrees, the Board finds that a separate 10 percent rating under DC 5261 is warranted.

The Board does not, however, find that a rating higher than 10 percent is warranted under this DC at any time during the appeal period. In this regard, the Veteran's left knee extension has been shown to be limited to, at worst, 10 degrees. Even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by his statements would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating extension limited to 15 degrees.

Given this, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, a rating of 10 percent, but no higher, is warranted for left knee degenerative joint disease, status post anterior cruciate ligament repair, under diagnostic code 5261 (limitation of extension), for the period on appeal from August 9, 2023 (the date VA received the Veteran's intent to file).

Analysis: Left Knee Disability: Diagnostic Code 5257: Instability

The Veteran's left knee instability is currently rated as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5257.

DC 5257 provides separate criteria for ratings based on recurrent subluxation or lateral instability or patellar instability.

For recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 20 percent rating is warranted for one of the following: (a) Sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation. (b) Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, DC 5257.

For patellar instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker. A 20 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: A brace, cane, or walker. A 30 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker. Id.

Analysis

Given the totality of the evidence when considering the Veteran's competent and credible reports of left knee instability, the Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to a rating higher than 10 percent at any time during the appeal period for instability under DC 5257.

During the December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his knee feels unstable. On examination, there was no recurrent subluxation or persistent instability. There was no ligament tear (sprain). There was no recurrent patellar instability. There was no recurrent patellar dislocation. He required occasional use of a brace due to left knee instability. Regarding functional impact, the examiner stated the Veteran's left knee disability impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks. Lastly, the examiner remarked, joint stability testing was performed for the left knee. Anterior instability, posterior instability, medial instability, and lateral instability testing were all normal.

The VA examination and treatment records do not contain objective medical evidence of instability, but the Veteran reported that his left knee was unstable, and he required a knee brace for ambulation. He is competent to describe symptoms associated with his left knee disability, such as instability, and the Board finds him credible.

However, the Board finds an increased evaluation for the Veteran's left knee instability is not warranted. There is no evidence of patellar instability, nor a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, or unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear.

In reaching its conclusion, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his left knee disability is more severe than the current rating reflects. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide statements regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert, 21 Vet. App. 456. In determining the actual degree of disability, the examination findings are more probative of the degree of impairment.

In sum, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the assignment of a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected left knee instability. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

Finally, the Veteran is not entitled to a higher or separate rating under DCs 5256, 5258, 5259, 5262, or 5263. There is no indication of ankylosis or functional equivalent thereof, cartilage, semilunar, dislocated, with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint, removal of semilunar cartilage, tibia or fibula impairment, or genu recurvatum.

4. Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain is denied.

The Veteran contends his lumbosacral strain warrants a higher rating.

On August 9, 2023, VA received an intent to file a claim for compensation. On August 14, 2023, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) seeking an increased rating for his service-connected lumbosacral strain. Therefore, the relevant period for consideration is from one year prior to receipt of the intent to file a claim for compensation, from August 9, 2022.

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is currently rated as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted when there is forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is warranted when there is forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A rating of 100 percent is warranted where unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine is demonstrated. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237.

Note (1): Evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id.

Note (2): For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. Id.

Ankylosis is defined as "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure." Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 94 (32nd ed. 2012). Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis. Id. at Note (5).

The requirement of ankylosis in the General Rating Formula for Injuries and Diseases of the Spine can be met with evidence of functional equivalent of ankylosis (i.e., functional immobility of the joint) during a flare-up. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded a VA Back Conditions examination in December 2023. During the examination he reported worsening of symptoms over the last several years. He reported pain in his lower back. He reported flare-ups occurring once per month, lasting one day, to a severe level of severity. The flare-ups were precipitated by lifting and pushing and alleviated by over-the-counter ibuprofen, heating pad, exercises, evaluation and treatment with pain medication injections, and steroid dose packs. He described difficulty walking, sitting, standing in erect position (leans to the left). He denied functional loss or functional impairment. He was treated with over-the-counter ibuprofen.

Initial active range of motion testing of the thoracolumbar spine demonstrated forward flexion to 90 degrees, extension to 30 degrees, right lateral flexion to 30 degrees, left lateral flexion to 30 degrees, right lateral rotation to 30 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 30 degrees. The examiner noted passive range of motion testing was not performed because it was medically contraindicated. There was evidence of pain on active motion. There was no objective evidence of crepitus. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions. He was not examined immediately after repeated use over time. The examination was not conducted during a flare-up. The examiner stated pain significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups. The examiner described the functional loss in terms of range of motion: forward flexion to 80 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, right lateral flexion to 20 degrees, left lateral flexion to 20 degrees, right lateral rotation to 20 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees. There was no evidence of localized tenderness, guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar" spine. Muscle strength testing was normal. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam was normal. He did not have radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy. There was no ankylosis of the spine or other neurologic abnormalities (such as bowel or bladder problems/pathologic reflexes). He did not have intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) of the thoracolumbar spine. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's lumbosacral strain did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks.

The Board finds the December 2023 examination is adequate for rating purposes, as the examiner interviewed the Veteran, reviewed the claims file, and reported all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the disability under the rating criteria. The Veteran and his representative have not argued otherwise.

Regarding Ingram, the December 2023 VA examiner merely noted the Veteran reported he takes over-the-counter ibuprofen for pain but did not indicate that he was taking anything at the time of the actual examination. The examiner considered the Veteran's lay description of functional impairment due to pain and range of motion limitations in all worse case-scenarios. There is no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication and indeed, factored in the Veteran's description of when his pain is at its worse, i.e., discounted such effects. As such, the Board concludes the December 2023 VA examination is adequate for adjudication purposes and gives it great probative weight.

Analysis

Given the totality of the evidence when considering the Veteran's competent and credible reports of lumbar spine pain, flare-ups and functional loss, the Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to a rating higher than 10 percent at any time during the appeal period. Even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by his statements would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 60 degrees or less. Additionally, there is no evidence of muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

The Board has considered the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, and the holdings in DeLuca and Mitchell. However, an increased evaluation for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability is not warranted on the basis of functional loss due to pain, less movement than normal, or interference with sitting, standing, and weight-bearing, as his symptoms are supported by pathology which do not indicate that a rating higher than 10 percent is warranted. Although the Veteran's painful motion and flare-ups are significant, there is no indication that it has resulted in further limitation of motion than what was shown on examination, and without clinical medical evidence indicating further functional limitation, the Board is unable to find the Veteran's pain and flare-ups limit flexion of the lumbar spine to such an extent as to warrant assignment of a higher rating.

In reaching its conclusion, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his lumbar spine disability is more severe than the current rating reflects. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide statements regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert, 21 Vet. App. 456. In determining the actual degree of disability, the examination findings are more probative of the degree of impairment.

In sum, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the assignment of a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected lumbosacral strain. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. Therefore, the appeal for an increased rating is denied.

5. Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 50 percent for PTSD with major depressive disorder is denied.

The Veteran's PTSD with major depressive disorder is currently rated as 50 percent disabling from August 9, 2023, under Diagnostic Code 9411.

Psychiatric impairment is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). Under the General Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9441.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, social, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

As the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held, evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under the regulation. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas," i.e., "the regulation . . . requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

VA must engage in a holistic analysis that assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the psychiatric disability; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Factual Background

On August 9, 2023, VA received an intent to file a claim for compensation. On August 14, 2023, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) seeking service connection for PTSD. In the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Regional Office granted service connection for PTSD with major depressive disorder with an evaluation of 50 percent. The Regional Office assigned an effective date of August 9, 2023, the date the VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim for compensation. On his May 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran expressed disagreement with the 50 percent evaluation for his PTSD with major depressive disorder.

In September 2023, the Veteran presented to the Martinsburg VA Medical Center (VAMC) for PCT intake. A Patient Health (Depression) Questionnaire (PHQ-9) screen was completed, and the Veteran's score of 24 was consistent with severe depression. A PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5) screen was completed, and the Veteran's score of 65 indicated a very high level of PTSD symptoms. The Veteran was referred to the PTSD clinical team for assessment.

During the assessment the Veteran stated, "I feel like I'm living in a hole, everything's negative, nothing's positive. The future looks bleak." The examining physician noted the Veteran was currently working full-time as an emergency room (ER) nurse. He was currently living with his wife and his three adult children. He had a history of diagnoses including PTSD, chronic; unsocialized conduct disorder, aggressive, severe; insomnia; depression; and generalized anxiety disorder. He was currently prescribed Duloxetine. On mental status exam, his appearance, motor activity, behavioral presentation, affect, and intellectual ability, were good. His speech was normal. He was oriented to person, place, time, and event. His thought processes were clear. His insight and judgment were fair. The physician noted the following diagnostic impression: Veteran's chief complaint was intrusive memories. He was oriented to person, place, time, and event. He appeared to have no audio or visual hallucinations. He did not appear to be responding to internal stimuli. He denied any suicidal ideation/homicidal ideation. He was well-groomed and appropriately dressed for the weather. The physician diagnosed PTSD, chronic.

In October 2023, the Veteran presented to the Martinsburg VAMC for psychiatry outpatient follow-up. The examining physician noted the Veteran's history of PTSD, depression, and anxiety. The Veteran reported doing well, although he had not been too consistent with taking his medications. He was working the night shift as an ER nurse. He noted that his mood was "decent." He denied any sustained low mood, anhedonia or hopelessness. He continued his sobriety with alcohol. On mental status exam, he was casually dressed, in no apparent distress, with good eye contact. His affect was euthymic, full range, stable, congruent with reported mood. His speech was regular rate, normal rhythm, normal volume. His thought process was linear, logical and goal directed. His insight and judgment were intact. There were no overt deficits in attention, memory or concentration. The examining physician diagnosed major depressive disorder (MDD), recurrent, moderate; chronic PTSD; generalized anxiety disorder; and alcohol use disorder, moderate in full sustained remission since February 2022. The Veteran was continued on Bupropion and Duloxetine.

The Veteran was afforded a VA Initial Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) examination in December 2023. During the examination, the Veteran reported being married and having three adult children. He described his marital relationship as "strained." He described challenges in the relationships. He did not get out socially. He was currently employed as a nurse. He described significant interpersonal conflict with one of his recent bosses. He was currently engaged in mental health treatment. He was currently prescribed Wellbutrin, Trazodone, and Hydroxyzine; he was receiving Vivitrol shots. The VA examiner diagnosed PTSD, major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate, and alcohol use disorder.

The VA examiner noted the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner observed the Veteran arrived promptly for his scheduled appointment. He presented as casually dressed and appropriately groomed. He was alert and fully oriented. His speech was logical and coherent with no evidence of thought disorganization. He presented in no acute emotional distress. The examiner ultimately opined the Veteran's psychiatric impairment resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Analysis

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements, the relevant treatment records, and the VA examination. After engaging in a "holistic analysis," that assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD with major depressive disorder, the Board finds the criteria for a rating higher than 50 percent have not been met or more nearly approximated at any time during the appeal period. Since August 9, 2023, his PTSD with major depressive disorder has been most closely approximated by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117; Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442. Simply put, the overall evidence is not reflective of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

The evidence shows that the Veteran has symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Board finds that such symptomatology is most consistent with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which corresponds with a 50 percent rating.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's symptoms which are not included in the rating criteria listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 and whether they constitute symptoms that would be comparable in type and degree (frequency, severity, and duration) to the criteria for a 70 percent rating. The Veteran has been noted to have persistent negative emotional state, markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, irritable behavior and angry outbursts, hyper-vigilance, exaggerated startle response, and sleep disturbance.

Although these symptoms are significantly, the Board does not find the occupational and social impairment necessary to warrant a 70 percent rating. He has a good relationship with his family. During the December 2023 VA examination, he reported being employed.

Further, none of the Veteran's treating clinicians or examiners found that he had suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; or other symptomatology of the type and degree such as to warrant a rating higher than 50 percent. See Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1 (2001); Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d 112.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the assignment of a disability rating higher than 50 percent for the service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. Therefore, the appeal for an increased rating is denied.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Grace A. Johnk, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.