Citation Nr: A25033593
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453716
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tension headache (previously rated as pain on side of head/headaches) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1980 to May 1985. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a November 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for tension headaches. In January 2024, the Veteran filed for a Higher-Level Review and in March 2024, the denial of service connection was continued. In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, in which he elected the Direct review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for tension headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As this case is being decided under VA's modernized appeal system, pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (known as the AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. The relevant favorable finding identified in the November 2023 decision was that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tension headaches. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

Tension Headaches 

The Veteran has requested service connection for his tension headaches, stating that he believes the headaches worsened in 2020 and were caused by a service-connected lumbar disc injury. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination in September 2022 to assess the etiology and severity of his tension headaches. He reported constant head pain that became worse with physical activity and was especially painful in the occipital region. He also experienced nausea and prostrating attacks more than once per month. The Veteran reported these symptoms made it difficult for him to concentrate on his work and affected his overall ability to work. The examiner found the Veteran had a diagnosis of tension headaches.

The examiner found it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tension headaches were proximately due to or related to his service-connected intervertebral disc disease (IVDS). The examiner stated that medical literature does not support the contention that IVDS causes headaches, therefore the two conditions cannot be related. 

The Board finds this opinion inadequate. The examiner failed to give a medical-based rationale for why the Veteran's tension headaches are not related to his IVDS. Additionally, both causation and aggravation must be addressed in any VA medical opinion concerning secondary service connection. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). The examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's IVDS aggravated his tension headaches. Therefore, this opinion should be provided little probative value.

The Veteran attended a second VA examination to address his tension headaches in August 2023. He reported pain localized to one side of the head as well as nausea and prostrating attacks that occur more than once per month. The Veteran also reported that his headache condition negatively impacts his ability to work. 

The examiner found that based on a lack of available evidence, the Veteran's tension headaches are less likely than not related to an event, injury, or disease in service. The examiner believed that without evidence of chronicity of symptomatology, the Veteran's tension headaches were more likely caused by a post-service event, injury, or illness. 

The Board also finds this opinion inadequate. Here, the examiner has only given an opinion regarding direct service connection and has ignored the Veteran's statements that he believes his tension headaches began "about 15 years ago" and are caused by his service-connected IVDS. Additionally, in giving this opinion, the examiner has relied on a lack of contemporaneous medical records to support her opinion. A lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an "absolute bar" to the service connection claim and cannot be used as a rationale in explaining why the current disability is not related to service. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Therefore, this opinion should also be given little probative value, and this issue is remanded to obtain an adequate medical opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headache disorder. If the examiner finds that a new examination must be held prior to providing an opinion, schedule such an examination. The examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's entire claims file and must specify in the report that the claims file has been reviewed. The examiner should then discuss:

(a.) Is it as likely as not the Veteran's tension headache disorder was incurred in or caused by an in-service event, injury, or disease?

(b.) Is it as likely as not the Veteran's tension headache disorder has been either a) caused or b) aggravated by his service-connected IVDS (listed as partial laminectomy, discectomy, L5-S1, and nerve root decompression of S1)?

The examiner must discuss the Veteran's reports of experiencing headaches since 2012 and his belief that the headaches are related to his in-service spine surgery.

A complete, well-reasoned rationale must be provided for all conclusions and opinions. If the requested opinions cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Black

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.