Citation Nr: A25033469
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-444618
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

The appeal for an increased rating of the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from September 2017 to September 2021. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2022 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, cannot by law, be considered by the Board as evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. The appeal for an increased rating or the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease is remanded.

The issue of an increased rating for the Veteran's lumbar spine condition is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error prior to the rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a July 2022 VA examination report prior to the October 2022 rating decision on appeal. However, this examination report did not adequately consider all of the Veteran's symptomology associated with the Veteran's lumbar spine. Specifically, the Veteran reported that his lumbar spine pain radiates to his lower extremities, however, the examiner did not evaluate this bilateral lower  extremity radiculopathy disability.  Accordingly, the examination is incomplete and therefore, inadequate. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should arrange for an examination of the Veteran to assess the current etiology and severity of his service-connected lumbar spine disability. The examiner must review the entire record (including this remand) in conjunction with the examination and note such review was conducted. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms associated with the Veteran's disability.

(a.) Specifically, the examiner MUST evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate diagnostic code, including but not limited to, the Veteran's claimed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. 

The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to provide information about observable symptoms and events. The examiner should assume, for the purposes of the opinions, that the Veteran's reports are both accurate and credible.

A detailed explanation (rationale) is required for all opinions provided. By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Williams, M. E. (BVA)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.