Citation Nr: A25033581
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240517-441199
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left shin splint disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shin splint disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that GERD began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for GERD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had honorable active service from April 1983 to December 1989. 

An original claim for service connection for GERD, headaches, bilateral shin splints, a bilateral hip disability, and a bilateral foot disability was filed in April 2023, and denied in a May 2023 rating decision. The Veteran appealed with a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the claim for service connection for GERD: if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the remaining claims for service connection for bilateral shin splints, bilateral hip disability, bilateral foot disability, and headaches: any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is denied. 

The Veteran contends he has a current GERD disability that is etiologically associated with active service.  

As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not yet been afforded an examination to assess the nature and etiology of his GERD. In the present case, though there is evidence of a current disability, there is no evidence establishing that an in-service event, injury, or disease occurred or an indication that the GERD is related to the Veteran's period of service. As discussed below, there are no service treatment records noting treatment or diagnosis of GERD, or lay statements relating to onset during active service. Accordingly, the Board finds the requirements for an examination have not been shown pursuant to McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). VA's duty to assist has been met in this respect. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is approximately at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a diagnosis of GERD, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that it began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

The May 2023 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD based on VA treatment records. The Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

However, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding an in-service injury, event, or disease occurred. Service treatment records are silent for any treatment or complaints related to GERD. A September 1989 examination revealed a clinical evaluation of the abdomen and viscera was normal and the Veteran was qualified for separation. The first evidence showing a diagnosis of GERD is a January 2015 VA treatment record. This occurred decades after separation from service. 

While the Veteran believes the claimed GERD is related to service, the Board reiterates that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that an in-service injury, event, or disease occurred. Of note, the Veteran has not offered any statements regarding the onset of his GERD or identified any outstanding treatment records relevant to the case. 

Accordingly, in the absence of any evidence establishing an in-service event, the Board concludes service connection is not warranted, and the claim must be denied. In denying the claim, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of service connection and, as such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left shin splint disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right shin splint disability is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right shin splint disabilities are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained a May 2023 medical opinion prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, this medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's claimed disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. The May 2023 VA examiner stated that the claims file is silent for any diagnosed condition of shin splints while on active duty. However, the Board notes that a May 1985 service treatment record (STR) revealed the Veteran's report of shin splints in the left leg for approximately 3 weeks. As the May 2023 VA examiner appears to have relied on an inaccurate factual premise, the Board finds remand is warranted for a new examination and opinion that addresses the May 1985 report of shin splints. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained a May 2023 medical opinion prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal.  However, this medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's claimed disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. The May 2023 VA examiner stated that there was no headache condition while on active duty. However, the Board notes that the Veteran complained of headaches and head pain in the temporal area in May 1983 and January 1986, and that he could not focus while reading and it was causing headaches in December 1987. As the May 2023 VA examiner appears to have relied on an inaccurate factual premise, the Board finds remand is warranted for a new examination and opinion that addresses the May 1983, January 1986 and December 1987 STRs. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hip disabilities are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained a May 2023 medical opinion prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, this medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding the nature and etiology of the claimed disability.

The May 2023 VA hip examiner opined there is no diagnosis for a musculoskeletal condition of the bilateral hips, and hip pain is likely a combination of radiating pain from the low back and some vascular disease. Service connection is already in effect for a low back disability, characterized as lumbar strain, degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, and foraminal stenosis. However, service connection is yet in effect for a vascular disease. Additionally, the examiner did not clarify the nature or etiology of the vascular disease. Accordingly, the Board finds remand is warranted for an additional examination to clarify the nature of the claimed bilateral hip disability (other than service-connected lumbar strain, degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, and foraminal stenosis), as well as the etiology of any such diagnosis. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right foot disabilities are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained a May 2023 medical opinion prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, this medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding the nature and etiology of the claimed disability.

The May 2023 VA foot examiner opined that the claimed foot disability was less likely than not caused by service because the reported symptoms correlate with lower extremity radiculopathy. However, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran had another diagnosis relating to the bilateral feet, to include peripheral arterial disease. Of note, in a January 2023 VA treatment record, a clinician remarked that the Veteran's left foot pain looked concerning for a vascular disease and provided a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease. Based on the Veteran's description of the symptoms as foot pain, and the January 2023 VA treatment record suggestion that left foot symptomatology may be related to a vascular disease, the Board finds remand is thus warranted for an additional examination to clarify the nature of the claimed bilateral foot disability (other than service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy), as well as the etiology of any such diagnosis. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed left and right shin splint disability. The examiner must review the claims file. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: is the claimed disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including the May 1985 STR noting the Veteran's report of shin splints in the left leg for approximately 3 weeks?

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed headache disability. The examiner must review the claims file. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: is the claimed disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including: the May 1983 complaint of headaches, January 1986 complaint of headaches and head pain in the temporal area, and December 1987 STR noting the Veteran could not focus while reading and it was causing headaches? 

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed left and right hip disabilities. The examiner must review the claims file. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: 

(a) Identify any diagnoses of the left and right hip (other than service-connected lumbar strain, degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, and foraminal stenosis). 

In providing this opinion, the examiner must address the May 2023 VA opinion indicating that hip pain is likely related to "some vascular disease."

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment (and does not overlap with symptoms of service-connected lumbar strain, degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, and foraminal stenosis), then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion below.

(b) If the Veteran has a diagnosis/functional impairment, is the claimed disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service?

(c) If the Veteran has a diagnosis/functional impairment, is the claimed disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or aggravated by:

(i) service-connected left ankle reconstruction residual pain, instability, limitation of motion and degenerative arthritis, or 

(ii) service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves?

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed left and right foot disabilities. The examiner must review the claims file. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: 

(a) Identify any diagnoses of the left and right foot (other than service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves). 

In providing this opinion, the examiner must address the January 2023 VA treatment record wherein a clinician remarked that the Veteran's left foot pain looked concerning for a vascular disease and provided a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease. 

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment (and does not overlap with symptoms of service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves), then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion below.

(b) If the Veteran has a diagnosis/functional impairment, is the claimed disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, to include the May 1983 STR noting soft tissue injury of the right foot. 

Any opinions offered should be accompanied by the underlying reasons for the conclusions.

 

 

TANYA SMITH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Vang

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.