Citation Nr: A25033550
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240820-465760
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right knee condition, noted at entry into service and therefore considered a preexisting disability, was aggravated by service

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the cervical spine condition began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right knee condition are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a cervical spine condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1986 to May 1987.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is warranted because the Veteran had swelling and drainage of the knee and was on crutches most of the time during his enlistment. See June 2022 VA 21-526EZ.

For the following reasons, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's right knee condition is warranted.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A Veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry into active service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the acceptance, examination, or enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the condition existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). The term "noted" refers to "[o]nly such conditions as are recorded in examination reports." 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).

When no preexisting condition is noted upon examination for entry into service, a Veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry, and the burden then shifts to VA to rebut the presumption of soundness. Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304.

To rebut the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111, there must be clear and unmistakable evidence that (1) a Veteran's disability existed prior to service, and (2) that the preexisting disability was not aggravated during service. Id. When the presumption of soundness is not rebutted, the claim must be treated as a direct service connection claim.

A preexisting injury or disease will be presumed to have been aggravated in service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding the increase in disability was due to the natural progression of the condition. 38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(a); Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292 (1991).

However, in order to avail themselves of this presumption of aggravation, initially, the burden is on the Veteran to establish an increase in severity in service. See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004). If the Veteran is able to demonstrate an increase in severity in service, then the presumption of aggravation attaches and the burden shifts to VA to rebut the presumption by clear and unmistakable evidence that the worsening of the preexisting condition was due to its natural progression. Id.; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(b). In that regard, "temporary or intermittent flare-ups during service of a preexisting injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered 'aggravation in service' unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, is worsened. See Hunt, 1 Vet. App. at 297.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the claimant. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The August 2023 rating decision noted that (1) the Veteran has a diagnosis of right knee strain; (2) a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service as he reported right knee impairment in February 1987; (3) the claimed issue existed prior to military service as a pre-service treatment record from July 1986 endorsed a history of right knee effusion and swelling before entry into the military; and (4) the claimed issue was treated during military service as a service treatment record (STR) from April 1987 noted that the Veteran's right knee pain had resolved.

Here, the Veteran was noted to have a right knee condition in the July 1986 enlistment examination report. Therefore, the presumption of soundness does not apply in this regard. The issue therefore becomes whether the Veteran's preexisting right knee condition was aggravated?by service. 

On review of the evidence of record and in resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's right knee condition clearly and unmistakably preexisted service and was aggravated by service. Therefore, service connection for a right knee condition is warranted based on?aggravation?of a preexisting disability. 

As noted above, the Veteran's STRs reflect that he injured his right knee in February 1987 and underwent treatment for it in service. The Veteran's June 2022 statement further confirms that he injured his right knee during service when he fell down the stairs and was seen multiple times for pain and swelling while in service. The Veteran reported that he has had issues with his knees ever since service.

The evidence of record contains two VA medical opinions providing a negative nexus and a private medical opinion providing a positive nexus. 

In a September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he fell down the stairs while in service and injured his right knee. The examiner provided an opinion on a direct service connection basis and found that there was no report of a significant knee injury incurred during active duty and the Veteran's knee pain was not related to any trauma. Further the VA examiner opined that at time of discharge, the Veteran's right knee is reported as resolved and as the Veteran's right knee condition existed prior to military service, the claimed condition is less likely as not incurred in or caused by the Veteran's in service injury.

In a November 2022 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined on aggravation of a condition that existed prior to service. The examiner found that temporary aggravation is plausible, but there is no evidence of permanent aggravation of the preexisting right knee condition. The examiner noted that there was no objective evidence found to confirm that the Veteran's right knee condition (which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service) was aggravated beyond its natural progression by right knee condition/pain during service. The examiner found that the Veteran separated from service in 1987 and had 35 years of gap in care before claiming aggravation of a preexisting condition. The examiner concluded that a thorough review of the claims file and the medical literature fails to support that the preexisting condition was permanently aggravated by service and a nexus has not been established.

In support of his claim, the Veteran provided a private medical opinion from T.M., in July 2023. The provider opined that based on her professional education and experience, in conjunction with the medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, it is her professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right knee strain is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his right knee injury that occurred during active service. In providing this opinion, the provider noted that the Veteran had an in-service injury to the right knee from a fall and sought medical care and treatment for his right knee condition while in service. 

The Board finds that entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition on an aggravation basis is warranted. 

In reaching this decision, the Board gives little probative weight to the September 2022 and November 2022 VA medical opinions and finds these opinions inadequate. The September 2022 specifically noted that there was no report of a significant knee injury incurred during active duty. This is contradictory to the evidence of record and the Veteran's lay contentions, which show that he had an in-service injury to his right knee from a fall while in service in 1987. 

The November 2022 VA opinion is inadequate, as the examiner relied on the Veteran's lack of medical treatment for 35 years following separation from service without considering the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and course of his right knee condition. An opinion is inadequate if it does not consider all relevant evidence, including lay statements, or if it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?23, 39 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30?Vet. App.?54, 60 (2018). 

In contrast, the Board affords more probative weight to the private medical opinion by T.M., and finds that the provider offered a sufficient rationale that is consistent with the Veteran's lay contentions and based on the examiner's knowledge and expertise as a medical professional.

Here, the evidence reflects an increase in the severity of the right knee condition during service. Aggravation is therefore presumed, and there is no clear and unmistakable evidence that the increase was due to the natural progress of the disease, as the medical opinion finding clear and unmistakable evidence that the increase was due to the severity of the disease did not consider the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements and is therefore inadequate.   

As noted above, the presumption of?aggravation?can only be rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence that the increase was due to the natural progression of the disease. For the reasons above, there is no such evidence in this case. The presumption of?aggravation?has not been rebutted, therefore, the Veteran's preexisting right knee condition?noted at entry into service was?aggravated?by the in-service injury to his knee. 

Consequently, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that his preexisting right knee condition was aggravated by service. See?38 U.S.C. § 5107;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.306. As such, service connection for a right knee condition is warranted, and this claim is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition is warranted because the Veteran has had ailments with his spine and hip since 1986. See June 2022 VA 21-526EZ. For the following reasons, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cervical spine condition is not warranted.

The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a disability, as he was diagnosed with cervical spine degenerative disc disease in a September 2022 VA examination. Further, the AOJ found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service as STRs from October 1986 note that the Veteran fell on the stairs. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's STRs from October 1986 show that he had a fall down the stairs and injured his left hip. There is no mention of any pain, injury, or treatment of the neck or cervical spine in these records.

In a June 2022 statement, the Veteran reported that he injured his neck after a fall during service. The Veteran noted that since separation from service, he continued to have varying degrees of pain and issues with his neck and used over the counter (OTC) medications to treat neck pain. The Veteran noted that his current neck pain can be described as throbbing and shooting, and he also has muscle spasms in his neck. The Veteran noted that his doctor advised him that he has an abnormal curvature in his back. The Veteran reported that the pain he is currently having in his neck has an impact on his daily movements, and movements like looking up and looking down exacerbate his pain. The Veteran noted that when he has flare-ups in his neck, the pain makes it so that he develops severe headache and needs to lay down. The Veteran stated that his neck pain rates around a 5 out of 10 on most days but can be as high as a 9 with the flare-ups. The Veteran reported that he used muscle relaxers and anti-inflammatory pills prescribed to ease his symptoms. The Veteran noted that his condition also affects his job as in the last 12 months he has missed at least a month of work. The Veteran reported that when he has a flare-up, he is unable to do anything but lie in his bed for the day, and in the last 12 months, he has been confined to his bed or couch for at least a month.

During the September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his cervical spine condition began during service after falling down the stairs in 1986. The examiner opined that the STRs are negative for complaints, evaluation, diagnosis or treatment related to the claimed condition. The examiner noted there was no significant injury to the neck reported after fall down the stairs, only to the left hip. The examiner noted there is no objective evidence that the current condition is associated with military service. The examiner further noted that the Veteran's present condition most often occurs in a chronic process from "wear and tear" and is also part of the normal aging process. The examiner concluded that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of or caused by the claimed in service injury, event or illness.

In support of his claim, the Veteran provided a private medical opinion from T.M., in July 2023. The provider opined that based on her professional education and experience, in conjunction with the medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, it is her professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current cervical spine degenerative disc disease condition is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his neck/cervical spine injury that occurred during active service. In providing this opinion, the provider noted that medical literature supports and documents that prior neck/cervical spine injury is a primary cause of chronic cervical spine osteoarthritis conditions due to post-traumatic pathological degenerative processes and changes. The examiner noted that cervical spine osteoarthritis is a significant cause of disability due to chronic pain and loss of function. 

Here, the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's contentions; however, there is no medical evidence in the STRs connecting the Veteran's cervical spine condition to his in-service fall in 1986. Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, see Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011), as to the specific issue in this case, the etiology of a cervical spine condition, falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). In this regard, determining the diagnosis and etiology of the condition requires medical training and credentials. Thus, the Veteran's opinion as to the cause of his claimed disability does not constitute competent evidence. 

Consequently, the Board gives significant probative weight to the September 2022 VA medical opinion as it was made by a medical professional with consideration of the specific facts in this case. The VA examiner conducted a thorough in-person examination, reviewed the claims file, and performed appropriate testing. The examiner relied on accurate facts gathered from the examination and considered the Veteran's relevant medical records and medical history. Further, the opinion provided is consistent with the STRs, which show no neck or cervical spine complaints or injuries from the Veteran's 1986 in-service fall.  

In contrast, there is no indication that the private medical examiner examined the Veteran before rendering her opinion or if the examiner even reviewed the Veteran's claims file. The wording of the private medical opinion suggests some degree of familiarity with the historical record beyond the Veteran's lay statements. However, the Board is unable to ascertain that T.M. reviewed all of the relevant evidence of record, let alone the entire claims file, and there is no reference to specific instances of in-service or post-service treatment. The Board therefore must conclude that T.M.'s opinion was based upon a less than complete record, whereas the VA examiner did review the claims file. As the VA examiner's medical opinion in this instance is based upon a claims file review and is fully consistent with the historical record, that opinion is afforded greater probative value for the cervical spine. To give weight to an opinion, the Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning).

The Board acknowledges that it afforded the private medical opinion by T.M., more probative weight for the right knee condition than for the cervical spine condition. The difference here is that the historical record apparently does not indicate an in-service injury and treatment for the cervical spine, whereas it does for the right knee. Accordingly, the private opinion is highly probative for the right knee because it closely correlates to the historical record, but it is markedly less probative for the cervical spine because of the absence of documented in-service injury or treatment.

Accordingly, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim of entitlement to service-connection for a cervical spine condition. As the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.?38?U.S.C. §?5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§?4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776, 781. Thus, service connection for a cervical spine condition is not warranted and this claim is denied.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Khan, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.