Citation Nr: A25033547
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240430-437357
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

An initial rating higher than 30 percent for a postoperative ileus is denied.

Special monthly compensation (SMC) on a basis other than the loss or loss of use of a creative organ is denied.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left salpingectomy with infertility is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's postoperative ileus manifests constipation and abdominal pain, with occasional diarrhea, intermittent nausea, and intermittent vomiting; the Veteran is already in receipt of the maximum rating available under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7319, which adequately contemplates the Veteran's symptoms.  

2. The Veteran is in receipt of SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ for the entire appeal period; there is no argument or indication that she is entitled to additional SMC based on either a higher rate or a different basis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for a postoperative ileus are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319 (as it existed prior to May 19, 2024) & 7336 (as it exists since May 19, 2024). 

2. The criteria for entitlement to SMC on a basis other than the loss or loss of use of a creative organ are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2020 to June 2021.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals from two rating decisions that were issued in March 2024.  In relevant part, a decision issued on March 6, 2024, granted service connection for postoperative ileus, with an initial rating of 30 percent, effective September 3, 2023.  Days later, a decision issued on March 13, 2024, granted SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, effective September 3, 2023, and denied a compensable rating for left salpingectomy with infertility.  The Veteran is appealing the assigned rating or level of compensation.  See VA Form 10182 (notice of disagreement) from April 30, 2024.  There is no argument or indication that she is appealing the assigned effective dates.

In her April 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of (1) the March 6, 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision (regarding postoperative ileus) and (2) the March 13, 2024 AOJ decision (regarding SMC and regarding left salpingectomy) on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the respective March 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  For the claims being denied, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  For the issue of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left salpingectomy with infertility being remanded, however, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this matter. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Regarding representation, it is noted that, in October 2024, VA received a VA Form 21-22 appointing New Mexico Department of Veterans Services (NMDVS) as her representative. The Veteran was previously unrepresented in these matters. Relatedly, a May 15, 2024 letter from the Board to the Veteran informed her that this appeal had been docketed by the Board and it also informed that she had 90 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182 or until the Board issued a decision (whichever came first) to request a change in representation. Here, the October 2024 VA Form 21-22a was received after the expiration of the 90 days referenced in the May 2024 letter. Pertinent VA regulations states that if a change in representation is requested more than 90 days after certification, good cause must be shown for the change. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304(b) (eff. Feb. 19, 2019). The October 2024 request was made several months after the Board's April 30, 2024 receipt of the VA Form 10182. The Veteran provided no cause for his change in representation. Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran is unrepresentative for purpose of this decision. Id.; see also Perez v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 190, 194-95 (2012) (concluding that when the Veteran submitted a request to change representation more than 90 days after his appeal was certified to the Board, he did not avail himself of the "good cause" provision contained in 38 C.F.R. § 20.1305(b) (now 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304(b) (eff. Feb. 19, 2019). For future matters and considerations after this decision is issued, NMDVS will be the Veteran's representative of record (barring another change of representation). 

1. An initial rating higher than 30 percent for postoperative ileus is denied.

The Veteran seeks an initial rating higher than 30 percent for her service-connected postoperative ileus.  (An ileus is a condition in which the bowel does not work correctly, but there is no structural problem causing the obstruction.  See National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, "Intestinal obstruction and Ileus," available at https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000260.htm.)  This appeal stems from a September 2023 claim.  The March 6, 2024 rating decision granted service connection for postoperative ileus with an initial 30 percent rating, effective September 3, 2023. 

The Veteran's postoperative ileus is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7399-7319, as analogous to irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).  Under DC 7319, the maximum schedular rating of 30 percent is for: severe; diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress.

VA amended the criteria for rating digestive disabilities effective from May 19, 2024. These new regulations apply to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the agency of original jurisdiction on or after May 19, 2024.  Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both old and new rating criteria, and whatever criteria is more favorable to the veteran will be applied.  The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date, unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise.  Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  However, the Board is not precluded from applying prior versions of the applicable regulation to the period on or after the effective dates of the new regulation if the prior version was in effect during the pendency of the appeal.

From May 19, 2024, under DC 7319, a maximum rating of 30 percent is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation at least one day per week during the previous three months; and two or more of the following: (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension.  38 C.F.R § 4.114.  This diagnostic code may include functional digestive disorders, such as dyspepsia, functional bloating and constipation, and diarrhea.  Other symptoms of a functional digestive disorder not encompassed by DC 7319 are to be evaluated under the appropriate diagnostic code, to include gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome (DC 7356), following the general principles of § 4.14 and the section of the rating schedule pertaining to the digestive system.  Id., Note.

Turning to the evidence, an October 2023 VA examination shows a diagnosis of postoperative ileus and indicates that this condition began right after the Veteran underwent a salpingectomy.  Current symptoms were described as severe constipation, resulting in pain and a backed-up feeling.  Per the examination report, the Veteran's disability manifests as frequent constipation with occasional diarrhea, intermittent nausea, and intermittent vomiting, with frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.  The examination report was negative for functional impact.

The Veteran is already in receipt of the maximum rating of 30 percent under DC 7319.  A higher rating under DC 7319 is not available as a matter of law under the pre- or post-amendment version of this DC.  

The Board has considered the extent to which a rating higher than 30 percent is warranted under a separate diagnostic code.  

Under DC 7301, prior to May 19, 2024, a rating of 50 percent is available for: severe; definite partial obstruction shown by X-ray, with frequent and prolonged episodes of severe colic distention, nausea, vomiting, following severe colic distension, nausea or vomiting, following severe peritonitis, ruptured appendix, perforated ulcer, or operation with drainage. 

Under DC 7301, from May 19, 2024, a rating of 50 percent is available for symptomatic peritoneal adhesions, persisting or recurring after surgery, trauma, inflammatory disease process such as chronic cholecystitis or Crohn's disease, or infection, as determined by a healthcare provider; and clinical evidence of recurrent obstruction requiring hospitalization at least once a year; and medically-directed dietary modification other than total parenteral nutrition (TPN); and at least one of the following: (1) abdominal pain, (2) nausea, (3) vomiting, (4) colic, (5) constipation, or (6) diarrhea.  38 C.F.R § 4.114.  While the evidence in this case shows abdominal pain, nausea, constipation, and diarrhea, there is no evidence of recurrent obstruction requiring hospitalization at least once a year and medically-directed dietary modification other than total parenteral nutrition (TPN).  In view of this, and to the extent that DC 7301 is applicable to the Veteran's disability picture, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating higher than 30 percent under this diagnostic code are not met.

Under DC 7326, a rating of 60 percent is available for moderate inflammatory bowel disease that is managed on an outpatient basis with immunosuppressants or other biologic agents; and is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain, four to five daily episodes of diarrhea; and intermittent signs of toxicity such as fever, tachycardia, or anemia.  While the evidence in this case shows abdominal pain, and diarrhea, there is no evidence of intermittent signs of toxicity or symptoms managed on an outpatient basis with immunosuppressants or other biologic agents.  In view of this, and to the extent that DC 7326 is applicable to the Veteran's disability picture, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating higher than 30 percent under this diagnostic code are not met.

Finally, under DC 7356, a rating of 50 percent is available for gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome requiring intermittent tube feeding for nutritional support; with recurrent emergency treatment for episodes of intestinal obstruction or regurgitation due to poor gastric emptying, abdominal pain, recurrent nausea, or recurrent vomiting.  While the evidence in this case shows abdominal pain and nausea, there is no evidence that the Veteran's symptoms require intermittent tube feeding for nutritional support, with recurrent emergency treatment for episodes of intestinal obstruction or regurgitation.  In view of this, and to the extent that DC 7356 is applicable to the Veteran's disability picture, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating higher than 30 percent under this diagnostic code are not met.

The Board further finds that extraschedular consideration is not warranted in the present case.  According to VA regulation, in exceptional cases where schedular ratings are found to be inadequate, the RO may refer a claim to the Under Secretary for Benefits or the Director, Compensation Service, for consideration of "an extraschedular evaluation commensurate with the average earning capacity impairment due exclusively to the service-connected disability or disabilities."  38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1).  

An extraschedular disability rating is warranted based upon a finding that the case presents such an exceptional or unusual disability picture with such related factors as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization that would render impractical the application of the regular schedular standards.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1); Fanning v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 225, 229 (1993).

Consideration of an extraschedular rating requires a three-step inquiry.  The first question is whether the schedular rating criteria adequately contemplate the veteran's disability picture.  If the schedular evaluation does not contemplate the level of disability and symptomatology shown and is found inadequate, then the second inquiry is whether the exceptional disability picture exhibits other related factors, such as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization.  See Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008).  The first Thun element compares a claimant's symptoms to the rating criteria, while the second addresses the resulting effects of those symptoms.  Thus, the first and second Thun elements, although interrelated, involve separate and distinct analyses.  Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484, 495 (2016).  If the veteran's disability picture meets the second inquiry, then the third step is to refer the case to the Director of Compensation Services to determine whether an extraschedular rating is warranted.  See Thun, 22 Vet. App. 111.

As detailed above, the Veteran's disability manifests constipation and abdominal pain, with occasional diarrhea, intermittent nausea, and intermittent vomiting.  These symptoms are adequately contemplated by the schedular rating criteria for disabilities of the digestive system.  Furthermore, there is no argument or indication that the Veteran's disability picture is exceptional or unusual.  Rather, her symptoms closely track the symptoms associated with an ileus.  See National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, "Intestinal obstruction and Ileus," available at https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/000260.htm.  As such, referral for extraschedular consideration of a higher rating is not warranted.

Finally, the Board has considered the extent to which the issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) has been raised by the record.  Private treatment records indicate that, in May 2022, prior to the June 2022 left salpingectomy, the Veteran reported having missed multiple days of work due to pelvic pain.  There is, however, no other indication that the symptoms associated with the postoperative ileus have affected the Veteran's ability to work.  Rather, the private treatment record shows that, following the June 6, 2022, left salpingectomy, the Veteran required emergency treatment on at least three occasions.  However, by June 22, 2022, the Veteran reported that her abdominal pain was improving.  Furthermore, the October 2023 VA examination is negative for functional impairment associated with the postoperative ileus.  

Based on the above, the Board finds that the evidence weighs against a finding of unemployability due to symptoms associated with the service-connected postoperative ileus.  While there is evidence that the Veteran missed some days of work due to pelvic pain, this was before she underwent a surgical procedure for relief of that pain.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (2024) ("Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.").  The Board deduces that this single evidence is not sufficient to establish unemployability.  Rather, it tends to show that the Veteran missed work due to acute symptoms, for which she subsequently received surgical treatment.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted a TDIU application in January 2025, based on the postoperative ileus and a mental health disability (service connection for which is in effect since December 12, 2023, per a November 2024 rating decision).  This application was received after the decision on appeal.  Therefore, any evidence contained in the application cannot be considered.

The January 2025 TDIU application was denied in a March 2025 rating decision.  Should the Veteran disagree with that decision, she is encouraged to request review of that decision or submit a supplemental claim with new evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(a).

2. SMC on a basis other than the loss or loss of use of a creative organ is denied.

The March 13, 2024 decision on appeal granted entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, effective September 3, 2023.

"SMC is available when, 'as the result of service-connected disability,' a veteran suffers additional hardships above and beyond those contemplated by VA's schedule for rating disabilities."  Breniser v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 64, 68 (2011) (citing 38 U.S.C. 1114(k)-(s)).  

Under 38 U.S.C. 1114(k), SMC is payable if the veteran, as the result of service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of one or more creative organs.  38 U.S.C. 1114(k); 38 C.F.R. 3.350(a)(1).  

The Veteran is currently receiving SMC at the 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) rate.  

While the Veteran listed the issue of SMC in her April 2024 notice of disagreement, there is no indication that she is appealing the effective date.  Nevertheless, to the extent that she is, there is no indication that a claim for any type of VA compensation was received prior to September 3, 2023.

Similarly, the Veteran has not asserted (and the Board finds no indication of) entitlement to SMC on a basis other than the loss or loss of use of a creative organ.  As such, and to the extent that the Veteran is asserting entitlement to SMC on a basis other than the loss or loss of use of a creative organ, her appeal is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The issue of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left salpingectomy with infertility is remanded.

The Veteran seeks an initial compensable rating for her service-connected left salpingectomy with infertility.  (A salpingectomy is a surgical procedure to remove one or both fallopian tubes.)  

This disability has been rated as noncompensable under DC 7614.  38 C.F.R § 4.115b.

Under the General Rating Formula for Disease, Injury, or Adhesions of Female Reproductive Organs (applicable to diagnostic codes 7610 through 7615), a noncompensable rating of 0 percent is warranted for symptoms that do not require continuous treatment.  A rating of 10 percent is warranted for symptoms that require continuous treatment.  A maximum rating of 30 percent is warranted for symptoms not controlled by continuous treatment.  Id. 

Turning to the evidence, private treatment records document a history of gastroschisis with severe abdominal/pelvic adhesions and severe pelvic pain with ovarian cysts and hydrosalpinx.  On June 6, 2022, the Veteran underwent a laparotomy, left salpingectomy, right ovarian cystectomy, and extensive lysis of adhesions.  The relevant discharge note indicates that, on postoperative day 2, the Veteran developed a mild ileus.  A note from June 22, 2022, indicates that, following the procedure, the Veteran presented to the emergency department three times due to abdominal pain and nausea/emesis (vomiting).  See private treatment records from February 16, 2024.

An August 2023 treatment note from a military medical facility show that the Veteran complained of chronic pelvic pain.  The note indicates that, following the June 2022 surgical procedure, the Veteran's pelvic pain resolved for a month or two but had since returned with right hematosalpinx seen on ED imaging.  The Veteran described her pain as a pressure/sharp sensation that starts on the right and radiates to the left lasting anywhere from minutes to all day.  She also reported significant dyspareunia during sexual intercourse and a chronic history of constipation.  See CAPRI records from February 26, 2024.

An October 2023 VA examination for gynecological conditions shows a diagnosis of left salpingectomy.  Current symptoms were described as unbearable pain and difficulty sleeping, sitting, walking, and having intimate relations.  Per the examination report, the Veteran's disability manifests as moderate intermittent pain and irregular menstruation.  Functional impact was described as difficulty concentrating at times due to sleep affected by abdominal pain.  

Service connection is in effect for a postoperative ileus.  The Veteran is in receipt of a rating of 30 percent for symptoms associated with that disability, which include abdominal pain.

As noted above, a treatment record from August 2023 documents complaints of chronic pelvic pain.  It is unclear whether this pelvic pain is different or separate from the abdominal pain for which the Veteran is already compensated.  Notably, the October 2023 VA examination fails to provide clarity in this regard.

In other words, there are indications that the Veteran's gynecological disability manifests as distinct symptoms.  October 2023 VA examination, however, does not provide insight into the nature and severity of these distinct symptoms.  Rather, it documents symptoms that appear to overlap with the Veteran's postoperative ileus, which is a separately service-connected disability of the digestive system.

VA's failure to obtain an examination that adequately addresses the nature and severity of the Veteran's symptoms is pre-decisional duty-to-assist error; a remand is required for correction of this error.  38 C.F.R § 20.802(a). 

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected gynecological disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is asked to identify any distinct symptoms from the service-connected gynecological disability.  Regarding any complaints of abdominal or pelvic pain, the examiner should indicate whether such pain is related to the Veteran's service-connected gynecological disability or her service-connected digestive disability.

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. López, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.