Citation Nr: A25033193
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240903-470978
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent prior to April 21, 2024, and 60 percent thereafter for service-connected hypertensive heart disease, coronary artery disease (CAD), ischemic heart disease (IHD), and arteriosclerotic heart disease (ASHD) is remanded.

Entitlement to a TDIU prior to April 21, 2024 is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1966 to Octo 1968. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA or Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. In October 2024, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 10182 electing the Evidence Submission docket. As the request to switch dockets was submitted within the time allowed, the Board granted this motion in a December 20, 2024 correspondence. Therefore, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative within 90 days after the Board's acceptance of the docket switch on December 20, 2024. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303(b)(2). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board accepted the docket switch on December 20, 2024, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board accepted the docket switch on December 20, 2024, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Evidence was added to the claim file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is remanding the claims on appeal for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.

Entitlement to a TDIU prior to April 21, 2024 has been raised by the Veteran. The Board has recharacterized the issues on appeal to include entitlement to a TDIU prior to April 21, 2024. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009). 

Additionally, the Board notes here that on the VA Form 10182 the Veteran phrased the issue he wishes to appeal as entitlement to an earlier effective date of September 6, 2016, for the 60 percent rating assigned in the AOJ decision on appeal. This was a grant of a staged disability rating, which stems from the initial grant of service connection rated 10 percent effective September 6, 2016 and 60 percent from April 21, 2024. The claim for an earlier effective date for the grant of the 60 percent disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected heart disability is actually a claim for an increased rating for the staged ratings assigned.

After a thorough consideration of the evidence considered at the time of the May 2024 rating decision, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error was made. Therefore, a remand is necessary to cure the error.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent prior to April 21, 2024, and 60 percent thereafter for service-connected hypertensive heart disease, CAD, IHD and ASHD is remanded.

The April 2024 VA examination for the Veteran's heart disability, it was noted that an exercise stress test was not performed as it is not required as part of the Veteran's current treatment plan and this test is not without significant risk. Instead, interview-based METs test was performed and >3-5 METs was indicated. 

Under both the pre- and post- amendment rating criteria, when the level of METs at which dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope may be used. 38 C.F.R. §4.104, Note (2) (emphasis added).

A specific examples were not provided for the interview-based METs test. This is pertinent in adequately determining the nature and severity of the Veteran's service-connected heart disability. Therefore, on remand, the Veteran should be provided a VA examination that thoroughly address the nature and severity of his heart disability.

As to whether a retrospective examination or opinion is necessary, in Chotta v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 80, 85 (2008), the Court explained that entitlement to a retrospective medical examination or opinion "is not automatic," but rather "applies only once the evidence has met the minimal threshold of indicating the existence of a medical question." If there is insufficient evidence to determine the medical question pertaining to a period of time, then a retrospective opinion may be necessary.

The failure to obtain a medical opinion that includes the necessary information to determine whether a higher rating is warranted is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As the previous VA examinations addressed whether service-connection was warranted and did not assess the severity of the Veteran's disability, the Board finds that a retrospective medical opinion is needed to determine the appropriate disability evaluation for the period on appeal. 

2. Entitlement to a TDIU prior to April 21, 2024 is remanded.

The Board finds that the derivative claim for TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the issue of entitlement to increased rating for the heart condition. This issue will be remanded as well.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an examination to determine the severity of the Veteran's service-connected heart disability beginning April 19, 2016. After eliciting a full medical history from the Veteran, the VA examiner must provide a retrospective medical opinion as to the nature and severity of the Veteran's left hip disability beginning April 19, 2016. The entire claim file should be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner. The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) The examiner is requested to provide diagnostic METs testing results during the period beginning April 19, 2016. If the appropriate tests cannot or should not be undertaken, the examiner should provide an explanation of such finding, as well as an estimation of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples) that results in breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope. It is insufficient for the examiner to only note that the Veteran does not experience symptoms with any level of physical activity as a reason for not providing METs scores.

In rendering the requested evaluation, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms/history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

A fully articulated medical rationale for each opinion or determination expressed must be set forth in the medical report. The examiner should discuss the particulars of this Veteran's medical history, pertinent lay evidence, and the relevant medical literature or studies as applicable to this case, which may reasonably explain the medical analysis in the study of this case. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, a complete explanation stating why this is so should be provided. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question have been exhausted.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Meawad, Julie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.