Citation Nr: A25033266
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240112-412388
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1971 to August 1974.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office rating decision. 

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and bilateral hearing loss most recently addressed in an October 2022 rating decision. In November 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and selected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that his service-connected tinnitus caused his vertigo.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the record raises alternate theories of service connection. Therefore, VA must consider not only whether service connection secondary to tinnitus is warranted, but also whether service connection is warranted on other bases. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 370 (2017) (explaining that VA must consider all theories of service connection raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

To establish service connection on a "direct" basis, a veteran must generally show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. Shedden?v. Principi,?381 F.3d 1163, 1167?(Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be established on a "secondary" basis for a disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

After review of the record, the Board finds the claim must be remanded to correct errors in satisfying VA's duty to assist and statutory duties under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act). See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79, 86 (2006). Additionally, pursuant to the PACT Act, when a veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active service, but the evidence is insufficient to establish service connection, VA must provide the veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1). 

There are two VA nexus opinions of record concerning vertigo, both of which are inadequate for adjudication because they do not address all theories of service connection reasonably raised by the record and do not discuss the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). 

The first VA nexus opinion was rendered in October 2022. The examiner discussed the symptoms and pathophysiology of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, and stated that it is idiopathic in the majority of cases but can be secondary to otologic surgery, Meniere's disease, head trauma, migraine, viral infection, and a prolonged recumbent position. The examiner then stated that tinnitus does not cause benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.

The second VA nexus opinion was rendered in November 2023. The examiner stated that "after extensive review of the [Veteran's] medical records and relevant medical research there is no association of tinnitus being a cause of vertigo."

Remand is required because the two VA nexus opinions do not address the likelihood that the Veteran's vertigo was incurred during service or caused by his service-connected bradycardia. The record includes evidence that raises a theory of direct service connection-the Veteran has reported his vertigo began during or shortly after service (although he has also reported that it began around 2014), the October 2022 VA nexus opinion states that vertigo can occur secondary to viral infection, and the Veteran experienced pneumonia during service. See Ear Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), November 2023 ("Since I got out from the service, I started having vertigo."); Ear Conditions DBQ, October 2022 ("Per veteran, 'room spinning' started in 1974") ; Hearing Loss and Tinnitus DBQ, February 2019 ("Veteran reports vertigo when laying [sic] down in bed for the last 5 years."); Service Treatment Record, February 1972 (noting pneumonia). There is also evidence that raises a theory that the Veteran's vertigo is secondary to his service-connected bradycardia-specifically, a January 2020 medical record notes that the Veteran sought emergency treatment after awakening with the room spinning, and includes cardiac arrhythmia on the list of potential diagnoses. Remand is required to obtain a nexus opinion that addresses all theories of service connection reasonably raised by the record.

Remand is also required because the two VA nexus opinions do not address the Veteran's reported in-service toxic exposure risk activities. The Veteran served as an aviation structural mechanic and detailed to a VA examiner in May 2022 that he believed exposure to jet fuel during service caused respiratory symptoms. Moreover, VA has conceded that the Veteran had probable asbestos exposure during service due to his military occupational specialty. See Toxic Exposure Risk Activity Memorandum, June 2024. As the record includes evidence of in-service toxic exposure, remand is required to obtain a nexus opinion that addresses the Veteran's toxic exposure. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss. 

After review of the record, the Board finds the claim must be remanded to correct errors in satisfying VA's duty to assist and statutory duties under the PACT Act. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The first VA nexus opinion was rendered in February 2019. The examiner opined that the Veteran's hearing loss was less likely than not caused by service because the Veteran showed no significant, permanent threshold shift beyond test variability during service, and there was no complaint of or treatment for hearing loss in the service treatment records. This opinion is inadequate for adjudication because it does not explain why a significant, permanent threshold shift during service is necessary to establish a nexus. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (stating that the probative value of a medical opinion lies in factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning). 

The second VA nexus opinion was rendered in November 2023. The examiner provided an identical rationale to the February 2019 opinion but added that tables of normally-occurring, age-related hearing loss show that the Veteran's current hearing loss is consistent with what would be expected for a male in his age category. For that reason, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's hearing loss represented "normally occurring age-related decline in hearing ability." This opinion is inadequate for adjudication because the examiner did not provide the numbers in the cited tables of normally-occurring, age-related hearing loss. Without this data, the Board cannot assess the veracity of the examiner's statement that the Veteran's current hearing loss is no more than what would be expected in any man of his age. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 301 (stating that a medical opinion must contain clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned explanation connecting the two).

The Veteran's bilateral hearing loss claim must be remanded not only because the opinions of record are inadequate for adjudication but also because VA has not yet fulfilled its statutory duties under the PACT Act by obtaining an opinion that addresses the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Perform the development necessary to verify and document the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure, to include toxic exposure related to his military occupational specialty and in-service duties.

In performing this development, consider the Veteran's reported in-service exposure to jet fuel.

2. Once the above development has been completed, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician in regard to the Veteran's vertigo. If deemed necessary by the examiner, afford the Veteran a VA examination.

The examiner must review the claims file, to include this Remand, and attest to having fully reviewed it.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following inquiries

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's vertigo had its onset in service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?

In responding to this inquiry, the examiner must address the likelihood that the Veteran's in-service pneumonia caused his vertigo.

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's vertigo was caused by his service-connected bradycardia?

(c)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's vertigo was aggravated (worsened beyond its natural progression, even if only temporarily or incrementally) by his service-connected bradycardia?

The term "at least as likely as not" means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion as it is to find against the conclusion.

The examiner is advised that, while the extent to which a scientific theory is accepted in the scientific community is a relevant consideration, a positive nexus opinion for service connection requires only an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. Scientific consensus or certainty is not required

Any opinions expressed must include a thorough rationale specific to the circumstances of the Veteran's case. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation should be provided as to why an opinion cannot be rendered.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner must address the Veteran's assertions on examination and any additional lay statements of record. The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner is reminded that an absence of documented treatment in or after service is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. 

The examiner is reminded that if positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance as to any issue, the Veteran should receive the benefit of the doubt.

3. Once all development related to the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activities has been completed, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician in regard to the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. If deemed necessary by the examiner, afford the Veteran a VA examination.

The examiner must review the claims file, to include this Remand, and attest to having fully reviewed it.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following inquiry: Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss had its onset in service, or is otherwise related to his active duty service?

The term "at least as likely as not" means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion as it is to find against the conclusion.

The examiner is advised that, while the extent to which a scientific theory is accepted in the scientific community is a relevant consideration, a positive nexus opinion for service connection requires only an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. Scientific consensus or certainty is not required

Any opinions expressed must include a thorough rationale specific to the circumstances of the Veteran's case. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation should be provided as to why an opinion cannot be rendered.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner must address the Veteran's assertions on examination and any additional lay statements of record. The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner is reminded that an absence of documented treatment in or after service is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. 

The examiner is reminded that if positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance as to any issue, the Veteran should receive the benefit of the doubt.

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Karp, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.