Citation Nr: A25033800
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240802-461801
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea to include as secondary to a service connected acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1981 to October 1984.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea to include as secondary to a service connected acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

This matter is remanded to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

(a)	The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea secondary to his service connected unspecified trauma disorder. The Veteran is service connected for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  October 2023 VA treatment records confirm that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of mild obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2023. The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was not caused by his service connected psychiatric disorder but did not determine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was aggravated by a service connected disability.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

(b)	Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW. 

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner is asked to address the following: 

Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated by his service connected acquired psychiatric disorders. 

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

3. Provide the Veteran and the representative notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

4. Readjudicate. 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Wimbish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.