Citation Nr: A25033880
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-448984
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for tinnitus is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for bilateral hearing loss is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for a right ankle disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A June 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for tinnitus.

2. A June 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

3. A June 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for a left a left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. As there is no longer a claim in controversy, the appeal for service connection for treatment purposes only for tinnitus is dismissed as moot.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. As there is no longer a claim in controversy, the appeal for service connection for treatment purposes only for bilateral hearing loss is dismissed as moot.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. As there is no longer a claim in controversy, the appeal for service connection for treatment purposes only for left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis is dismissed as moot.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from April 1994 to February 1995.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from June 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which granted service connection for treatment purposes only for tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss.  The rating decision also granted service connection for treatment purposes only for a left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

While the AOJ limited the scope of the Veteran's claim in the rating decision on appeal to only "the left ankle condition with Achilles tendonitis," the Board notes that the Veteran originally claimed service connection for treatment purposes only for both ankles.  The Board finds it best to add the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disorder according to his original intent, as noted in the February 2024 claim application.  Hence, the Board has framed the issue as entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for a right ankle disability, as reflected on the title page.

Additionally, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision, Williams v. McDonough, in which the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  Nevertheless, as further explained below, the Veteran's service-connection claim for treatment purposes only for tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis was granted prior to this decision.  Therefore, the appeal as to these claims has been resolved, no longer in appellate status, and are not before the Board at this time.  As the claims were fully resolved and no longer in appellate status, the Veteran could not request a docket switch.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in dismissing the resolved claim prior to the expiration of the period specified in 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).

Finally, the Board notes that with respect to the issues on appeal, the Veteran further asserted that the results of the subject rating decisions were "unfair" or that he was "discriminated" against.  However, such contentions are not matters that the Board may consider in connection with the current appeal.  In addition, to the extent that the Veteran may be claiming that there was error with respect to the June 2016 administrative decision that found his service to be dishonorable for VA benefits purposes, a formal claim asserting clear and unmistakable error (CUE) with the June 2016 must be filed and adjudicated by the AOJ before the Board may review such a claim on appeal.  Therefore, if that was the actual intent of the Veteran in this matter, he is advised to file an appropriate claim for this purpose with his local RO.  

Health Care

Health care and related benefits authorized by Chapter 17 of Title 38 U.S.C. shall be provided to certain former servicepersons with administrative discharges under other than honorable conditions for any disability incurred or aggravated during active military, naval, or air service in line of duty.  38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a).  With certain exceptions, such benefits shall be furnished for any disability incurred or aggravated during a period of service terminated by a discharge under other than honorable conditions.  Such benefits may not be furnished for any disability incurred or aggravated during a period of service terminated by a bad conduct discharge or when one of the bars listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c) applies.  38 C.F.R. § 3.360(b).

In this case, the appellant's period of service is considered dishonorable for VA purposes and is a bar to VA benefits pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).  See June 2016 Administrative Decision.  As also noted, this finding allows for the appellant to still be eligible for medical treatment for a current disability that is found to have been incurred or aggravated in his active-duty service.

In making determinations of health-care eligibility, the same criteria will be used as is now applicable to determinations of service incurrence and in line of duty when there is no character of discharge bar.  38 C.F.R. § 3.360(c).

As an initial matter, service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service, or if preexisting service, was aggravated therein.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

To establish service connection for a disability, there must be competent evidence of the following: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis.

A June 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis.

As the benefit sought on appeal as to these claims has been granted, the appeal must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction and because there remains no case or controversy as to the issue of service connection for tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis.  Consequently, the claims are dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205; Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

Once again, while the Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he feels discriminated against due to his discharge status, the Board must follow current regulations.  Specifically, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12, a dishonorable discharge deprives the claimant of all payable VA benefits.  

The Veteran filed in disagreement with the rating decision on appeal, but did not assert an exception to the rule.  See June 2024 Form 10182.  Thus, the Board must find that the Veteran's dishonorable discharge remains binding on VA and constitutes a bar to compensation for service-connected disabilities.  The Veteran is therefore only eligible for health care benefits under Chapter 17 of Title 38 U.S.C. for his service-connected tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and left ankle disability with Achilles tendonitis for which he has already been approved. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for a right ankle disability.

The Veteran also sought service connection for treatment purposes only for a right ankle disability under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C.  See June 2024 Form 10182.  

Following a review of the record, and as discussed further below, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist (DTA) error.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional DTA errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

As stated in his February 2024 claim application, the Veteran attributes his bilateral ankle disability to active service.  During a VA back examination in June 2024, the Veteran reported experiencing "some radiating pain in the back of his legs at times."  

Despite the medical and lay evidence indicated above, which demonstrate a possible current disability and in-service event, no VA examination or opinion was obtained.  This failure constitutes a pre-decisional DTA error and remand is warranted.  Thus, the Board must obtain an opinion that addresses whether the any right ankle disability is directly related to service.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination and medical opinion by a qualified VA examiner regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the requested examination and opinion.  

Following a review of the claims file and examination, the examiner shall address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed right ankle disability is directly related to service?  Please state the facts and medical principles and/or medical literature upon which you base this opinion.

The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above.  This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alexander, Lasheyna T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.