Citation Nr: A25033648
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230311-331178
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a neck injury, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder injury, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder injury, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy (PN LLE), to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 

38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), and to include as secondary to diabetes, is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy (PN RLE), to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 

38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), and to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from October 1973 to September 1976.  He also served from September 1976 to April 1980 and was discharged under other than honorable conditions due to misconduct.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of December 2022 and February 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In the December 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for a neck injury, left shoulder injury, and a right shoulder injury.  In the February 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, PN LLE, and PN RLE. 

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, concerning the relevant issues, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 and February 2023 AOJ decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §?20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a neck injury, left shoulder injury, right shoulder injury, and diabetes, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a) 

The Veteran contends he experiences a neck injury, left shoulder injury, and right shoulder injury related to his military service.  He also contends that his currently diagnosed diabetes mellitus and associated bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, is related to exposure to herbicides during service.

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has two periods of service.  The Veteran's first period of service from October 1973 to September 1976 is honorable for VA purposes.  However, in a July 1981 character of discharge notification letter, VA informed the Veteran that he is ineligible for VA benefits for his second period of service, exclusive of health care benefits under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), by reason of his discharge under other than honorable conditions. 

Turning to the issues before the Board, after a careful review of the record and for the reasons detailed below, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

First, VA has a duty to provide a Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA) notice to the Veteran of the information and evidence required to substantiate his claims prior to issuing a rating decision.  38 U.S.C. § 5103(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b).  Here, the AOJ failed to provide the Veteran such affirmative notice prior to issuing the rating decisions on appeal, which constitutes a pre-decisional due process error.  Accordingly, the AOJ must provide such notice to the Veteran and give him an opportunity to provide any such information and evidence.

Next, concerning the claims for service connection for a neck injury, left shoulder injury, and right shoulder injury, the record indicates that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with a neck injury, left shoulder injury, and right shoulder injury.  See generally VA Treatment Records; see also December 2022 Rating Decision.  Review of service treatment records also reveals that in February 1980, the Veteran reported neck pain that radiated into his right arm and caused right hand numbness following a car accident, four days prior.   

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the low threshold for provision of a VA examination described in McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006) were met prior to the promulgation of the decision on appeal.  Therefore, remand is necessary for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's neck injury, left shoulder injury, and right shoulder injury. 

Finally, regarding the Veteran's claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus, the Board takes judicial notice of an April 2024 VA TERA memorandum, that indicates evidence of non-deployment exposure.  Here, prior to the promulgation of the decision on appeal, the Veteran's service record indicated that he served as an assistant gunner in Korea.  His VA treatment records also show that he is currently diagnosed with diabetes mellitus.  See generally VA Treatment Records; see also February 2023 Rating Decision.  

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the low threshold for provision of a VA examination described in McLendon, supra, were met prior to the promulgation of the decision on appeal.  Therefore, remand is also necessary for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diabetes. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for PN LLE and PN RLE, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), and to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus 

Entitlement to service connection for PN LLE and PN RLE is intertwined the with the remanded claim for service connection for diabetes.  Therefore, the Board finds adjudication of this issue would be premature because it is inextricably intertwined with the remanded issue.  See Harris v. Derwinksi, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).  As such, this matter is deferred.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send the appropriate VCAA duty to assist letter to the Veteran notifying him of the criteria to develop and substantiate his claims.  Allow the Veteran a reasonable time to respond.

2. Then, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an examiner with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed (i) neck injury, (ii) right shoulder injury, and (iii) left shoulder injury.   

The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated test or studies should be provided.

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, including any additionally received treatment records and the Veteran's assertions, the examiner should provide the following opinions:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any currently present (i) neck injury, (ii) right shoulder injury, and/or (iii) left shoulder injury was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's first period of active service dated from October 1973 to September 1976.

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any currently present (i) neck injury, (ii) right shoulder injury, and/or (iii) left shoulder injury was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's second period of active service dated from September 1976 to April 1980.

In doing so, the AOJ should address STRs indicating that the Veteran experienced pain and numbness related to a February 1980 motor vehicle accident.  A rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.  

3. Then, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an examiner with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed diabetes. 

The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated test or studies should be provided.

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, including any additionally received treatment records and the Veteran's assertions, the examiner should provide the following opinions:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any currently present diabetes was directly incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's first period of active service dated from October 1973 to September 1976.

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any currently present diabetes was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to any toxic exposures during the Veteran's first period of active service dated from October 1973 to September 1976.

(c)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any currently present diabetes was directly incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's second period of active service dated from September 1976 to April 1980.

(d)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any currently present diabetes was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to any toxic exposures the Veteran's second period of active service dated from September 1976 to April 1980.

?

A rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.  

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Kaufer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.