Citation Nr: A25033972
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240430-436246
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for glaucoma is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1966 to June 1969.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2024 and April 2024 rating decisions.

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 in April 2024 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision regarding sleep apnea and the April 2024 rating decision regarding glaucoma. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In a June 2024 letter sent to the Veteran and his representative, the Board acknowledged that he had submitted additional documents with the VA Form 10182.  However, the letter explained that any additional evidence could not be submitted because he selected the direct review docket.  The Veteran and his representative were also advised that, if they wanted the Board to consider any additional evidence, he must change switch dockets and provided instructions on how to do so.  However, to date, they have not made such a request.

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

Glaucoma 

A March 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's glaucoma was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies) TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  She found that there is no medical evidence or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of glaucoma and TERA in Thailand.  She also opined that the disorder was less likely than incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner noted that the disorder was not diagnosed until 2018, which was nearly 51 years after his military service.  However, she did not explain the significance of that finding or discuss how glaucoma generally present or develops.

The March 2024 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's glaucoma was less likely than proximately due to or the result of his service-connected hypertension and diabetes mellitus.  She stated that glaucoma has a greater hereditary etiology and is an intraocular condition.  However, she did not address whether the Veteran's glaucoma may have been caused or worsened by his service-connected hypertension and diabetes mellitus. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

For these reasons, the Board finds that an additional VA medical opinion was needed.

Sleep Apnea

An October 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by Agent Orange exposure after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  She noted that he was diagnosed with the disorder in 2013 at which time there was a strong positional component with almost no obstructive sleep apnea in the non-supine position.   Therefore, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea was related to obstruction of the airway due to positional changes while asleep.  However, the examiner did not provide any further explanation regarding the positional component.  Nor did she discuss why sleep apnea would not be related to herbicide agent exposure based on that finding.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional VA medical opinion was needed. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. Ap. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that, once VA undertakes providing a veteran with an examination, it has a duty to ensure it is adequate).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  The AOJ should obtain a VA medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's glaucoma.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should also note that the Veteran served in Thailand during the Vietnam Era.  Thus, he is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents during service.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has glaucoma that is causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or herbicide agent exposure therein (regardless of the fact that such an association may not be presumed).

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran has glaucoma that is caused by or resulted from his service-connected hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus.  He or she should address whether the Veteran has glaucoma that would have been less severe but-for his service-connected hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus, to include any worsening of functionality.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

2.  The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should also note that the Veteran served in Thailand during the Vietnam Era.  Thus, he is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents during service.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has sleep apnea that causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or herbicide agent exposure therein (notwithstanding the fact that such an association may not be presumed).

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brandon C. Procell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.