Citation Nr: A25033324
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 250131-523289
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps from September 1960 to September 1964.

As an initial matter, in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held the Board should not adjudicate an appeal until the time for the appellant to switch Board dockets has ended. This period ends either one year from the date the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) mailed notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever date is later. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). Here, the Board may proceed with adjudication because on March 4, 2025, the Board received the Veteran's waiver of the remainder of the period to switch dockets.

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2020 rating decision. In August 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior December 2023 decision. 

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran did not elect a Board review option. However, in March 2025, the Veteran clarified the January 2025 Notice of Disagreement and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a TDIU is granted. 

The Veteran seeks a TDIU and contends his service-connected disabilities render him unemployable. See January 2025 Notice of Disagreement.

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id.

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether they are capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

The Veteran has the following disabilities that are service connected: chronic kidney disorder, sleep apnea, depressive disorder and anxiety disorder, diabetes mellitus, left lower extremity radiculopathy, right lower extremity radiculopathy, tinnitus, degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis, hearing loss, deviated nasal septum, and hypertension.

The Board acknowledges the favorable finding in the August 2024 rating decision that the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for entitlement to a TDIU. The Board is bound by these favorable findings and therefore, finds the Veteran to have met the schedular criteria for a TDIU. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that a TDIU is warranted.

The Veteran reported he last worked as an appraiser from January 1996 to December 2010. The Veteran reported his service-connected disabilities, including his lumbar spine disability and sleep apnea, prevent him from maintaining substantially gainful employment. The Veteran completed one year of college and has special training in real estate. See September 2023 VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability).

In an October 2023 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran reported that he is unable to walk without a walker or wheelchair and that he cannot get to his bed without using a chairlift. He reported his pain caused him to leave work early or not report for work. He stated over the counter medications provide little or no relief. The Veteran also reported that his legs cause him severe nerve pain that keeps him awake at night.

VA treatment records indicate the Veteran's service-connected lower extremity radiculopathy causes debilitating pain and limits mobility. VA treatment records also indicate the Veteran has decreased balance and difficulty walking, as well as difficulty with activities of daily living. See VA Treatment Records received September 2023.

The Veteran had an in-person VA examination for mental conditions in September 2023. The examiner opined the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported prominent and persistent depression and anxiety which the examiner stated causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, and other important areas of functioning. The examiner indicated the Veteran has symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The Veteran had an in-person VA examination for left and right lower extremity radiculopathy in September 2023. The Veteran reported symptoms of radiating pain from his back to lower extremities, weakness, and fatigue. The examiner noted the Veteran is unable to stand for longer than a few seconds, unable to take more than three steps with support, and uses a wheelchair or walker constantly. Regarding functional impairment, the examiner noted that occupational tasks which require prolonged standing or walking longer than three minutes would likely have a negative impact on the Veteran's ability to function in the workplace. See VA Examination received October 2023.

The Veteran had an in-person VA examination for his back conditions in October 2023. The Veteran reported symptoms of low back pain with radiation to both legs. The examiner noted the Veteran is unable to stand for longer than a few seconds and needs assistance with transition.

In an October 2023 VA examination for sleep apnea, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical records and opined the Veteran's sleep apnea impacts his ability to work. The examiner noted the Veteran's sleep apnea causes apneic episodes, fatigue, headache, snoring, insomnia, poor concentration, and difficulty completing tasks. 

In an October 2023 VA examination, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical records and opined the Veteran's current mental health symptoms do not impair the Veteran's functioning in an occupational setting. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported difficulty with concentration while at work but did not present with impaired judgment, difficulty understanding complex commands, or impaired abstract thinking. The examiner also stated the Veteran does not struggle to adapt to stressful occupational circumstances, present with impaired impulse control, or have active psychotic symptoms.

In a November 2023 VA examination, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical records and provided the following opinion: 

The Veteran has a diagnosis of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathies. The Veteran needs to use an assist device to walk. The Veteran would thus be best suited for a seated position that does not include significant walking and does not include stair climbing, lifting, bending, or physical activity. An administrative or clerical position would be a good fit. The Veteran should not be driving or operating machinery as he takes narcotic pain medication regularly.

The Board acknowledges the October 2023 and November 2023 VA opinions. However, entitlement to a TDIU is a legal determination, not a medical determination. Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350 (Fed. Cir. 2013). While medical examiners may provide evidence regarding functional and occupational impairment, the Board must decide whether a veteran may "secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" based on all evidence of record. See Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 232, 243 (2019).

The evidence of record shows that the Veteran has consistent and constant impairment of his occupational capabilities due to his service-connected disabilities. The Board finds his ability to engage in many work-related activities, such as an administrative or clerical position, is too speculative to constitute an ability to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment. An employer would need to make more than reasonable accommodations to accompany the Veteran's symptoms and needs that result from his service-connected disabilities.

The Board finds that the functional impairment and limitations associated with the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are of such nature and severity as to preclude substantially gainful employment. Moreover, the lay and medical evidence demonstrates the Veteran's service-connected conditions have precluded substantially gainful employment consistent with the Veteran's education and employment experience.

In light of the foregoing, the evidence weighs in favor of the Veteran's claim, and entitlement to a TDIU on a schedular basis is warranted. 

 

David Gratz

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Henderson, Catherine

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.