Citation Nr: A25033723
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-469711
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for the residuals of a left foot fracture is remanded.

Service connection for a missing bone of the right foot is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1985 to January 1986.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

Following the June 2024 rating decision, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) and selected the Direct Review docket.  Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of June 27, 2024-the date of the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

The Board recognizes that, pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting a docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date of notification of the rating decision on appeal or 60 days from receipt of the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later.  Although a year has not passed from notification of the June 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran stated in a November 2024 phone call that he wanted his appeals to continue without additional evidence.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran has waived the ability to switch dockets, and the appeal is properly before the Board for adjudication.  

Lastly, as addressed in a letter to be separately mailed to the Veteran, in November 2024, the Veteran moved to advance his case on the Board's docket due to serious illness.  See 38?C.F.R. § 20.800(c).  Upon review of his motion, and any evidence submitted in support, there is insufficient evidence to show that advancement of his appeal is warranted. Specifically, although the motion asserted that the appeal should be advanced on the docket due to serious illness, there was insufficient medical evidence to show that the Veteran has an illness so grave in nature that advancement is warranted.  As such, the motion to advance this appeal on the Board's docket is denied.

Service connection for bilateral feet disabilities is remanded.

The Board is bound by the favorable findings in the June 2024 rating decision that the Veteran has bilateral feet disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  The Veteran contends that his feet conditions are related to service.  In August 2023 statements, the Veteran reported that boot camp was hard on his feet and that he developed a corn on his right foot.  Although nexus opinions for the feet were obtained in February 2024, the Board finds the opinions inadequate, requiring remand.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  

The negative nexus opinions were based on the lack of complaints of foot pain in the service treatment records (STRs).  However, the absence of evidence in the STRs does not equate to unfavorable evidence. See Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc) (cautioning that negative evidence, meaning actual evidence weighing against a party, must not be equated with the absence of substantive evidence). Furthermore, the examiner did not adequately address the Veteran's lay report of symptoms in service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination must consider lay evidence of in-service incurrence or continuity of symptomatology since service).  The failure to obtain adequate VA medical opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  

The Board also notes that Veteran reported that he received foot and wound care from a private treating physician.  See December 2023 Correspondence.  Those records, however, are not in the claims file.  As part of the remand, the RO should attempt to obtain any outstanding private treatment records.   

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and request authorization to obtain any outstanding records pertinent to his claim, to include any private treatment records, following proper VA procedures under 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  

2. Following the completion of the development in item 1, obtain VA medical opinions addressing the nature and etiology of the bilateral foot disabilities.  The Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this remand, should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner. If the examiner determines that a physical examination is warranted, one should be scheduled.  Following review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, if any, the examiner should address:  

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (the evidence is in approximate balance or nearly equal) that the left foot disability had its onset in, was caused by or is otherwise related to service.  

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the right foot disability had its onset in, was caused by or is otherwise related to service.  

In rendering these opinions, the reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history.  Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  

The reviewing clinician is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.  The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's statements regarding the effects of boot camp on his feet.  

All findings and conclusions should be supported with a complete rationale based on consideration of the medical and lay evidence of records.  If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the reason that is so should be explained, indicating whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided or whether the inability to provide an opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge in general or of the examiner.  If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts required), the RO should develop the claim to the extent necessary to cure any such deficiency.  If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, the RO should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.  

 

 

S.C. KREMBS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Snyder, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.