Citation Nr: A25033885
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 220314-227515
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, is granted.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment is not shown by the evidence of record. 

2. For the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability precluded him from securing or following substantially gainful employment consistent with his education and work history.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. For the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent for the Veteran's psychiatric disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9422.

2. For the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the criteria for entitlement to TDIU are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served active duty from December 1960 to May 1964. The appellant is his surviving spouse and has been substituted to pursue his claims pending at the time of his death.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on an appeal from a November 2016 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In this decision, the AOJ granted service connection for persistent depressive disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder and assigned a 30 percent disability rating, effective March 28, 1997.

The Veteran perfected appeals for an increased rating and inclusion of PTSD. An October 2018 Board decision remanded entitlement to service connection for PTSD and entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for persistent depressive disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder since March 28, 1997. 

A June 2020 Board decision granted service connection for PTSD. A June 2020 rating decision continued the 30 percent evaluation of his psychiatric disability. A November 2020 rating decision granted an increased rating of 70 percent for PTSD, effective October 27, 2014. 

A November 2020 SSOC denied a rating in excess of 30 percent since March 28, 1997, for persistent depressive disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder (now rated as PTSD), denied a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD from October 27, 2014. 

In November 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the November 2020 SSOC, appealing for an increased rating for his psychiatric disability. 

In March 2021, the AOJ issued the HLR decision denying the appeals. In March 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, electing the Direct Review docket. 

In May 2022, the Board denied a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, granted a disability rating of 70 percent for PTSD from February 2, 2004, to October 27, 2014, and denied a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD from October 27, 2014. The Board also granted an earlier effective date of February 2, 2004, for the grant of TDIU entitlement, and remanded the issue of an effective date prior to February 2, 2004, for a TDIU for additional development.  

The Veteran appealed the Board's decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In a November 2022 Joint Motion for Partial Remand (Joint Motion) the parties requested that the Court vacate the portion of the Board decision that denied entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. In an Order issued that same month, the Court granted the Joint Motion. 

In January 2023, VA received notice that the Veteran died on December [REDACTED] 2022. As such, the Board dismissed his claim later in January 2023. 

In January 2024, the Board sent the appellant a letter informing her that the case had been re-docketed with her as the substitute appellant.

In a March 2024 decision, the Board granted a 50 percent disability rating for PTSD from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. 

The appellant appealed the Board's decision to the Court. In an October 2024 Joint Motion, the parties requested that the Court vacate the part of the March 2024, Board decision that denied entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. In an Order issued that same month, the Court granted the Joint Motion.

In the March 2024 decision, the Board determined that it did not have jurisdiction over the claim for an effective date prior to February 1, 2004, for entitlement to TDIU, since the appellant had filed a request for higher-level review of an August 2022 rating decision which had not yet been acted upon. 

The AOJ issued a higher-level review rating decision in May 2024, in which it determined that a duty to assist error had been identified with regard to the claim for an earlier effective date for TDIU entitlement, requiring additional development. In November 2024, the AOJ denied an earlier effective date for TDIU. 

The October 2024 Joint Motion to the Court stated that the Board will, "consistent the Appeals Modernization Act and its structure of the review lanes," readjudicate the appeal. This statement is wholly unnecessary to the errors explicitly identified in the March 2024 Board decision and has no particular meaning on remand. In a December 2024 statement, the appellant's representative provided arguments in support of a grant of TDIU based on the Veteran's impairment due to his service-connected PTSD for the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. The Joint Motion being utterly inscrutable, the Board takes this to mean the parties agreed the Board has jurisdiction over the TDIU issue even though it was not stated in the Joint Motion. Accordingly, the Board will now take jurisdiction over the claim. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Increased Rating - PTSD

The appellant contends that a 70 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD for the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004.

Rating Criteria

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

In determining the appropriate disability rating under the General Formula, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the Veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442. A claimant may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

JMR Findings

In the JMR, the parties agreed that, in its March 2024 decision, the Board erred when it provided an inadequate statement of reasons or bases addressing 1) the appellant's arguments, 2) favorable evidence, and 3) explaining its application of the rating criteria. Specifically, the JMR found that, in finding that the Veteran was not deficient in most areas, the Board failed to address the appellant's arguments that the Veteran was unable to establish or maintain any effective relationships. In addition, Board did not properly address the appellant's contentions that the Veteran had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances throughout the appeal period, which is included in the listed symptoms for a 70 percent rating. Next, the JMR found that the Board did not address relevant evidence in the record in finding that the Veteran did not experience obsessional rituals which interfered with routine activities. Finally, the JMR found that the Board did not support its implicit finding that impaired impulse control required violence and that unprovoked aggression alone did not amount to impaired impulse control warranting a 70 percent rating.

Background

A May 1999 VA psychological evaluation noted the Veteran's reports of difficulty sleeping, emotional pain, and feelings of humiliation related to an incident in service when he was falsely arrested for rape, incarcerated briefly, and released without apology. The clinician observed anxiety, excessive worry, and rumination, and that the Veteran had difficulty relaxing. The examiner noted that the Veteran occasionally became overly aggressive without provocation but responded appropriately most of the time. At times, the Veteran coped with life stress ineffectively and tended to rely on the use of fantasy and repression as mechanisms of primary defense. This coping mechanism was exacerbated by his excessive rumination. The Veteran tended to keep his emotional expression under tight control. The examiner found that the Veteran exhibited obsessive-compulsive personality traits. Mental status examination showed normal speech, thought process, concentration, judgment, and insight. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideations or hallucinations.

A July 1999 VA treatment visit reflected the Veteran's reports that he was bothered by thoughts of the military. He said these thoughts occur most when he was alone, and his mood becomes depressed. The clinician observed mild distress when discussing his experience in the military. Otherwise, the Veteran was doing well, and his mental status was unremarkable.

An August 1999 VA treatment visit reported he had recently returned from a "pleasurable vacation" with his wife. He indicated that he was experiencing ongoing sleep impairment, episodes of depression, forgetfulness, and recent anxiety about the results of a recent test for cancer. 

A September 1999 VA treatment visit reported his mood was stable. He expressed frustration with being falsely accused during service and the VA disability process.

An October 1999 VA treatment visit reported feeling somewhat anxious and nervous. He reported flashbacks about his experiences in service. Discussion involved irrational beliefs an unfounded judgment about himself. 

A January 2000 VA treatment visit reported low mood, ruminating thoughts about his service experiences, and problems sleeping. Mental status assessment revealed mild depression with congruent affect. There was no report of suicidal thoughts or intent. 

A March 2000 VA treatment visit reported a continued feeling of anxiety, which he believed caused him to break out in hives. He discussed frustration with the disability process and his feelings of being wronged.

An April 2000 VA treatment visit reported continuing mild depression. He reported feeling tarnished and wronged related to false accusations during service.

A May 2000 VA treatment visit reported feeling depressed for one to two years, having flashbacks of service, poor sleep, energy, and concentration. Mental status examination showed the Veteran was pleasant, alert, oriented, with normal speech and motor, and blunted affect. There were no hallucinations, delusions, or paranoia. His thoughts were coherent with good insight and judgment. There was no suicidal ideation, plans, or intentions. He was started on medication.

The Veteran was seen again in May 2000, and discussed his shame and guilt and self-degradation underlying his anger and depression.

A June 2000 VA treatment visit reported less rumination since starting medication, but he was experiencing some fatigue. 

A July 2000 VA treatment visit reported frequent rumination and anger about what happened during service and that he had poor sleep. The Veteran was doing about the same, with ups and downs. He reported enjoying attending his usual church activities, going shopping, reading, and watching TV. Mental status examination showed normal speech and motor, appropriate affect, mildly depressed mood. There were no hallucinations, delusions, or paranoia. Thoughts were coherent with fair insight and judgment. There was no active suicidal ideation, plans or intentions.

A July 2000 VA treatment visit reported mild depression and anxiety.

August 2000 VA medical records show that the Veteran reported his depression was under control and that he felt depressed only when reminded of a false accusation during service or when stressors occurred. Mental status examination showed speech was coherent, with normal rate, rhythm, and volume. The examiner noted that the Veteran appeared depressed and that his affect was restricted. Thought processes were logical and goal directed. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation or hallucinations. Insight and judgment were good. However, the examiner noted that the Veteran seemed to focus at length on the incident in service and that it was difficult to redirect him. 

An October 2000 VA treatment visit noted the Veteran was anxious in session, particularly when describing service. The clinician observed his affect was full range and appropriate. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation or psychosis.

A November 2000 VA treatment visit reported poor sleep, flashbacks to service, irritability, and lots of anxiety. He reported poor self-esteem, energy, and concentration. His wife thought he was not doing well. He denied suicidal ideation or thoughts of death. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, attitude, orientation, speech, and thought processes. His affect was subdued. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation, delusions, or obsessions. He liked to walk and visit with friends. 

A January 2001 VA treatment visit reported continued periods of depression with some good days. He reported anger at the military. The clinician observed mood was depressed and affect was restricted. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation or psychosis.

A February 2001 VA treatment visit reported feeling somewhat depressed, but not too bad. He reported some mood swings, but not to the point he wants to hurt anyone. He reported concern about his multiple health problems and the status of his disability claim. He reported poor energy and concentration. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, orientation, speech, thought process, insight, and judgment. The Veteran denied suicidal/homicidal ideation, delusions, obsessions, or hallucinations.

At a March 2001 VA treatment visit, the clinician noted the Veteran discussed stress related to his family, but often returned to the topic of his military experience and dwelled excessively. The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.

A June 2001 VA treatment visit reported nightmares and anger. He had recently relived his experience in the service and felt as if "they were coming to get him." The Veteran denied hallucinations and illusions except when he had flashbacks. The clinician noted his mood was depressed and affect was restricted. He continued to have thoughts about his experience in the military with an obsessional quality. The Veteran denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.

A July 2001 VA treatment visit reported anger and frustration with VA. He had difficulty shifting focus away from the topic of his anger and a perceived belief of "a cover-up" by the government.

An August 2001 VA treatment visit reported feeling depressed with no energy or motivation. He was upset with VA. The clinician noted his mood was depressed and affect was blunted. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. 

A September 2001 VA treatment visit reported anger about experiences in service.

A December 2001 VA treatment visit reported anger about experiences in service. He reported that he had sent a number of angry letters to the head of CID and the assistant to the president, and that he was concerned that his phone was "bugged." He was socially withdrawn and described his mood as "below fair." The examiner found that his affect was angry. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.

A March 2002 VA treatment visit reported depression. The clinician noted irrational, obsessive thinking about being arrested for an assault in service. Mental status examination showed depressed mood and congruent affect. The Veteran denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. 

An April 2002 VA treatment visit reported his self-esteem was up and down. Energy and concentration were not good. His wife reported that he was irritable. He reported flashbacks and wanting to be alone, and feeling that people were talking about him and being mistreated in stores. The clinician noted the Veteran had some paranoia. The clinician noted preoccupation with problems and anger at the system. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, orientation, speech, and thought process. The clinician noted his affect/mood was depressed. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. 

A June 2002 VA treatment visit reported anger and frustration about being falsely accused during service. He described his mood as depressed, and affect was congruent. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation or psychosis.

A July 2002 VA treatment visit reported isolation and not wanting to communicate with anyone. He reported decreased interest, self-esteem, concentration, and mood. He reported flashbacks of service and moderate anxiety. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, orientation, speech, thought process, insight, and judgment. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. Affect and mood was depressed.

A November 2002 VA treatment visit reported anxiety and depression. The Veteran reported frustration, betrayal, and anger associated with being falsely accused of rape of during service. Mental status examination noted his affect appeared depressed. His thoughts were coherent, logical, and goal directed, and there were no indications of psychosis or mania. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. 

A November 2002 VA treatment visit reported flashbacks, mood swings, feeling low, sleep impairment, and forgetfulness. The clinician noted some paranoia. The Veteran reported his self-esteem, energy, and concentration were not good. His wife worried about his forgetfulness. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, orientation, speech, thought process, insight, and judgement. Affect was anxious. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. 

An April 2003 VA treatment visit reported mood and sleep were good. He reported forgetfulness and that his energy and concentration were not good. He had flashbacks about service and was preoccupied with the incident in service. He reported interest was good with church work. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, attitude, orientation, speech, thought process, insight, and judgement. Affect was good. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation, delusions, or hallucinations. He reported mild anxiety. 

At an August 2003 VA treatment visit, the clinician reported that the Veteran was preoccupied with the false accusation in service. Sometimes he felt as though strangers were talking about him. Mental status examination showed he was cooperative, alert, and attentive. Affect was slightly constricted, and mood was reported as depressed. His thoughts were coherent, logical, and goal directed, and there were no indications of psychosis or mania.

An August 2003 VA treatment visit reported impaired sleep and flashbacks. The clinician noted preoccupation with the way he was treated in the service. Mental status examination showed normal appearance, attitude, orientation, speech, thought process, insight, and judgment. Affect was a little low. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation, delusions, or hallucinations. 

A December 2003 VA treatment visit reported continued frustration with treatment during service. He reported being involved in a lot of community service activities. Mental status examination showed an open and friendly attitude. His psychomotor activity was normal. His affect was appropriate, speech and thought processes were coherent, logical, and goal-directed, and he was oriented. He denied perceptual disturbances. Attention, concentration, and memory were good. Reliability, judgment, and insight were good. He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation. 

Starting in February 2004 VA treatment visit, the evidence shows increased symptom severity and frequency, with increased functional impairment, that continued during the appeal period. At a February 2, 2004, visit, the Veteran started to report suicidal ideation, without specific plan or intent. The Veteran requested an increase in medication. The clinician assessed good adherence to his medications with poor results. The clinician noted his symptoms were somewhat worse. At a February 24, 2004, VA treatment visit, the clinician noted increased symptoms of suspiciousness and hypervigilance. At an April 2004 VA treatment visit, the Veteran noted increased fighting with his family. His clinician noted good adherence to his medications with poor results. The clinician assessed his symptoms had worsened. Treatment records show the Veteran continued to have episodes of suicidal ideation, increased suspiciousness and hypervigilance, increased isolation except for church and doctor's appointments, and increased disagreements with his wife and family.

The appellant submitted a lay statement in June 2010, attesting to her observations and experience with the Veteran when he returned from service. She reported that he was verbally violent or overly aggressive, and twice was physically violent. He was impatient with their children and had a hard time keeping a job. 

In a February 2017 symptom questionnaire, the Veteran reported feeling depressed, angry, and having frequent panic attacks and thoughts of harming himself or others since service.  

Appellant's Arguments

In a December 2024 statement, the appellant's representative provided additional arguments in support of a higher rating for PTSD from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. The appellant contended that the evidence shows that the Veteran had the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, impaired impulse control, obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities, near-continuous panic affecting the ability to function, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and suicidal ideation, all of which demonstrate that his occupational and social impairment is consistent with the 70 percent rating criteria. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Analysis

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran had several symptoms addressed in the rating criteria for a 70 percent disability rating and that his overall occupational and social impairment more closely approximated the level of impairment for a 70 percent from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004.

The appellant's representative has contended that the Veteran experienced suicidal ideation during the period on appeal, as his "symptoms have been present since service." This contention relies on the Veteran's report in his February 2017 symptom questionnaire that he had thoughts of hurting himself or others.

However, the Board emphasizes that there are copious medical records showing ongoing psychiatric treatment throughout the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004 which consistently reflect that the Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation. The Board finds that the Veteran's contemporaneous denial of suicidal ideation in his treatment records for the period prior to February 2, 2004, is more probative than his recollection of a distant past in the February 2017 questionnaire particularly in light of the medical evidence reflecting an intervening increase in severity. See Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1997) (statements made to physicians for purposes of diagnosis and treatment are exceptionally trustworthy because the declarant has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive proper care).

As such, the Board finds that the evidence does not persuasively show that the Veteran had suicidal ideation during the period on appeal.

The evidence does show that the Veteran exhibited symptoms similar in severity and frequency to obsessional rituals which interfere with routine daily activities. In a May 1999 psychological evaluation, the provider noted that the Veteran exhibited "obsessive-compulsive personality characteristics." During his treatment sessions, he exhibited obsessional beliefs, reported that he dwelled excessively about his military experience, and had difficulty shifting focus away from the topic of his anger. He reported that he felt as if "they were coming to get him" and that he believed that there was a "a cover-up" by the government. The clinician noted that his thoughts about the military experience had an obsessional quality. See March 2001, June 2001 VA medical records. The Board finds that these reports persuasively reflect that the Veteran's obsession with the incident in service preoccupied his thoughts and would therefore interfere with his daily life. 

The appellant further contended that the evidence showed that the Veteran experienced near-continuous panic affecting his ability to function during the appeal period. In support of this argument, the appellant noted that the Veteran endorsed frequent panic attacks. See February 2017 symptom questionnaire. While the Veteran was diagnosed with an anxiety disorder at the May 1999 psychological evaluation, the evidence does not show anxiety or panic attacks similar in severity, frequency, or duration to near-continuous panic affecting his ability to function during the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. 

In some situations, silence to a condition may be taken as proof that the doctor did not observe the symptom. Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011). The absence of an entry in a record may be evidence against the existence of a fact if it would ordinarily be recorded. Fed. R. Evid. 803(7). Specific recording of all psychiatric symptoms, both reported by the Veteran and observed by the clinician, would be standard medical practice, particularly in a circumstance where the Veteran did report many other psychiatric symptoms. The fact that psychiatric treatment providers wrote down other symptoms that affected his ability to function is strong evidence that near-continuous panic interfering with the Veteran's ability to function was not observed or reported. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011) (stating that VA may use silence in the service treatment records as evidence contradictory to a veteran's assertions if the service treatment records appear to be complete and the injury, disease, or symptoms involved would ordinarily have been recorded had they occurred). As such, the Board finds that the evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran experienced symptoms similar to near-continuous panic effecting his ability to function during the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004.  

The appellant's representative also argues that the evidence shows that the Veteran experienced persistent delusions or hallucinations during the appeal period. In support of this argument, the appellant noted that the Veteran sometimes felt as though "strangers [were] talking about him." See August 2003 VA medical record. The Veteran reported that he did not have hallucinations or illusions, except when he had flashbacks. See June 2001 VA medical record. He was concerned that his phone might be "bugged." See December 2001 VA medical record. In addition, the Veteran reported that he felt as if "they were coming to get him" and that he believed that there was a "a cover-up" by the government. See March 2001, June 2001 VA medical records.

The Board notes that the regulation does not define the term "persistent." The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines "persistent" as existing for a long or longer than usual time or continuously." MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARY online, available at https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary. The Board also believes that to be the common understanding or ordinary meaning of that word. Prokarym v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 307, 310 (2015) (holding that in the absence of an express definition, words are given their ordinary meaning).

While the cited evidence does support that the Veteran had symptoms similar to delusions or hallucinations, the evidence does not reflect that these symptoms were "persistent" delusions or hallucinations. Significantly, outside of the instances noted above, medical records reflecting treatment throughout this appeal period show that the Veteran denied delusions and hallucinations and was oriented in all spheres. See May 1999, May 2000, July 2000, August 2000, November 2000, February 2001, April 2002, July 2002, November 2002, April 2003, August 2003, and December 2003 treatment records. 

As such, the Board finds that the Veteran did not have persistent delusions or hallucinations during the appeal period.

The Board does find that the evidence persuasively supports a finding that the Veteran had impaired impulse control. The Veteran became "overly aggressive without provocation." See May 1999 psychological evaluation. His wife reported that the Veteran was verbally violent at times. See June 2010 appellant statement. Finally, he had unprovoked anger or irritability. See February 2017 Symptom questionnaire. 

In addition, the evidence reflects that the Veteran had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. The May 1999 psychological evaluation reflects the examiner's opinion that the Veteran's "style of coping [with stress] is through the use of fantasy and repression exacerbated by excessive rumination." Moreover, the Veteran indicated that he had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. See February 2017 symptom questionnaire. 

The Board also finds that the Veteran exhibited the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. While the Veteran did maintain a relationship with his wife, the evidence shows that it was not an effective one. The evidence showed that the Veteran was "verbally violent," that they hardly communicated, and separated many times, that he isolated and did not want to communicate with anyone. See June 2010 appellant statement, April 2002 VA medical record, February 2017 symptom questionnaire. 

As such, the evidence reflects that the Veteran exhibited several of the symptoms listed in the rating criteria for a 70 percent disability rating during the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004. 

With regard to social and occupational impairment, the Board finds that the record persuasively shows that the impairment attributable to his service-connected PTSD more closely approximated the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating. As the above evidence shows that the Veteran had deficiencies in several areas, including family relations, thinking, and mood.

While the Board has found that the Veteran's PTSD met the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating for the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the evidence does not show that he met the criteria for a 100 percent rating during this time. 

Significantly, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran experienced gross impairment in thought processes or communication; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name. These symptoms are listed in the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating. While the Veteran did exhibit significant PTSD symptoms, mental status examinations reflected normal appearance, orientation, speech, thought process, insight, and judgment.

While the Board is granting a TDIU herein, there is no showing of total social impairment due to the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability as to warrant the assignment of a schedular 100 percent rating evaluation at any time during the period of this appeal. Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

For the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the Veteran was able to maintain some level of relationships during this period, including a "pleasurable vacation" with his wife. He indicated that he was involved in his church and enjoyed the activities there. The weight of evidence shows that the service-connected PTSD causes social impairment with deficiencies in relationships, not total impairment.

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 70 percent rating, but no higher, for the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004.

TDIU entitlement

A TDIU may be assigned when the claimant is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. The service-connected disabilities, employment history, educational and vocational attainment, and all other factors having a bearing on the issue will be addressed in both instances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a), (b).

If there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more; if there are two or more disabilities, at least one disability must be rated at 40 percent or more, with sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

As a result of the grant of a higher disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability to 70 percent for the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the Veteran meets the criteria for TDIU consideration under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a) for that period. 

In analyzing TDIU claims, the central inquiry is "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." See Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but it may not be given to his age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

The term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" as having two components: one economic and one noneconomic. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The non-economic component includes consideration of the following: The Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.

In this case, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively shows that the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability rendered him unemployable for the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004.

The Veteran has a high school education with some college. He last worked in 1988 as a railroad clerk. See March 2006 and September 2019 Applications for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. The Veteran stated for a majority of his time at the railroad, he was a payroll clerk. See October 2019 statement.

As the Veteran was not working during the period on appeal, the economic component under Ray has been met. 

As noted above, during the period from March 28, 1997, to February 1, 2004, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms included obsessional beliefs, excessively dwelling on his military experience, difficulty shifting focus away from the topic of his anger, impaired impulse control, unprovoked anger or irritability, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. These symptoms would prevent the Veteran from working in the position in which he has the most experience, as a payroll clerk at the railroad.

Considering the Veteran's education, prior employment history, and the medical evidence of record, the Board is satisfied that the current evidence of record indicates the Veteran is precluded from securing and maintaining substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected psychiatric disability.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board finds that overall, his current symptoms caused by his psychiatric disability prohibits him from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board concludes that entitlement to a schedular TDIU rating prior to February 1, 2004, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

J. B. FREEMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Harrigan Smith, Maureen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.