Citation Nr: A25033182
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241003-479398
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The appeal of the denial of entitlement to an initial increased disability rating for TB Infection, status-post INH treatment, claimed as skin rashes and failed to test, is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

On November 5, 2024, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Board received notification from the appellant, through their authorized representative, that a withdrawal of this appeal is requested.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the appellant, through their authorized representative) have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected to appeal the issue listed above and requested a direct review of the evidence considered by the RO. 

Law and Regulations

An appeal may be withdrawn at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative.  Id.  

The requirements for making a written withdrawal of an appeal are set out in 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  By regulation, a veteran's "appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal."  38 C.F.R. § 20.205(a).  To be effective, the "withdrawal must include the name of the veteran, the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the veteran (e.g., a veteran's survivor, a guardian, or a fiduciary appointed to receive VA benefits on an individual's behalf)."  38 C.F.R. § 20.205(b)(1).  The withdrawal must also include "the applicable Department of Veterans Affairs file number, and a statement that the appeal is withdrawn."  Id. And "[i]f the appeal involves multiple issues, the withdrawal must specify that the appeal is withdrawn in its entirety, or list the issue(s) withdrawn from the appeal." Id.

When deciding whether the withdrawal is valid, the Board should ordinarily confine itself to examining the written submission to determine whether it complies with the requirements laid out in the regulation.  See Hembree v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 1, 6 (2020).  If the withdrawal includes the name of the veteran, the file number, and unambiguously identifies the claim[s] to be withdrawn, then the written withdrawal will be considered valid, and the Board need not look to other evidence to find it so.  Id.

Analysis

The evidence of record includes an October 29, 2024 email from the Veteran to her representative indicating that she wished to withdraw her appeal and file a supplemental claim. 

In November 2024, the Veteran, through their representative, submitted a written request for withdrawal of their sole appeal before the Board.  The document included all the necessary elements of a withdrawal; thus, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal for entitlement to an initial increased rating for TB Infection, s/p INH treatment, claimed as skin rashes and failed to test, and the appeal is dismissed. 

Following the withdraw, the Veteran submitted a new VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim and a February 2025 rating decision continued the noncompensable (zero percent) disability rating assigned for this issue. However, between filing her new claim and most recent February 2025 rating decision, the Veteran also submitted two new Notices of Disagreement.  Both challenged the February 2024 rating decision. 

VA regulations permit claimants to renew appeals that they previously withdrew by filing a new notice of disagreement as long as the new notice of disagreement would have been timely (filed within one year of the applicable rating decision) had the withdrawn appeal never been withdrawn. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Thus, although the Board is dismissing the appeal with the docket number listed above, the Veteran has filed a new notice of disagreement to the February 2024 rating decision, and this appeal will be addressed by the Board in a future decision. 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Todd; Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.