Citation Nr: A25033202
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240610-446843
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

A disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection, is dismissed.

A disability rating higher than 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

A disability rating higher than 70 percent for chronic PTSD with alcohol use disorder is denied. 

A disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar strain is denied.

Service connection for anxiety as a separate condition from the service-connected PTSD is denied. 

REMANDED

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

An initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for left lower sciatic radiculopathy is remanded.

An initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for left lower femoral radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran did not file a timely notice of disagreement within one year of notification of the November 2008 rating decision that awarded him service connection for PTSD and assigned a 30 percent rating as of June 10, 2007; and he has not submitted good cause for his failure to file in a timely manner; thus, the Board does not have jurisdiction over the issue of entitlement to a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic PTSD, to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection.

2. The issue of entitlement to a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic PTSD, to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection, as noted on the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), is not an appealable adjudicative action. There is no rating decision within one year of the June 2024 Notice of Disagreement that specifically addresses this issue.

3. The Veteran's tinnitus has been assigned a 10 percent rating, which is the maximum schedular rating allowable for this disability.

4. For the entirety of the appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was not shown to have been manifested by symptoms productive of total occupational and social impairment.

5. For the entire appellate period, the Veteran's lumbar strain disability was manifested by forward flexion greater than 60 degrees and a combined range of motion greater than 120 degrees, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups, without muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or spinal contour, ankylosis, incapacitating episodes due to intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), or other neurologic abnormalities. 

6. The Veteran's anxiety is part of the symptomatology contemplated under the rating criteria for his current service-connected PTSD and, therefore, does not result in a distinct, separate disability. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the claim for a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic PTSD, to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection are met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.203.

2. The criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for tinnitus are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.87, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6260.

3. The criteria for a rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.130, DC 9411.

4. The criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar strain are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5237.

5. The criteria for service connection for anxiety as a separate condition from PTSD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from June 2003 to June 2007, and from May 2009 to June 2010. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the increased rating claims for tinnitus, PTSD, and lumbar strain, and the claim for service connection for anxiety, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability and erectile dysfunction, and the increased rating claims for left lower extremity sciatic and femoral radiculopathy, and entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU has been raised as part of the increased rating claims on appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Specifically, at an October 2023 VA examination for PTSD, the Veteran reported that he has lost construction and managerial jobs, and that he cannot now see himself holding his anxiety together so that he may work. He also reported at a November 2023 VA examination for his back condition that, at work, he is frequently put on the "roller" due to his back pain and reduced range of motion. Further, the examiner remarked that the Veteran is unable to sit for longer than 20 to 30 minutes before pain significantly increases. These reports raise the issue of entitlement to a TDIU. Id.

Chronic PTSD - higher rating prior to October 1, 2023, and earlier effective date for service connection

Regrettably, the Board finds the Veteran's claim for a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic PTSD, to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection must be dismissed as his June 2024 NOD for this issue was not timely and, thus, the Board does not have jurisdiction to decide the claim.

By way of background, an August 2007 rating decision denied the Veteran service connection for PTSD. In July 2008, the Veteran submitted a new claim for service connection for PTSD. In a November 2008 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD with an evaluation of 30 percent, effective June 10, 2007. In a letter dated November 28, 2008, VA notified the Veteran that if he did not agree with the November 2008 AOJ rating decision, he had one year from the date of the letter to submit a notice of disagreement (NOD). The Veteran did not file an NOD within one year of receiving the November 2008 notification letter and has not submitted evidence or argument for waiver of the one-year filing for good cause.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's June 2024 NOD for the August 2007 rating decision that initially denied service connection for PTSD, or the November 2008 rating decision that granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 30 percent rating as of June 10, 2007, was not timely filed, and that good cause has not been provided to warrant extending the filing deadline. VA is presumed to have properly mailed the August 2007 and November 2008 rating decisions, and notification letters, in the normal course of business to the Veteran and his representative. A timely-filed NOD on the proper standardized form within one year of the November 2008 rating decision was not received from either the Veteran or his representative. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202, 20.203, 20.204. 

The Board also notes that a claim for an earlier effective date is a downstream element of a grant, and generally cannot be claimed as a freestanding claim. See Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 296, 299 (2006) (holding that stand-alone claims for earlier effective dates have no legal merit). In this matter, the Veteran did not file a timely appeal to the November 2008 rating decision which granted him service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 30 percent rating as of June 10, 2007. Therefore, a later standalone claim would violate the rule of finality.

Accordingly, the Board finds the June 2024 NOD to be untimely for the issue of a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic PTSD, to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection--there is no remaining justiciable case or controversy with respect to the appeal for this issue. The Board therefore has no jurisdiction to decide the appeal of a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 1, 2023, for chronic PTSD, to include whether an effective date earlier than June 10, 2007, is warranted for the award of service connection, and the appeal for this issue must be dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.104, 20.203.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Staged ratings are appropriate when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); see also Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

In evaluating a disability, the current examination reports are considered in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the disorder's severity. The medical and industrial history are to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; however, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one disorder is not duplicative of the symptomatology of the other disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

Tinnitus 

The Veteran's service-connected tinnitus is currently assigned a 10 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260. He is presumed to be seeking a higher rating but has provided no supportive argument. Nevertheless, the Board notes that he has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available for tinnitus under 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260. A single rating for recurrent tinnitus is assigned whether tinnitus is present in one or both ears, or whether it is constant versus recurrent. Id. at Note 2; Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006). As tinnitus is specifically listed in the rating schedule, it may not be evaluated by analogy under a different diagnostic code. Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336-37 (2015). The claim for a schedular rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected tinnitus must be denied as lacking legal merit. Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

As to whether the Veteran is entitled to a higher rating on an extraschedular basis, the applicable diagnostic criteria adequately account for the severity of his symptoms. There is also no evidence of frequent occupational impairment or frequent hospitalization due to this disability. He has also provided no argument for an extraschedular rating. Referral for consideration of an extraschedular rating is therefore not warranted. Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008).

Chronic PTSD with alcohol use disorder 

The Veteran contends that his service-connected PTSD with alcohol use disorder is of such severity as to warrant a higher rating.

The Veteran filed a claim for a higher rating for his PTSD on October 1, 2023. His PTSD evaluation was increased to 70 percent, effective October 1, 2023, under DC 9411. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. He is appealing that 70 percent rating. The psychiatric symptoms listed in these criteria are not exclusive but are examples of typical symptoms for the listed percentage ratings. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). In particular, the criteria of DC 9411 provide for a 70 percent rating where the evidence shows occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence) spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating requires total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Considerations in rating a mental disorder include the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a). The rating must be based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on an examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id. Although the extent of social impairment is a consideration in determining the level of disability, the rating may not be assigned solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Here, the Veteran's VA treatment records generally note complaints for elevated PTSD symptoms. An October 2023 Mental Health Note shows the Veteran was oriented to time, place, person, and situation. He was alert, cooperative, and appropriately dressed. His mood was euthymic, and his affect was congruent with mood. His speech was of normal rate, volume, and tone. It was noted that no delusions were expressed or elicited, and no hallucinations were reported. His thought process was logical and linear, and he had good insight and judgment.

Thereafter, at the end of October 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his PTSD, where the examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; impairment of short- and long-term memory, for example, retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting; the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

It was noted that the Veteran was dressed in casual clothes that were appropriate for the weather. He was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation. His thought process was logical, and goal-directed. His speech pattern was slow and deliberate. He was able to make and maintain good eye contact. His recent and remote memory appeared to be intact. He was able to track the conversation during the interview and provide a coherent history. The Veteran did not experience any word finding difficulties or parapraxis. His mood was dysphoric, and his affect was flat. The examiner noted that, given the length of severe symptoms and the longevity of such, the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis had progressed to accurately reflect a chronic disability. The examiner remarked that the Veteran has lost construction and managerial jobs and cannot now see himself holding his anxiety together so that he may work.

The examiner explained that the Veteran is highly socially averse and avoids crowds; that he feels hypervigilant constantly, feels guarded, is easily alarmed and startled, and is highly irritable with verbal explosiveness. The examiner noted that the Veteran is suspicious of others and feels complete apathy; that the Veteran reports deadened emotions and difficulty having loving feelings. The Veteran was also noted to experience loss of drive and lack of motivation. He has intrusive and disruptive memories of the traumas in service, which emerge randomly and through cues. The Veteran reported that since his service, he is only able to dine in restaurants if he can sit with his back to a wall and maintain a clear view of the exits. He reported being in a depressed mood most days, and that he feels a loss of interest and pleasure in usual activities. He also reported having a loss of libido, and issues with his weight, diet, and fatigue. He further reported experiencing lethargy and psychomotor retardation. The Veteran feels self-reproach, with shame and guilt; self-directed anger; disappointment; and feelings of worthlessness. He also experiences loss of focus and concentration and has slowed thinking. He denied internal stimuli. 

The Veteran reported that he tried to end his life approximately four to five years ago but stressed that thinking of his wife and children prevent him from acting on any suicidal thought. He reported having twins. He denied suicidal and homicidal ideation or intent. He further reported that he just started his counseling and feels that he will continue. 

Given the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD does not approximate a 100 percent rating. The VA examination and treatment records reveal that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms, while severe, do not reflect symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment. There was no evidence of symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); or disorientation to time or place. Importantly, the VA examiner specifically noted that the Veteran's symptoms result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. Although the examiner noted that the Veteran experiences memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, there is no indication that this symptom is of the frequency, severity, or duration to result in total occupational and social impairment. 

The Board reiterates that the evidence does not reflect the Veteran's PTSD symptoms rising to such a level as to result in total occupational and social impairment. The Board acknowledges the examiner's remarks that the Veteran has lost construction and managerial jobs, and that the Veteran cannot now see himself holding his anxiety together so that he may work. While it is not clear as to whether the Veteran is currently working, this could be construed as total occupational impairment; however, there is no evidence of total social impairment. The Veteran reported some problems with socializing and being in crowds, etc. However, the evidence does not suggest he does not maintain close relationships, to include a good relationship with his wife or children. There is no evidence of total social impairment.  

Accordingly, the Board assigns probative value to the opinion of the VA examiner, who found that the Veteran's PTSD has not resulted in total occupational and social impairment. Hayes v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 67 (1996). The examiner evaluated the Veteran and reviewed the Veteran's complete medical history prior to making this conclusion.

The Board acknowledges the severity of the Veteran's condition; however, those symptoms are already contemplated by the current 70 percent rating. Although the Veteran's PTSD with alcohol use disorder has resulted in significant occupational and social impairment, the severity, frequency, and duration of his symptoms do not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment to warrant a 100 percent disability rating. Thus, a 100 percent evaluation is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, supra.

Lumbar strain 

The Veteran has been in receipt of a 10 percent rating for his lumbar strain disability as of June 10, 2007. He filed his claim for a higher rating in October 2023.

Here, the Veteran's back disability is rated under DC 5237, lumbosacral strain. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. Under the General Rating Formula for Disease and Injuries of the Spine (DCs 5235-5242), a 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted where forward thoracolumbar flexion is limited to 30 degrees or less, or there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, while a 100 percent evaluation contemplates unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula of Disease and Injuries of the Spine.

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id. at Note 1.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("It is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion and in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint."

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

Effective February 7, 2021, the DCs pertaining to the thoracolumbar spine were amended. For purposes of this decision, the applicable rating criteria for those DCs did not materially change. See 85 Fed. Reg. 76453 (Nov. 30, 2020) (as corrected at 85 Fed. Reg. 85523 (Dec. 29, 2020), as corrected at 86 Fed. Reg. 8142 (Feb. 4, 2021)).

Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching." Id. at Note 5. Additionally, fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis. Id. 

Under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes, intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least two weeks but less than four weeks during the past 12 months warrants the assignment of a 20 percent rating. Intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks but less than six weeks during the past 12 months is assigned a 40 percent rating. A 60 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12 months.

Note (1): For purposes of evaluations under DC 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.

Note (2): If intervertebral disc syndrome is present in more than one spinal segment provided that the effects in each spinal segment are clearly distinct, evaluate each segment on the basis of incapacitating episodes or under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, whichever method results in a higher evaluation for that segment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the record does not show, and the Veteran does not contend, that he ever had IVDS, to include incapacitating episodes. Thus, the IVDS Rating Formula would not allow for higher ratings for the Veteran's lumbar strain disability at any point during the appellate period.

The Veteran's treatment records generally reflect complaints of chronic back pain. However, there are no range of motion measurements that fall within the criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent.

At a November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported worsening pain, causing him to refrain from engaging in physically demanding activities. He also reported moderate to severe flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine, described as increased pain which occurs three to four times a week. He explained that his back flare-ups are precipitated by sitting longer than 20 to 30 minutes, any labor that involves movement of the back, vibration from machinery at work, carrying a backpack, and picking up his children. He further stated that the flare-ups are alleviated by rest and medications. The Veteran reported functional loss or functional impairment of the lumbar spine as problems with doing work around the house, sitting for longer than 20 to 30 minutes, driving for long periods, and engaging in outdoor activities. 

On examination, range of motion measurements revealed forward flexion to 90 degrees; extension, right lateral flexion, left lateral flexion, and right lateral rotation, each, to 20 degrees; and left lateral rotation to 30 degrees. Passive range of motion testing revealed the same measurements as active range of motion. It was noted that there was no evidence of pain. There was also no objective evidence of crepitus or of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue.

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing after three repetitions, with no additional loss of function or range of motion. He was not examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up. The examiner noted that procured evidence (statements from the Veteran) did suggest that pain, lack of endurance, and weakness (for flare-ups only) significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and during a flare-up. Estimated range of motion measurements noted forward flexion further limited to 85 degrees; extension, right lateral flexion, left lateral flexion, and right lateral rotation, each, to 15 degrees; and left lateral rotation to 25 degrees. The Veteran did not have localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine. He also did not have muscle atrophy or ankylosis. However, there was evidence of radicular pain and other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy. There were no other neurologic abnormalities or findings related to the thoracolumbar spine. IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine was not present. The examiner remarked that the likely cause for the positive straight raising test is radiculopathy, and possible disc herniation, and that the likely cause of radiculopathy is lumbar strain. The examiner also remarked that the lumbar strain disability impacted the Veteran's ability to work, as the Veteran is unable to sit for longer than 20 to 30 minutes before pain significantly increases. The examiner further remarked that, at work, the Veteran is frequently put on the "roller" due to his back pain and reduced range of motion, which is primarily sitting for the entire day, and the vibrations increase the pain.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's lumbar strain disability at any time during the appellate period. As previously stated, to warrant a 20 percent disability rating under the General Rating Formula, forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine must be limited to at least 60 degrees; the combined range of motion must be limited to at least 120 degrees; or muscle spasms or guarding must be severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

However, review of the evidence does not reveal symptomatology consistent with a 20 percent rating. Specifically, range of motion testing conducted at the VA examination revealed forward flexion, at worst, to 85 degrees, even with pain, and a combined range of motion that was greater than 120 degrees. Although the VA examination reflected additional functional loss due to pain, lack of endurance, and weakness during flare-ups, the additional functional loss did not reflect forward flexion to at least 60 degrees or combined range of motion to at least 120 degrees. Thus, range of motion measurements did not more nearly approximate those required for a rating higher than 10 percent under the General Rating Formula.

Additionally, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran had muscle spasms or guarding severe enough to result in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour at any point during the appellate period. The VA examination report did not show that the Veteran had guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine. Thus, a rating higher than 10 percent for the Veteran's lumbar strain disability is also not warranted based on these criteria.

The Board has also considered whether separate ratings for associated objective neurologic abnormalities are warranted at any time throughout the appeal period, pursuant to Note (1) of the General Rating Formula. The Board notes that the Veteran is currently separately rated for bilateral lower radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerve roots. However, the Veteran did not contend, and the evidence does not show, that there are other neurologic abnormalities associated with the Veteran's lumbar strain disability, to warrant additional separate ratings.

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's sincerely held belief that his back disability is more severe than that which is reflected by his assigned rating, and notes he is competent to describe his symptoms and their effects on his daily life. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). However, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). The Board finds instead that the medical evidence, in which a professional with medical expertise examined the Veteran, completed necessary testing, considered his reported symptoms, and described the manifestation of his disability in light of the rating criteria, is more persuasive than the Veteran's own reports regarding the severity of such condition.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Hart, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected lumbar strain disability; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appellate period.

In sum, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating higher than 10 percent for his lumbar strain disability at any point throughout the appellate period. Accordingly, the criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected lumbar strain are not met, and the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021). Finally, except for the issue of entitlement to a TDIU, which will be addressed herein, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 69-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Service Connection

The law provides that service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, establishing service connection requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra. 

Anxiety as a separate condition from PTSD 

The Veteran asserts he has an anxiety disorder that is related to his active service, for which he is seeking service connection. The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have an anxiety disorder that warrants service connection, that is separate from his service-connected PTSD. 

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for an acquired psychiatric disorder, chronic PTSD with alcohol use disorder. However, he is also separately seeking service connection for anxiety.

In this regard, VA treatment records, dated October 10, 2023, note that the Veteran reported significant anxiety interfering with work and family. It was also documented that the Veteran has a history of PTSD. PTSD is frequently noted with anxiety in the Veteran's treatment records. The Veteran was afforded a VA psychiatric examination on October 30, 2023, where he was diagnosed with chronic PTSD with alcohol use disorder, a condition for which he is service connected, as noted herein. No other mental disorder was noted. The examiner indicated that the Veteran does not have more than one mental disorder diagnosed. It was also noted that it is possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to the Veteran's diagnosis. Specifically, the Veteran was noted to experience anxiety as a symptom of his PTSD with alcohol use disorder diagnosis. The examiner remarked that for the Veteran's claimed condition of anxiety disorder, "there is no diagnosis because the symptoms are well accounted for in the diagnosis of major clinical focus, the PTSD."

The Board notes that the fact that the Veteran is already service connected for PTSD does not necessarily preclude the Veteran from receiving service connection for anxiety. The scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 4 (2009). Further, there is no prohibition against a veteran being service connected for more than one diagnosed psychiatric disorder if the different diagnoses have different symptoms that do not overlap. See Amberman v. Shinseki, 570 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (noting that different psychiatric diagnoses may have symptoms that are not overlapping). However, as discussed above, the Veteran's October 2023 PTSD examination noted anxiety and depression as part of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms.    

The regulations caution that the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is generally to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. The critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); see also Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998) (when it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected and non-service-connected disabilities, the benefit of the doubt doctrine described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 dictates that such signs and symptoms be attributed to the service-connected disability or disabilities).

After reviewing the record, the Board finds that, to the extent the Veteran has anxiety, the symptoms are already included in his PTSD rating. The VA examiner who assessed the Veteran for his PTSD, as noted above, concluded that there is no diagnosis of an anxiety disorder because the symptoms are well accounted for in the diagnosis of PTSD. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms overlap and that he does not have anxiety distinct and separate from his service-connected PTSD. 

A separate award for anxiety would not result in additional benefit to the Veteran because all compensable symptoms are encompassed by his PTSD rating. See Amberman, 570 F.3d at 1381. Thus, to award service connection for anxiety and rate that disability would violate the prohibition against pyramiding. The claim for service connection for anxiety is therefore denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for a left shoulder disability

The Veteran contends he has a left shoulder disability that is related to his active service. He explained that his shoulder strain was caused by wear and tear on the shoulder from carrying weight and by sleeping on rooftops and on the ground. See November 2023 Claim.

Here, there is a favorable finding in the February 2024 rating decision noting that the Veteran has a current left shoulder disability. It states that The Veteran's VA treatment records show that he has a diagnosis of shoulder region pain. The Board is bound by this favorable finding.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) also reveals evidence of joint pains. Notably, a Post-Deployment Health Assessment (PDHA), after 2005 deployments to Kuwait and Iraq, notes that the Veteran experienced swollen, stiff, or painful joints, and muscle aches. The Board also notes that the Veteran served as an infantryman in combat.

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for his left shoulder disability. Based on the circumstances of the Veteran's service, his current diagnosis of left shoulder pain, his PDHA noting swollen, stiff, or painful joints, and muscle aches, and his competent and credible reports, the Board finds that a remand is required for the Veteran to be afforded a VA medical examination with an opinion to determine the etiology of his left shoulder disability. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The Board notes that failure to obtain a VA examination when one is required is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The Board also notes that in Saunders v. Wilkie, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Court) found that the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability." 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

Service connection for erectile dysfunction 

In October 2023, the Veteran indicated that he would like to file claims for service connection for both anxiety and erectile dysfunction. He did not state whether his erectile dysfunction is directly related to his active service or is secondary to a service-connected condition. However, as a review of the record shows that erectile dysfunction is frequently noted as related to the Veteran's psychiatric condition, the Board finds that secondary service connection for erectile dysfunction is raised by the record.

In VA treatment records dated in July 2008, a Mental Health Note documents that the Veteran takes 40mg of Citalopram by mouth at bedtime for depression, anxiety, and anger. It was also noted that there were complaints of side effects of this medication, to include "sexual side effects at every dose." In March 2017 VA treatment records, the Veteran was also noted to have decreased libido and erectile problems.   

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination to determine the etiology of his erectile dysfunction. As the Veteran is service-connected for a psychiatric disorder, and as the claim for secondary service connection has been reasonably raised by the record, the failure to obtain a VA examination and opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, the Board finds that remand is necessary to provide the Veteran with a VA examination and opinion to address his claim for erectile dysfunction.

High rating for left lower sciatic radiculopathy 

Higher rating for left lower femoral radiculopathy 

Where VA provides a veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Here, the Veteran is seeking increased ratings for his left lower sciatic and femoral radiculopathy; however, the VA examination of record is not adequate to make a well-informed determination on the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy disability. Notably, a November 2023 VA examination for back conditions, which notes the Veteran's lower left extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerve roots, does not indicate whether this condition is "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," or "severe," pursuant to Diagnostic Codes 8520 and 8526, as relevant to the ratings for the sciatic nerve and femoral nerve, respectively. There is also no separate VA examination for the peripheral nerves. Failure to afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which requires remand of these claims.

TDIU 

The Board notes that a TDIU will be considered to have been raised by the record as "part and parcel" of the underlying increased rating claims, as in this case. See Rice, supra. As previously noted, an October 2023 VA examination report for PTSD notes that the Veteran has lost construction and managerial jobs, and that he cannot now see himself holding his anxiety together so that he may work. He also reported at a November 2023 VA examination for his back condition that he is frequently put on the "roller" at work due to his back pain and reduced range of motion, and the examiner remarked that the Veteran is unable to sit for longer than 20 to 30 minutes before pain significantly increases. The Board also finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the issues of entitlement to increased ratings for the Veteran's left lower radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerve roots, associated with his service-connected lumbar strain disability, and remanded herein. Thus, this matter is hereby remanded to the AOJ, to accord the Veteran an opportunity to undergo a VA examination to determine the effect of his service-connected disabilities on his employability. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send the Veteran an Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (VA Form 21-8940) and request that he complete and return the form.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete and submit a VA Form 21-4192, Request for Employment Information, to allow VA to attempt to request employment verification information from his employers.

3. Then, schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his left shoulder disability, to include pain. The examiner should review the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and indicate such on the examination report. Any testing deemed necessary should be conducted, and the results should be noted in the examination report. All relevant left arm and shoulder pathology shown on examination should be annotated in the examination report.

Following a review of the claims file, as well as an interview with, and examination of, the Veteran, the examiner is asked to:

a.	Identify and diagnose any left shoulder disability that presently exists or that has existed during the appellate period.

b.	If the examiner finds there to be no pathology to attribute the Veteran's left shoulder symptomatology, to include pain, the examiner should address the functional effects or limitations of the Veteran's left shoulder pain, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity.

c.	Then, as to each diagnosed disability, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity, indicate whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the Veteran's reports that he hurt his shoulder while carrying weight and while sleeping on rooftops and the ground; and a Post-Deployment Health Assessment, after 2005 deployments to Kuwait and Iraq, documenting that the Veteran experienced swollen, stiff, or painful joints, and muscle aches.  

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinions expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why. 

4. Also, schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his erectile dysfunction. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and note such review in the examination report. All necessary tests should be conducted, and the results reported.

Following review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following: 

a.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

b.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was caused OR aggravated by his service-connected chronic PTSD with alcohol use disorder, to include any medication the Veteran is taking for his psychiatric disorder.

In answering this question, the examiner should consider and address a July 2008 Mental Health Note documenting that the Veteran takes 40mg of Citalopram by mouth at bedtime for depression, anxiety, and anger, and that there were complaints of side effects of this medication, to include "sexual side effects at every dose."

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinions expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why.

5. Also, schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examiner to determine the current symptoms, level of severity, and functional impairment associated with his left lower radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerve roots. The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner, to include a copy of this Remand, which should be noted in the examination report.

Pursuant to the relevant Diagnostic Codes, the examiner should specifically note the current severity of the Veteran's lower left sciatic radiculopathy and lower left femoral radiculopathy. If this cannot be accomplished without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training) and explain why that is the case.

The examiner should consider and address the Veteran's reports regarding his symptoms and the impact of those symptoms on his ability to work.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating opinions.

Also, the examiner must elicit and set forth pertinent facts regarding the Veteran's medical, education, and employment history, and must also elicit from the Veteran the specific employment issues that arise from his service-connected disabilities. The examiner must provide a statement regarding the impact of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities on his ability to obtain and maintain gainful employment. A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

 

 

JOHN Z. JONES 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.