Citation Nr: A25033314
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241223-498716
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft is granted.

Service connection for diabetes mellitus is granted.

Service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is granted.

Service connection for diabetic nephropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is granted.

Service connection for right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is granted.

Service connection for left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is granted.

Service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is denied.

Service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft is related to service.

2. The Veteran's diabetes mellitus is related to service.

3. The Veteran's hypertension is proximately due to his service-connected diabetes mellitus.

4. The Veteran's diabetic nephropathy is proximately due to his service-connected diabetes mellitus.

5. The Veteran's right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy are proximately due to his service-connected diabetes mellitus.

6. The Veteran does not have current diagnoses of right and left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307.

2. The criteria for service connection for diabetes mellitus are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307.

3. The criteria for service connection for hypertension as secondary to the service-connected diabetes mellitus are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

4. The criteria for service connection for diabetic nephropathy as secondary to the service-connected diabetes mellitus are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

5. The criteria for service connection for right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

6. The criteria for service connection for right and left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1961 to June 1964 in the U.S. Navy.  His DD Form 214 reflects that he was discharged under honorable conditions.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 18, 2024, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that decision, the RO denied entitlement to service connection for arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease) to include coronary artery bypass graft, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, diabetic renal disease (diabetic nephropathy), right and left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, and right and left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

On December 23, 2024, VA received the Veteran's 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD).  The Veteran selected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 18, 2024, rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days of receipt of the December 23, 2024, 10182 NOD.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

Within 90 days of receipt of the December 23, 2024 10182 NOD, the Veteran (through his authorized representative) submitted additional evidence.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider regarding claim(s) that have been denied by this decision in whole or in part, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1)?a current disability; (2)?in-service incurrence or aggravation of a?disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden?v.?Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Pursuant to?38?C.F.R. §?3.303(b), where a chronic disease?is shown as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease are generally service connected; if a chronic disease is noted in service but chronicity in service is not adequately supported, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after?separation is required.  Entitlement to service connection?based on chronicity or continuity of symptomatology pursuant to?38?C.F.R. §?3.303(b) applies only to a disease enumerated on the list of chronic diseases in?38?U.S.C. §?1101(3) or?38?C.F.R. §?3.309(a).? Walker v. Shinseki?708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In addition, such chronic diseases are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested?to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1101(3), 1112(a)(1), 1113;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.307(a), 3.309(a).

Additionally, the law provides a presumption of service connection for certain diseases that are associated with exposure to herbicide agents and become manifest within a specified time period.  A veteran who, during active military, naval, or air service, served in the Republic of Vietnam or its offshore waters during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide agent (including Agent Orange) even if there is no record of evidence of such exposure during the requisite period of service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).

1. Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft.

In a December 2023 statement, the Veteran contended that he had boots-on-the-ground service in Vietnam.  Furthermore, in a July 2024 statement, he asserted that he served in Vietnam "between 1964 and 1964" on the USS Ranger aircraft carrier as part of the "VA-95" naval attack squadron.  Finally, in a March 2025 statement, he reported other toxic exposures including asbestos, hydraulic fluids, lubricants, solvents, and degreasers due to his service as a naval airman at Chase Field Naval Air Station in Texas and Lemoore Naval Air Station in California and on board the USS Ranger.  He argues that his coronary artery disease is related to his in-service chemical exposures.

The Veteran has not received a VA examination for coronary artery disease.  However, a December 2023 disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) completed by the Veteran's treating cardiologist indicates that he has a current diagnosis of coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft in October 2004.

Coronary artery disease is on the list of diseases presumed to be associated with herbicide exposure.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).

In this case, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's coronary artery disease is caused by the synergistic, combined effects of his TERAs during service.

In the March 2025 statement, the Veteran reported exposure to contaminated water from consumption and use of water at the Chase Field Naval Air Station and pursuant to his airman duties.  He reported use of degreasers to clean excess hydraulic fluid, grease, oils, and fuel that were on the aircraft and auxiliary equipment, like the NC-5 power unit.  He indicated that, when replenishing hydraulic fluids, excess fluid would get on his skin and clothes.  He reported that he would become covered in jet fuel when fueling jets and lubricants, which required him to crawl underneath aircraft to lubricate hatches and wheels.  He denied use of protective gear and stated that he would sometimes be covered in chemicals for 8 to 10 hours before he could shower.  He reported dumping of old chemicals, including hydraulic fluid, oil, and fuel in 55-gallon drums near his work area, which would later be dumped out near the station's aircraft apron, or parking area.  He reported becoming covered in black soot from exhaust from passing aircraft.  He identified similar exposures during his service at Lemoore Naval Air Station and on board the USS Ranger but noted that he was even closer to passing aircraft on the carrier.  Finally, he recalled seeing asbestos on pipes and fixtures at his Chase Field barracks on the USS Ranger.

An enlisted performance record indicates that the Veteran was assigned - as an airman - to the Chase Field Naval Air Station from March 1961 to June 1962 and to "ATKRON-95" from November 1963 to May 1964.  Other personnel records entries identify this duty station as ""AT-95."  Personnel records do not specifically indicate that the Veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam or in its territorial waters.  The Veteran's DD Form 214, which used a form prescribed on April 26, 1950, does not have categories for sea service, foreign service, or decorations and medals.  However, of record is an award of a Battle Efficiency Pendant citation indicating that the Veteran was attached to the USS Enterprise - also an aircraft carrier - during the period from July 1963 to June 1964.  At the time, the carrier was situated in the Atlantic fleet.

Given the above, while the above-referenced personnel records suggest that the Veteran may have misidentified the carrier to which he was assigned during service, his statements regarding his in-service duties are nonetheless consistent with the circumstances of his service.

In an October 2024 toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memorandum, the RO conceded exposures to asbestos, aqueous firefighting foam (AFFF), and perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), but not herbicides.

Of record is a March 2025 private opinion completed by Dr. K.G., a doctor of internal medicine.  Dr. K.G. first discussed the Veteran's in-service toxic exposures.  He noted that the Veteran would have been exposed to hazardous chemicals including trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), heavy metals, benzene and black carbon in jet fuels (from inhalation of jet engine exhaust and through skin contact), and PFAS during performance of maintenance of aircraft and aircraft components.  He referenced pertinent literature such as a 1960's-era training manual for Navy airmen, which described use of lubricants, solvents, aviation fuels, and hydraulic fluids in maintenance of aircraft, and a 2011 Institute of Medicine report describing Vietnam-era Navy exposures including solvents, jet fuel (containing benzene and black carbon), PCBs, TCE, lead, and mercury.  Dr. K.G. estimated benzene exposure of 90 grams per day - based on exposure to approximately one liter of jet fuel per day over a period of three years for five of seven days per week.  He further noted that asbestos exposure would have been far in excess of the .1 fibers per cubic centimeters currently considered safe, noting that the minimum safe level of asbestos in 1972 (one year prior to the ban on use of asbestos in building materials) was 12 fibers per cubic centimeters.  Finally, he referenced a 1980 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Superfund site report on the Chase Field Naval Air Station.  This report referenced soil and ground water contamination sites near aircraft hangers, aprons, and parking areas where the Veteran would likely have spent the majority of his time.  Contaminants (beyond safe levels) included hydrocarbon residue, heavy metals such as lead, arsenic, and cadmium, TCE, PCE, PCBs, and PFAS.  All literature cited by Dr. K.G. was submitted by the Veteran's representative as evidence.

Dr. K.G.'s discussion of the above exposures was based on review of the Veteran's March 2025 statement regarding his in-service duties, pertinent literature, and his own expertise.  Although the Veteran's personnel records indicate that he may have misidentified the aircraft carrier to which he was assigned, this error - to the extent that it is an error - does not impact Dr. K.G.'s analysis of the Veteran's exposure history.  Accordingly, significant probative weight is afforded to the opinion regarding the Veteran's in-service toxic exposures.  Accordingly, in addition to the exposures listed in the October 2024 TERA memorandum, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran was exposed to toxins such as TCE, PCE, PCBs, heavy metals, and jet fuel components.

Turning to whether the coronary artery disease is due to the synergistic effect of the Veteran's in service toxic exposures, Dr. K.G. noted several mechanisms by which these exposures may have caused the coronary artery disease.  For example, Dr. K.G. discussed literature indicating that certain components of jet fuel, such as benzene, PAHs, and volatile organic compounds, can cause endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress in the heart, causing arteriosclerosis and coronary artery disease.  He noted literature indicating an increased prevalence of myocardial infarction near sites contaminated by PCBs as possibly due to increased synthesis of cholesterol and triglycerides associated with exposure to PCBs, and that this increased synthesis could promote inflammation and endothelial dysfunction, leading to coronary artery disease.  He provided similar mechanism for the nexus between heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, and arsenic, and coronary artery disease.  He also noted that PFAS exposure could lead to coronary artery disease due to alteration of lipid and glucose metabolism.  Finally, while he acknowledged that the connection between asbestos and coronary artery disease was more tenuous, he indicated that there was literature showing that asbestos could cause inflammation of the endothelial cells of the aortic valve, leading to endothelial dysfunction and coronary artery disease.

Dr. K.G. noted that the Veteran had other risk factors for coronary artery disease such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, and a history of smoking.  However, he indicated that the Veteran became obese and was diagnosed with hypertension and diabetes only after diagnosis of coronary artery disease in 2004.  Regarding the Veteran's smoking history, he indicated that toxins from smoking could be "symbiotic" and "synergistic" with service-related toxin exposure, and therefore, it could not be said that the Veteran "would not have developed heart disease if he had not smoked...".  In conclusion, Dr. K.G. found that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's coronary artery disease was incurred in or caused by military-related chemical exposures.

Here, Dr. K.G. conducted a thorough review of medical literature and the claims file and provided a detailed analysis of the mechanisms behind how the Veteran's conceded chemical exposures could lead to development of coronary artery disease.  Factual premises made in the opinion regarding the Veteran's medical history were accurate.  Notably, a September 13, 2022, private treatment record suggests that the Veteran quit smoking approximately 35 years prior.  Moreover, the medical principles relied upon by Dr. K.G. are substantially consistent with the cited medical literature, which is also part of the evidence record.  Given the above, the March 2025 private opinion is afforded significant probative value.

Given the above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft is related to service, to include as due to the synergistic effects of the Veteran's TERAs.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for coronary artery disease is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 53 (1990).

2. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus.

The Veteran contends that his diabetes mellitus is related to his in-service chemical exposures.

The Veteran has undergone VA examinations for neurological and renal complications of diabetes mellitus, but not specifically for diabetes mellitus.  However, a December 2023 DBQ completed by the Veteran's endocrinologist confirms that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.

Diabetes mellitus is on the list of diseases presumed to be associated with herbicide exposure.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).

In this case, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's diabetes mellitus is caused by the synergistic, combined effects of his TERAs during service.

Furthermore, it is conceded that the Veteran in-service TERAs included exposures to asbestos, AFFF, PFAS, TCE, PCE, PCB, heavy metals, and jet fuel components.

In the March 2025 private opinion, Dr. K.G. also addressed nexus between the diabetes mellitus and in-service chemical exposures.  First, he addressed literature showing a positive associated between PCB and diabetes mellitus due to impairment of glucose and insulin tolerance.  Furthermore, he noted an association between diabetes mellitus and heavy metals, specifically based on correlations between blood lead levels and fasting glucose, and between arsenic and insulin resistance, oxidative stress, and inflammation.  He also indicated that PCBs and PFAS could negatively impact the endocrine system by disturbing glucose tolerance and causing insulin resistance.  Finally, he noted that other factors involved in development of diabetes mellitus included obesity and genetics, but that the Veteran was not obese at the time of his diabetes diagnosis in 2004 and did not have a family history of diabetes mellitus.  Dr. K.G. concluded that it was at least as likely as not that the diabetes mellitus was caused by the in-service chemical exposures due to the "combination of endocrine disrupting PCBs, PFAS, and solvents, with toxic impact of heavy metals..."

Here, as with the opinion for coronary artery disease, Dr. K.G. conducted a thorough review of medical literature and the claims file and provided a detailed analysis of the mechanisms behind how the Veteran's conceded chemical exposures could lead to development of diabetes mellitus.  Factual premises made in the opinion regarding the Veteran's medical history were accurate.  Moreover, the medical principles relied upon by Dr. K.G. are substantially consistent with the cited medical literature, which is also part of the evidence record.  Given the above, the March 2025 opinion is afforded significant probative value as to nexus.

Given the above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's diabetes mellitus is related to service, to include as due to the synergistic effects of the Veteran's TERAs.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for diabetes mellitus is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

3. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus.

4. Entitlement to service connection for diabetic nephropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus.

6. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus.

At the outset, March 2024 VA examinations confirmed diagnosis of hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy.  The December 2023 DBQ completed by the Veteran's endocrinologist noted similar diabetes complications - although, as noted below, the endocrinologist did not specify the extremities that were affected by diabetic peripheral neuropathy.

Here, the evidence persuasively shows that the hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy are proximately due to the now service-connected diabetes.

In this regard, the March 2024 examiner opined that the hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy were at least as likely as not proximately due to diabetes mellitus, citing pertinent literature and medical records in support.  An October 2024 examiner (providing VA TERA opinions) reached the same conclusions.  Finally, Dr. K.G. also noted that the hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy were secondary complications of diabetes mellitus, providing a detailed explanation regarding how these complications develop based on medical literature.

As the evidence persuasively suggests that the hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy are proximately due to the now service-connected diabetes, consideration of direct nexus between these secondary disabilities and the Veteran's in-service chemical exposures is not necessary.  Accordingly, service connection for hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, and right and left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy as secondary to the now-service-connected diabetes mellitus is warranted.

7. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus.

8. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus.

However, the evidence persuasively weighs against the finding that the Veteran has current diagnoses of right and left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, diabetic or due to other causes.

As noted above, the December 2023 DBQ did not specify which extremities were affected by neuropathy.  Furthermore, during the March 2024 VA neurological examination, the Veteran did not report symptoms associated with the upper extremities, and the examiner opined that the Veteran did not have diagnoses of peripheral neuropathy in the upper extremities.  Medical records submitted by the Veteran's representative are similarly devoid of evidence of reports of or treatment for upper extremity neurological symptoms.

In the March 2025 statement, the Veteran reported "tingling and numbness in my fingers," affecting his ability to "count coins, button my shirt, or tie my shoes."  However, while the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms associated with the upper extremities, including tingling and numbness, he is not competent to opine that he has a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy in the upper extremities.  Given that this evidence was received during the 90-day evidence submission period and not prior to the rating decision on appeal, there is no basis to remand based on a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

Furthermore, in the March 2025 private opinion, Dr. K.G. merely assumed that the Veteran had a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy in the upper extremities, providing no analysis of the evidence in this regard.  Unlike the March 2024 examiner, Dr. K.G. did not examine or interview the Veteran regarding his symptoms, and furthermore, the March 2024 examiner's findings are substantially consistent with the other medical evidence of record, which is negative for evidence of upper extremity neurological symptoms.  Therefore, the March 2024 examination report and opinions are afforded significant probative value and outweigh the March 2024 private opinion, which is afforded little probative value in this regard.

Given the above, the evidence persuasively weighs against the finding that the Veteran has current diagnoses of right and left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy that were incurred in or related to service or secondary to the now-service-connected diabetes mellitus.  Accordingly, service connection for right and left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is not warranted, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Small, Attorney Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.