Citation Nr: A25033351
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240712-456221
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for service-connected irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus is dismissed.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's IBS more closely approximates moderate severity, with frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.

2. The agency of original jurisdiction did not issue a decision adjudicating entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus within the one-year period prior to the receipt of the July 2024 VA Form 10182. Additionally, the medical evidence does not show that the Veteran's feline esophagus is logically related to his increased rating claim for IBS. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for IBS have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

2. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202, 20.203. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 2005 to November 2005 and from March 2009 to August 2009.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations (ratings) are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. § Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual disorders in civil occupations. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

In general, when an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). "Staged" ratings may be assigned when the evidence shows distinct periods during the evaluation period when manifestations of the disability warranted varied ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2009).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for service-connected IBS is granted. 

The Veteran seeks a higher (compensable) rating for his service-connected IBS. 

The Veteran's IBS has been rated as noncompensable (zero percent) under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7319, effective August 10, 2022. As the issue for a higher rating arose from a disagreement with the rating decision which granted service connection and assigned the initial rating, the relevant period on appeal is from the date of service connection. 

The Board notes that the criteria for rating disabilities of the digestive system were amended, effective May 19, 2024. However, as the rating period on appeal in this case ends with the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the amended criteria are not applicable to this case. 

Under the pre-amended DC 7319, a noncompensable rating is assigned for mild disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress. A 10 percent rating is assigned for moderate frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. A 30 percent rating is assigned for severe diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7319.

The terms "mild," "moderate" and "severe" are not defined in the VA rating schedule. Therefore, the Board finds it appropriate to utilize definitions provided by a general dictionary. See Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378, 1382-83 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (in the absence of an express definition, words are given their ordinary meaning). "Mild" is defined as "not violent, severe, or extreme; slight or gentle." Cambridge Dictionary, https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english. "Moderate" is defined as "being within a middle range in size, amount, or degree; neither great nor little." Id. "Severe" is defined as "causing great pain, difficulty, damage, etc.; very serious." Id.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2023. The Veteran reported that he developed an irritable colon during his active service and that his symptoms have been persistent. The VA examiner completed the intestinal conditions disability benefits questionnaires (DBQs) and indicated a diagnosis of IBS. 

The VA examiner noted that the Veteran has not had any surgical treatments for his intestinal condition. The VA examiner documented the Veteran's IBS symptoms as alternating diarrhea and constipation especially with lactose, and abdominal distension (bloating). Symptoms did not include anemia, nausea, or vomiting. The VA examiner did not indicate that there was constant abdominal distress, but did note that there were episodes or exacerbations and/or attacks of the intestinal condition consisting of bad pains and cramping in the stomach, occurring 7 or more times in the past 12 months. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had a benign neoplasm related to his IBS, however, it did not result in any residuals or complications or require any treatment aside from watchful waiting. The VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have weight loss attributable to his IBS, malnutrition, serious complications, other health effects attributable to his IBS, or any other pertinent physical findings, complications, signs or symptoms. Finally, The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's IBS would impact his ability to work in that he would have to make several trips to the bathroom after meals and pain in his stomach/bowels would interfere with concentration. See Intestinal Conditions DBQ, November 2023.      

Review of the available private and VA treatment records show that in January 2020, the Veteran reported that his antidepressant medication was causing an upset stomach (cramps, gas, and diarrhea). See CAPRI, January 2020. The medication was subsequently discontinued. The remaining treatment records reflect no other specific symptomatology.

Upon review of the evidence and without considering the ameliorative effects of any medication, the Board concludes that a 10 percent disability rating, but no higher, for IBS is warranted.

As noted above, under DC 7319, a noncompensable rating is warranted for mild IBS with disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress while moderate IBS, with frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress warrants a compensable 10 percent evaluation.

Notably, the evidence demonstrates that during the November 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had alternating diarrhea and constipation, especially with lactose, bloating, and 7 or more episodes of exacerbations in the past 12 months resulting in pain and cramping in his stomach and bowel. As a result, the Board finds that an initial 10 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's IBS as the Veteran had symptoms commensurate with moderate IBS, with frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.

After reviewing evidence of record as a whole, the Board finds that the assignment of a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the Veteran's IBS is not warranted at any time during the rating period on appeal. Notably, the November 2023 VA examination did not reflect alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress. Additionally, there was no evidence of anemia, nausea, vomiting, malnutrition, serious complications, or other general health effects attributable to the Veteran's IBS. Consequently, the Board finds that the  Veteran's symptoms are less than severe, i.e., less than causing great pain, difficulty, damage, and more analogous to frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. Thus, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the doubt doctrine and has applied it in assigning a 10 percent initial rating for the Veteran's IBS. However, the evidence is persuasively against assignment of a higher rating, and the doctrine is not applicable.

Lastly, the Board observes that the Veteran was granted a total rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) effective January 13, 2011. See Rating Decision - Codesheet, January 2024. As such, a TDIU is not applicable to this increased rating claim. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

2. Entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus is dismissed.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated that he was appealing a November 2012 rating decision's denial of service connection for feline esophagus. 

The Board has fully reviewed the electronic claims file, and in the one-year period prior to the receipt of July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Board has been unable to locate any modernized review system (AMA) rating decision that adjudicated the issue of entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus. As such, there is no AMA rating decision pertinent to this claim that could have been appealed to the Board, and thus, the July 2024 VA Form 10182 constitutes an invalid appeal for this matter. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202; 20.203(b) (a Notice of Disagreement is only valid if received within one year from the date that the agency mails the notice of decision).

The legal requirements for properly filing an appeal to the Board are "claims-processing" rules that are subject to the relevant considerations of waiver or forfeiture. See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333 (2021). However, in this case, the record reflects that the Veteran simply added the issue of service connection for feline esophagus to the July 2024 VA Form 10182 without ever filing an AMA supplemental claim for the matter following the issuance of the prior disallowance of the claim in November 2012, and thus, a claim of entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus has never been adjudicated by the AOJ in an AMA rating decision. Under these circumstances, there is no basis for finding that VA has waived or forfeited the basic requirements for filing a valid AMA Board appeal under 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, and 20.203.

Lastly, the Board considered whether the issue of entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus was raised in the context of the increased rating claim for the Veteran's service-connected IBS. In Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203 (2021), the Court held that the Board is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for an increased rating for a primary service-connected disability, as the secondary service connection claim is ancillary to the increased rating claim under 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2). In Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 103 (2022), the Court explained that the test for determining whether a service connection claim is within the scope of an increased rating claim is whether the secondary service connection issue is "logically related" to the primary service-connected disability on appeal in the increased rating context.

In this case, the most probative evidence of record is the November 2023 VA examination; however, the examination did not etiologically link the Veteran's IBS to an esophageal condition. There is no other medical evidence of record establishing that the Veteran's feline esophagus is "logically related" to his IBS. As such, the Board concludes that a claim of entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus was not reasonably raised in conjunction with the increased rating claim for the Veteran's IBS under Bailey and Wilson, supra.

For the foregoing reasons, the Veteran's appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for feline esophagus is outside of the Board's adjudicatory domain and must be dismissed.

(continued on next page)

The Board notes that the Veteran is free to file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) along with new and relevant evidence should he wish to further pursue his claim for service connection for an esophageal condition. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. S. Rubin, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.