Citation Nr: A25033925
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-433015
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2008 to September 2008.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The issue of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder is remanded.

The Board must remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. This claim must be remanded for correction of the following pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Veteran asserts that her major depressive disorder is due to her service.  She reports treatment for depression during basic training. See August 2020 VA Form 526EZ. She also asserts that based on her in-service treatment she was immediately discharged from the military based on her mental health, which further exacerbated her symptoms. See August 3, 2020 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. 

An August 28, 2008 service treatment record (STR) indicates that the Veteran complained of depression attributed to basic training conditions. Specifically, she reports that the "yelling and environment" at basic training have "caused her problems."

The Veteran provided a private medical opinion indicating a diagnosis of major depressive disorder and a positive nexus between the Veteran's military service and her current diagnosis of major depressive disorder. See June 2023 VA Examination. However, the clinician who issued the opinion did not provide a rationale to support her conclusion, so it is inadequate to grant the claim. The Veteran had previously submitted a disability benefits questionnaire completed by a different private clinician and suggesting an in-service onset of the Veteran's currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder. See August 2020 VA Examination. However, the clinician noted she had interviewed the Veteran and reviewed her DD Form 214, only. As a result, the medical findings included in that examination report are also inadequate to grant the claim.

Moreover, the evidentiary record appears incomplete. Specifically, the Veteran reported that she attended counseling in service, which led to her immediate discharge. Her sparse STRs support that she was going to be evaluated further after she reported feeling depressed. It does not appear, however, that the Veteran's complete personnel records have been obtained, as records addressing the circumstances of her discharge are not included in the claims file. Additionally, military psychiatric treatment records are often kept separately from other service treatment records, and there is no indication that a separate request for any such records was made. The AOJ erred in failing to conduct this development prior to adjudicating the claim.

Additionally, VA must provide an examination when there is competent evidence of a disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability) that may be associated with an in-service event, injury, or disease, but there is insufficient information to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). Here, based on the foregoing evidence, that low threshold was met, but the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination by the AOJ. A remand is also necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Finally, the record suggests there are relevant outstanding Social Security Administration (SSA) records. Specifically, the Veteran reported to the private clinician who examined her in 2020 that she was receiving Social Security disability for her mood symptoms. In 2023, the Veteran submitted SSA records supporting this assertion, but they are incomplete. The AOJ erred in failing to request the complete records from the SSA, and this pre-decisional duty to assist error must also be corrected on remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's complete service personnel records. 

Additionally, request the Veteran's in-service psychiatric records, including counseling records, from any appropriate source.

If the Veteran's complete personnel records or psychiatric records cannot be obtained, issue a memorandum outlining the steps taken to obtain these records, and notify the Veteran of what records could not be obtained.

2. Contact the SSA and request the records associated with all Social Security disability benefits claims the Veteran has filed, including copies of the decisions and the medical records relied upon to make those decisions.  Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

3. After the development requested in remand directives 1 and 2 has been completed to the extent possible, schedule the Veteran for an examination to address the nature and etiology of any currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder. After reviewing the claims file, performing a physical examination of the Veteran, and conducting any indicated tests, the examiner is asked to address the following:

(a) Please identify all current acquired psychiatric disabilities. In doing so, please specifically discuss the diagnoses of record. For any diagnoses of record that cannot be validated or confirmed, please explain why that is so.

(b) For each acquired psychiatric disability identified, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability was incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness? Please explain why or why not. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Please include a complete rationale for the opinions provided. If you cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, please expressly indicate this and state why it is so.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Barbato.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.