Citation Nr: A25033756
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240709-454973
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left arm disability, to include left arm sling palsy, tendinosis, and subacromial impingement, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active-duty service from August 1987 to February 1991 with additional Reserve service. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 (for entitlement to service connection for cervical strain) and June 2024 (for entitlement to service connection for left arm disability) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she has a neck disability caused by or incurred in service. Specifically, she contends that she fell down a flight of stairs in 1990 and carried heavy items during service. See July 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. 

Under the AMA, only pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including those related to examinations, are eligible for remand. When VA undertakes to obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). 

Every Veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disabilities noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111. To rebut the presumption of soundness for disabilities not noted on the entrance or enlistment examination, VA must show by clear and unmistakable evidence both that the disease or injury existed prior to service and that the disease or injury was not aggravated by service. VAOPGCPREC 3-2003 (July 16, 2003).

When the Veteran is presumed sound at entrance, the burden then falls on the Government to rebut the presumption of soundness by clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's disability was both preexisting and not aggravated by service. Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004). In Horn v. Shinseki, the Court explained that even when there is clear and unmistakable evidence of preexistence, the claimant need not produce any evidence of aggravation in order to prevail under the aggravation prong of the presumption of soundness. Rather, the burden is on VA to establish by clear and unmistakable by clear and unmistakable evidence that it did not or that any increase was due to the natural progress of the disease. 25 Vet. App. 231, 235 (2012). Clear and unmistakable evidence means that the evidence "cannot be misinterpreted and misunderstood, i.e., it is undebatable." Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 390, 396 (2009).

Here, for the reasons discussed below, the direct service connection opinion of record is inadequate, and the Board must remand for a new VA opinion. 

The Veteran's December 1986 entrance examination noted scoliosis of her upper dorsal spine.

A February 1989 military personnel record notes that the Veteran was pushed down by a civilian. 

A November 1990 service treatment record notes that the Veteran tripped and fell. 

The Veteran reported neck pain in December 2022 in private treatment records, which she stated was chronic from when she fell down steps in 1990. 

VA treatment records from 2023 and 2024 note chronic neck pain. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in March 2024 for her cervical strain. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a cervical strain dating back to 1990. The Veteran reported that she fell off a flight of steps in. The condition has worsened and she has symptoms of stiffness and locking. She treats with massage and occupational therapy, biofreeze, ibuprofen, curcumin, and glucosamine. 

VA asked the examiner to provide a direct service connection opinion. The examiner stated that the Veteran's enlistment examination "revealed an upper back condition which conceded that the upper back condition/neck began before service. Thus, the claimed neck condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." The examiner did not cite to any medical literature or explain why the Veteran's noted scoliosis of the upper dorsal spine was the same disability as her cervical strain. 

Based on the March 2024 opinion, VA obtained a May 2024 opinion on whether the Veteran's neck disability was aggravated by service. The examiner opined that the Veteran's neck disability "was not aggravated beyond its natural progression by military physical activities, such as running, marching, and carrying a rucksack during service. The Veteran's entrance exam, 23 Dec 86, lacks objective evidence of a neck condition or treatment prior to service." 

VA then asked the May 2024 examiner for clarification on whether the Veteran had a neck disability that existed prior to service. The May 2024 examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a neck disability that existed prior to service, explaining that the "upper dorsal spine is not a part of the cervical spine." In support of the opinion, the examiner cited the Cleveland Clinic website about the thoracic spine. 

The Board finds the May 2024's examiner more probative, as the May 2024 examiner provided an adequate rationale with citations to medical literature in support of his opinion that the Veteran did not have a pre-existing neck disability.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Therefore, the presumption of soundness applies, and the Veteran's claim is one of ordinary service connection. There is no adequate direct service connection opinion of record, as the March 2024 examiner did not opine on whether the Veteran's cervical strain was caused by service and VA did not obtain another direct service connection opinion following the May 2024 addendum opinion. A remand is warranted to afford the Veteran an adequate opinion. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left arm disability, to include left arm sling palsy, tendinosis, and subacromial impingement, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she has a left arm disability, including left arm sling palsy, tendinosis, and subacromial impingement, that was caused by or incurred in service. See November 2023 VA Form 20-0995. Specifically, she contends that she had left arm sling palsy in service, that she fell down a flight of stairs in 1990, and she lifted heavy objects during service.

Under the AMA, only pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including those related to examinations, are eligible for remand. When VA undertakes to obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). 

The Veteran's service treatment records note left arm sling palsy due to rifling in October and November of 1987. 

A November 1990 service treatment record notes that the Veteran tripped and fell. 

In a December 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran noted she had left should pain since she fell down steps in 1990. 

A private February 2023 left shoulder MRI showed tendinosis of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis, acromioclavicular arthrosis, and subacromial subdeltoid bursitis.

The Veteran was diagnosed with subacromial impingement of the left shoulder in March 2023.

The Veteran's private and VA treatment records show reports of left shoulder pain throughout 2023 and 2024. 

The Veteran underwent a May 2024 VA examination for her left arm disability. VA obtained a peripheral nerve examination, though the original exam request was for a shoulder and arm musculoskeletal examination. The examiner found a normal left arm and that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of left arm sling palsy. The examiner did not mention the Veteran's diagnoses of left shoulder tendinosis and subacromial impingement and did not address whether they were caused by service. Therefore, the pre-decisional opinion is inadequate, and remand is warranted to afford the Veteran an adequate opinion.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified VA examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical strain. An examination should be scheduled if the examiner finds it necessary to provide an opinion in this case. Forward the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this REMAND to the examiner. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety and the review should be noted in the report.

The examiner should answer the following:

(a) Whether the Veteran's cervical strain was caused by or incurred in-service.

In providing an opinion, the examiner must consider the November 1990 service treatment record showing the Veteran tripped and fell and the Veteran's lay statement that she has had neck pain since then. 

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should fully explain why that is so.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified VA examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left arm disability, to include left arm sling palsy, tendinosis, and subacromial impingement. Forward the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this REMAND to the examiner. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety and the review should be noted in the report.

The examiner should answer the following:

(a) Whether any of the Veteran's diagnosed left arm disabilities were caused by or incurred in-service.

In providing an opinion, the examiner must consider the November 1990 service treatment record showing the Veteran tripped and fell and the Veteran's lay statement that she has had shoulder pain since then. The examiner must also consider the February 2023 MRI showing the Veteran had tendinosis of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis, acromioclavicular arthrosis, and subacromial subdeltoid bursitis.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should fully explain why that is so. 

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Eisenberg

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.