Citation Nr: A25033544
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-429845
DATE:  April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity (LUE) peripheral neuropathy is moot and is dismissed. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity (RUE) peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In October 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for entitlement to service connection for LUE peripheral neuropathy (claimed as "MGUS covers neuropathy of both upper") which the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied in a March 2024 rating decision. 

2. In April 2024, the Veteran appealed the March 2024 rating decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by filing a timely VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement). 

3. In an April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for LUE diabetic peripheral neuropathy (minor), effective September 16, 2022, while the appeal of the March 2024 rating decision was pending.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

There being no justiciable case or controversy, the issue of entitlement to service connection for LUE peripheral neuropathy is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service in the United States Marine Corps from July 1966 to April 1969, including service in the Republic of Vietnam. These matters come before the Board on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the VA AOJ. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801 (2024). 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for RUE peripheral neuropathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection - Left Upper Extremity Peripheral Neuropathy

As noted above, the Veteran filed a claim of entitlement to service connection for LUE peripheral neuropathy (claimed as "MGUS covers neuropathy of both upper") that was received by VA in October 2023. That claim was denied in March 2024. While the appeal of the March 2024 rating decision was pending at the Board, the Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for LUE peripheral neuropathy in an April 2024 rating decision, effective September 16, 2022. As the effective date of service connection granted in the April 2024 rating decision preceded the date of claim in this appeal, that grant of benefits constitutes a complete grant of the benefit sought on appeal in this appeal stream with regard to the LUE peripheral neuropathy. As such, there is no longer a case or controversy with regard to the issue of entitlement to service connection for LUE peripheral neuropathy for the Board's consideration. As such, the appeal of the March 2024 denial of entitlement to service connection for LUE peripheral neuropathy is moot and is dismissed. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran contends that his RUE peripheral neuropathy (claimed as "MGUS covers neuropathy of both lower") is related to his active service. In November 2023, a VA examiner found that the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for MGUS (or monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance). Further, in March 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's RUE neuropathy was less likely than not caused by his service in the Republic of Vietnam, exposure to spray paint equipment, and military occupational specialty as a rifleman after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner stated, in part, that considering the Veteran's diagnosis for hereditary spastic paraplegia, possible radicular symptoms, and possible small fiber neuropathy given his diagnosis of pre-diabetes, it was less likely than not that his neuropathy was due to toxic exposure during service. The examiner concluded that the onset of the Veteran's neuropathic symptoms began thirty plus years after his separation from active service, and he had been given a likely diagnosis of hereditary spastic paraplegia which was a genetic condition unrelated to toxic exposure.

The Board finds, however, that VA examination reports for DM, diabetic sensory - motor peripheral neuropathy, and peripheral nerve conditions raised the issue of entitlement to service connection for RUE peripheral neuropathy as secondary to DM in June 2023. In this regard, a VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had diabetic neuropathy, reduced right muscle grip strength, and abnormal right upper extremity EMG results. Prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not obtain a VA medical opinion which is responsive to such findings. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Therefore, an addendum VA medical opinion should be obtained.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Return the claims file for an addendum medical opinion by an examiner with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed RUE peripheral neuropathy. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated studies should be performed. 

Based on the review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran meets the diagnostic criteria for RUE peripheral neuropathy. 

Then, if present, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present RUE peripheral neuropathy was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for service-connected diabetes mellitus. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed. Another VA examination of the Veteran should only be conducted if deemed necessary by the examiner providing the requested medical opinion. 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Ware, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.