Citation Nr: A25033783
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-462500
DATE:  April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service from January 1980 to May 1984. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 higher-level review (HLR) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Initially, the Veteran's claim was denied in an April 2023 rating decision. In October 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 and requested HLR of that decision. The February 2024 HLR rating decision on appeal was issued in response to that request. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the April 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801 (2024). 

Service Connection - Sleep Apnea 

The Veteran asserts that her sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease (back disability), to include an intermediate step of weight gain. The AOJ last obtained a VA medical opinion in August 2023. However, prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not obtain an opinion on the Veteran's entitlement to service connection on a secondary aggravation basis, to include an intermediate step of weight gain. Furthermore, the Veteran challenges the VA examiner's reference of a Himanshu. W. (2020) article supporting the examiner's finding that the Veteran's high arched palate was a risk factor for sleep apnea. Indeed, the Board finds the examiner's reliance on the article is, at a minimum, lacking without consideration of obesity. As the opinion is inadequate is insufficient to support the denial of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. Therefore, a remand is required for corrective action. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Return the claims file for a medical opinion by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Based on a review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran gained weight as a result of service-connected disabilities, and if so, whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed sleep apnea was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for the weight gain.

The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for her service-connected back disability and/or migraine headaches, irrespective of any weight gain.

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed. Another VA examination of the Veteran should only be conducted if deemed necessary by the examiner providing the requested medical opinions.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Ware, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.