Citation Nr: A25033572
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231003-381918
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is granted.

Readjudication of the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder is warranted; to this limited extent, the appeal of that issue is granted.

Readjudication of the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is warranted; to this limited extent, the appeal of that issue is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as unspecified anxiety disorder, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  There is no clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's asthma that existed prior to active service was not aggravated therein.

2.  The Veteran's asthma is at least as likely as not related to his active duty service.

3.  Following the agency of original jurisdiction's (AOJ's) issuance of a May 2023 rating decision in which it determined that the claim for service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder remained denied as the evidence submitted was not new and relevant, new evidence was received that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder.

4.  Following the AOJ's issuance of a May 2023 rating decision in which it determined that the claim for service connection for PTSD remained denied as the evidence submitted was not new and relevant, new evidence was received that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

5.  The Veteran's psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as unspecified anxiety disorder, is at least as likely as not related to his active duty service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria to establish entitlement to service connection for asthma have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2.  New and relevant evidence has been received as to the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

3.  New and relevant evidence has been received as to the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

4.  The criteria to establish entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as unspecified anxiety disorder, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Air Force from July 1990 to July 1994.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision and an August 2023 rating decision.  As this HLR decision and rating decision each constitute an initial decision, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

Regarding the service connection claim for asthma, the record shows that in August 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested review of a May 2022 rating decision based on new and relevant evidence.  In February 2023, the AOJ issued a rating decision in which it found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR.  In this form, the Veteran requested review of both the February 2023 and May 2022 rating decision that addressed his service connection claim for asthma.  In response to this submission, the AOJ issued the June 2023 HLR decision on appeal.  It appears that the AOJ construed the Veteran's VA Form 20-0996 as requesting review of the February 2023 rating decision as the AOJ indicated in the June 2023 HLR decision that it considered the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 rating decision, including records from the VA Medical Center Atlanta dated from October 30, 2011 to the February 2023 rating decision.

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, with respect to the service connection claim for asthma, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Regarding the service connection claim for a psychiatric disorder, the record shows that the AOJ previously issued a rating decision that a May 2023 rating decision that denied entitlement to service connection for PTSD and entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder as the evidence submitted was not new and relevant for either claim.  In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested review of the May 2023 rating decision based on new and relevant evidence.

In August 2023, the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal, which found in part that new and relevant evidence had not been received for both previously denied service connection claims for PTSD and unspecified anxiety disorder.  The Board acknowledges that under the reasons for decision in the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ initially stated that the new and relevant evidence had been received and the claims were now reconsidered.  However, the AOJ concluded its analysis for each issue by stating that evidence received from the Atlanta VA Medical Center did not constitute relevant evidence.  The decision findings also noted that the previous denials of service connection for PTSD and unspecified anxiety disorder were confirmed and continued before proceeding to state that the claims remained denied because the evidence submitted was not new and relevant.  In light of this internal inconsistency, the Board will consider whether new and relevant has been received to readjudicate the service connection claims for PTSD and unspecified anxiety disorder.  There is also no prejudice to the Veteran in light of the favorable dispositions herein for these issues.

In light of the Veteran's election of the Direct Review option in the October 2023 VA Form 10182, the Board must determine whether new and relevant evidence has been received based only on a consideration of the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The Board notes that the AOJ separately addressed the Veteran's service connection claims for PTSD and unspecified anxiety disorder in the August 2023 rating decision on appeal.  In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated that he sought to appeal the August 2023 rating decision's denial related to his service connection claim for a psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder.  However, in Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009), the Court held that what constitutes a claim cannot be limited by a lay veteran's assertion of his condition in the application, but must be construed based on the reasonable expectations of the non-expert claimant and the evidence developed in processing the claim.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that under the circumstances of this case, the appropriate action is to determine whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the previously denied service connection claims for PTSD and unspecified anxiety disorder, and to combine the service connection claims into a single issue that encompasses all current psychiatric disorders.

If the Veteran would like the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1.  Entitlement to service connection for asthma, to include as secondary to service-connected allergic rhinitis and/or sinusitis.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show:  (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 38 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).  The absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection.

Service connection may also be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Every veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service.  38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  Only conditions recorded on examination reports are considered "noted" at entry into service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  History provided by the veteran of the pre-service existence of conditions recorded at the time of the entrance examination does not, in itself, constitute a notation of a preexisting condition.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(b)(1); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466, 470 (1995); Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238, 246 (1995).

In cases where the presumption of soundness attaches, the burden shifts to the Secretary to show by clear and unmistakable evidence that: "(1) a disease or injury existed prior to service; and (2) the disease or injury was not aggravated by service."  Patrick v. Shinseki, 668 F.3d 1325 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (citing Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (emphasis added).  The second prong of the presumption of soundness is rebutted if there is clear and unmistakable evidence either that (1) there was no increase in disability during service, or (2) any increase in disability was due to the natural progression of the condition.  Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096; see also Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. at 397.

Clear and unmistakable evidence is a more formidable evidentiary burden than the preponderance of the evidence standard.  See Vanerson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 254, 258 (1999) (noting that "clear and convincing" burden of proof, while a higher standard than a preponderance of the evidence, is a lower burden to satisfy than clear and unmistakable evidence).  It is an "onerous" evidentiary standard, requiring that the no-aggravation result be "undebatable."  Cotant v. West, 17 Vet. App. 116, 131 (2003) (citing Laposky v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 331, 334 (1993) (citing Akins v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 228, 232 (1991)) and Vanerson, 12 Vet. App. at 258, 261; id. at 263 (Nebeker, C.J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Concerning clear and unmistakable evidence that the disease or injury was not aggravated by service, the second step necessary to rebut the presumption of soundness, a lack of aggravation may be shown by establishing that there was no increase in disability during service, or that any increase in disability was due to the natural progress of the preexisting condition.  Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096; 38 U.S.C. § 1153.

Under the version of 38 U.S.C. § 1117 effective prior to August 10, 2022 and the implementing regulation at 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, for veterans with service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, service connection may also be established under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Under that statute and regulation, service connection may be warranted for a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest during active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, or to a degree of 10 percent or more no later than December 31, 2026.  The term Southwest Asia theater of operations refers to Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e)(2).

On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted and amended 38 U.S.C. § 1117 such that it expanded the definition of Persian Gulf veteran to include veterans who served in Afghanistan, Israel, Egypt, Turkey, Syria, and Jordan along with those who served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  P.L. 117-168.  The PACT Act also favorably amended § 1117 to provide that the qualifying chronic disability can become manifest "to any degree at any time."  Section 3.317 has not yet been revised to implement these changes.

For purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, there are three types of qualifying chronic disabilities:  (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI); and (3) a diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117(d) warrants a presumption of service-connection.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, a MUCMI means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic multisymptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered medically unexplained.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii).

Three examples of a MUCMI as provided by section 1117(a)(2)(B) are chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).  There is also a list of signs or symptoms that may be a manifestation of an undiagnosed illness or a MUCMI that includes fatigue, gastrointestinal signs or symptoms, signs or symptoms involving the respiratory system, muscle pain, joint pain, and sleep disturbances.  38 U.S.C. § 1117(g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).

The term "objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability" includes both "signs," in a medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3).  In the case of claims based on undiagnosed illness and MUCMI under 38 U.S.C. § 1117, unlike those for direct service connection, there is no requirement that there be competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed illness and service.  Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8-9 (2004).

For purposes of Gulf War undiagnosed illness and MUCMI claims, disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic.  The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(5).

Effective August 5, 2021, VA issued an interim final rule amending its adjudication regulations and establishing presumptive service connection for three chronic respiratory health conditions, to include asthma, in association with presumed exposures to fine, particulate matter.  These presumptions apply to veterans with a qualifying period of service, which includes active military, naval, air, or space service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War; and in Afghanistan, Syria, Djibouti, or Uzbekistan on or after September 19, 2001, during the Persian Gulf War.  38 C.F.R. § 3.320.

A qualifying disease shall be service-connected even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service if it becomes manifest to any degree (including non-compensable) at any time following separation from military service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.320; Presumptive Service Connection for Respiratory Conditions Due to Exposure to Particulate Matter, 88 Fed. Reg. 60336 (Sept. 1, 2023).

Section 406(b) of the PACT Act, in pertinent part, provides a presumption of service connection for covered veterans diagnosed with certain diseases associated with burn pits and other toxins (BPOT).  Veterans with in-service toxic exposure, to include BPOT, are defined in 38 U.S.C. § 1119 as "covered veterans" and are presumed to have been exposed to burn pit smoke and other environmental hazards based on the location of their service.  A veteran is considered "covered" if they had active service on or after August 2, 1990 in Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, or the United Arab Emirates; or active service on or after September 11, 2001 in Afghanistan, Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Yemen, Uzbekistan, or any other country determined relevant by the Secretary.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1119(c), 1120(c).  The list of diseases associated with exposure to BPOT includes asthma that is diagnosed after service of the covered veteran.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1120(b).

Under the PACT Act, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  For such claims, absent a specific exception, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when a veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, has evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  Under 38 U.S.C. § 1710(e)(4), a TERA is defined as any activity that required a corresponding entry in an exposure tracking record system, to include any system used by the Secretary of Defense to track how veterans or members of the Armed Forces have been exposed to various occupational or environmental hazards.

Service connection may also be granted where a disability is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  The Board notes that the Federal Circuit recently addressed the issue of causation in Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, (Fed. Cir. 2023).  In Spicer, a veteran sought service connection for bilateral knee arthritis as secondary to his service-connected leukemia.  He asserted that the medication he took for leukemia precluded him from undergoing knee surgery to improve his condition.  Thus, he argued that his leukemia was the cause of his current functional impairment of the knee.  

The narrow question before the Court was whether the "but-for" causation requirement in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 was limited to a pure etiological link or whether it encompassed situations where a service-connected disease or injury impedes treatment of a separate disability.  The Court adopted the latter viewpoint.  The Court explained that the phrase "resulting from" in the statute refers to "but-for" causation and is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  The Court then held that VA's application of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b), which addresses the aggravation prong of secondary service connection, was unlawful to the extent that it rejected the veteran's theory of service connection.  It is clear from the Court's holding that causation and aggravation can be established without demonstrating a pathological link between the claimed and service-connected disabilities. 

The record has raised the theory that the Veteran has asthma that is directly related to his exposure to Gulf War environmental hazards during his active duty service.  See, e.g., December 2016 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.  To the extent that the record has also raised alternative theories of entitlement, the Board will first determine whether direct service connection can be established.

In the June 2023 HLR decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability based on an October 2021 VA examination that showed a diagnosis for asthma.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) include a March 1990 Applicant Medical Prescreening Form in which the Veteran reported a history of being hospitalized as well as asthma or respiratory problems.  Under the explanation of "yes" answers section, the record stated that the Veteran was hospitalized for asthma at age 6 and had not experienced any problems since that time.

The July 9, 1990 enlistment examination noted that the Veteran's lungs and chest were normal on clinical evaluation, and no asthma was noted under the summary of defects and diagnoses section of the report.  A July 23, 1990 stamp in the enlistment examination report indicated that the Veteran's physical inspection was conducted on that date, and he was found to be qualified.  In the July 9, 1990 Report of Medical History, the Veteran reported asthma.  The physician's summary and elaboration of all pertinent data explained indicated that the Veteran had a history of asthma with the last attack at age 7 to 8.  The provider appeared to note that this issue was not considered disabling.

A subsequent July 25, 1990 entry from medical services processing at Lackland Air Force Base, Texas noted that the Veteran's entrance physical was screened, and no significant abnormalities were found except for those listed below.  The listed complaints included adolescence asthma.

An August 27, 1990 STR later stated that the Veteran complained of symptoms for 1 week that included a runny nose and headache.  The assessment was upper respiratory infection.  On September 16, 1990, an STR noted that the Veteran's chief complaint was a nagging cough.  He complained of a cough and upper respiratory symptoms, and the assessment was viral upper respiratory infection.  On October 9, 1990, an STR noted that the Veteran complained of a one-month history of a nagging cough.  The Veteran was seen 2 to 3 weeks ago, and he received cough medication.  However, the Veteran's cough had continued.  The assessment was bronchitis.

A subsequent December 1990 Dental Patient Medical History included the Veteran's report of a history of asthma and shortness of breath.  The dentist comments explained that the reported shortness of breath related to asthma.  The provider indicated that the Veteran took Primatene pills when the asthma flared up.  A March 1991 Dental Patient Medical History shows that in relation to the Veteran's report of a history of asthma, the provider noted that the Veteran had asthma as a child and was ok now.  The record also noted the Veteran's report of possible bronchitis 1.5 months ago.

On February 14, 1992, a physical examination and standards section noted that the Veteran's medical record was reviewed for overseas clearance.  The provider noted that the Veteran had a history of asthma with childhood.  The Veteran's last episode was at age 7 to 8, and he had no current problems.  The Veteran later reported his history of asthma in a February 26, 1992 Dental Patient Medical History, and the provider noted that the Veteran did not take asthma medication.  A March 30, 1992 STR subsequently indicated that the Veteran sought treatment for sinus problems.  The record stated that the Veteran complained of nasal congestion, and he at times awakened with shortness of breath.  The record also noted that the Veteran had asthma as a child.  The assessment appeared to include possible allergic rhinitis.

In the April 20, 1994 Report of Medical History that was completed for separation, the Veteran reported asthma and hay fever.  The physician's summary noted that the Veteran's asthma occurred in his childhood, and it was treated symptomatically with a full recovery and no recurrence since.  The provider added that there were no complications, no sequalae (NCNS).  Regarding the report of hay fever, the provider noted that the Veteran had allergic rhinitis in his childhood during the spring with moderate to severe symptoms while living in Miami, Florida.  The Veteran was treated with antihistamines, and the provider indicated that the complaint was recurrent with no complications.

On April 14, 1994, a military personnel record related to the medical examination for voluntary separation or retirement indicated that the Veteran desired to have a medical examination upon his scheduled separation.  A subsequent April 20, 1994 entry in the STRs noted that the Veteran was seen for a separation physical examination.  The record noted that the Veteran's lungs were clear to auscultation and stated under the assessment that the examination was normal.  In a subsequent May 1994 Dental Patient Medical History, the Veteran reported his history of asthma and hay fever.  The provider noted that the Veteran did not take medication for asthma, and his hay fever was seasonal.

The Board first notes that the record has raised the question of whether the Veteran's current asthma preexisted service.  In the June 2023 HLR decision, the AOJ made the seemingly favorable finding that the claimed issue existed prior to military service based on the conclusion that the "enlistment exam dated July 9, 1990" said that the Veteran had asthma, with the last attack at age 7 to 8.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported having a history of childhood asthma in the July 9, 1990 Report of Medical History, and the physician's summary from that record stated that the last asthma attack was at age 7 to 8.  However, no asthma was documented in the July 9, 1990 enlistment examination or indicated in relation to the subsequent July 23, 1990 physical inspection.  To the extent that the July 25, 1990 screening of the Veteran's entrance physical noted adolescence asthma, neither this entry nor the July 9, 1990 enlistment examination indicated that there was any current asthma at the time of the enlistment examination.  The Veteran's relevant body systems were found to be normal on clinical evaluation at that time, and there were no findings referrable to any current asthma under the summary of defects and diagnoses section of the examination report.  Thus, and resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, it cannot be said that asthma was noted at the time of the examination or subsequent medical review.  As such, he is legally presumed to have been sound at entrance to service as to asthma.  

As the presumption of soundness applies, the relevant question is whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had asthma that both preexisted service and was not aggravated by service.  In this case, the March 1990 Medical Prescreening Form and the July 1990 Report of Medical History indicate that the Veteran had a history of asthma prior to service with hospitalization for the complaint at age 6 and the last attack occurring at age 7 to 8.  A May 2017 statement from the Veteran's mother also confirmed that the Veteran had childhood asthma.  As such, the Board finds that there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's asthma pre-existed service.

However, it is the burden of the government to show that the condition was not also aggravated by clear and unmistakable evidence.  That is, "VA may not rest on the notion that the record contains insufficient evidence of aggravation. Instead, in order to fully rebut the presumption of soundness, VA must rely on affirmative evidence to prove that there was no aggravation."  Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 236 (2012).  In this regard, there is no clear and unmistakable evidence of a lack of aggravation.

Regarding the Veteran's history of relevant symptoms, both the May 1990 Medical Prescreening Form and the July 1990 Report of Medical History indicated that the Veteran had not experienced any hospitalizations, attacks, or problems related to asthma after age 8.  The Veteran's mother additionally reported in the May 2017 statement that he only had a "slight case of childhood asthma," and the Veteran did not use any prescribed medications prior to service.  The Veteran's mother only recalled the Veteran taking over-the-counter medication for hay fever during the season when the pollen was high.  This report is largely consistent with the information in an August 2017 VA examination related to asthma in which the examiner noted that the Veteran had asthma as a child and used over-the-counter Primatene mist before he grew out of it.  The December 1990 Dental Patient Medical History similarly indicated that the Veteran had a history of taking Primatene pills for flare ups of asthma.  In a February 2022 VA Form 20-0996, the Veteran reported that he had no issues with asthma during high school with one or two exceptions.  A February 2022 HLR Informal Conference Worksheet also stated that despite the Veteran's history of childhood asthma, he had no issues with running track and playing basketball on school teams.

The Veteran has indicated that the severity of his asthma worsened following his exposure to environmental hazards such as burn pits and sandstorms during his Gulf War service in Saudi Arabia.  See, e.g., August 2017 VA examination, August 2022 VA examination.  Although the Board acknowledges that an August 2022 VA examination indicated that the relevant deployment with environmental hazards occurred in 1991, the great majority of the evidence supports that the relevant exposure and worsening of asthma symptoms occurred in conjunction with a subsequent period of deployment to Saudi Arabia.  

In this regard, Department of Defense (DoD) military service information received in October 2017 noted that the Veteran's deployment periods included deployment to the Gulf War I theater from November 1993 to August 1994.  An October 2019 letter from the Department of the Air Force, Headquarters Air Force Personnel Center, also stated that based on a complete review of the Veteran's official military record as well as documentation provided by the Veteran, they were able to verify and confirm that the Veteran had boots on the ground foreign service time in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia from November 1993 to January 1994, for approximately 3 months.  The letter noted that this amount of foreign service was also reflected by the Veteran's DD 214.  The Veteran was advised that as specific locations were not annotated on a member's DD 214, the Veteran could use the letter as proof of "boots on the ground" for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.  

In the June 2023 HLR decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia based on the October 2019 letter from the Department of the Air Force stating that he serviced in Saudi Arabia from November 1, 1993 to January 31, 1994.  The AOJ also made the favorable finding that the Veteran had conceded participation in a TERA, citing the report from a December 3, 2022 VA memorandum that confirmed toxic exposure.  This memorandum stated that the DoD had provided VA with authoritative data the verified that the Veteran had military service that constituted presumptive toxic exposure per 38 U.S.C. § 1119.  As relevant to the current analysis of direct service connection, the Board also finds that the Veteran's reports that he was exposed to environmental hazards during his active duty service in Southwest Asia are competent, credible, and consistent with the circumstances of his service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (each disabling condition for which a veteran seeks service connection must be considered based on factors including the basis of places, types, and circumstances of service as shown by service records).

In the February 2022 VA Form 20-0996, the Veteran reported having no issues with his asthma during his first three years of active duty service with the exception of one or two incidents, and the Veteran indicated that he was able to use over-the-counter medications for those events.  The Board notes that this information appears to be consistent with the details in the December 1990 Dental Patient Medical History noted above.  An August 2022 VA examination indicated that during the relevant period of deployment with exposure to Gulf War environmental hazards, the Veteran had symptoms of shortness of breath, cough, and wheezing following the exposure event.  The August 2017 VA examiner also reported that the Veteran's symptoms increased to become more severe following his service in Saudi Arabia in 1993.  The examiner also noted that he had bronchitis approximately 3 to 4 times, indicating that this complaint was a yearly event.  Thus, although the February 2022 HLR Informal Conference Worksheet indicated that the "the trouble started" regarding the Veteran's asthma during the spring of 1995 after service, the other relevant evidence instead supports that the Veteran's observable symptoms worsened during service following his established exposure to environmental hazards in Saudi Arabia, and the increased severity led to the need for further post-service treatment in 1995.  The February 2022 HLR Informal Conference Worksheet and an October 2021 VA examination related to asthma indicated that the Veteran had an asthma attack in the spring of 1995, and he went to VA for treatment where he received a steroid pack.  The Veteran was now on year-round medication, and this need for medication occurred after being in Saudi Arabia.  Consistent with this report, the August 2022 VA examination noted that the Veteran's current symptoms included cough and shortness of breath, and his current treatment plan consisted of albuterol and Advair inhaler as well as antihistamines.  The Veteran also required daily use of inhalational anti-inflammatory medication for his asthma.

The foregoing evidence supports finding that there was in-service aggravation of the Veteran's pre-existing asthma in conjunction with his established exposure to Gulf War environmental hazards while on active duty.  As discussed above, following the Veteran's established in-service exposure while on active duty, the Veteran reported that he began to experience observable symptoms of asthma.  The record indicates that these symptoms continued to worsen thereafter such that he experienced an asthma attack shortly after service and has required daily treatment with medication since that time.  The record does not suggest that the Veteran experienced asthma symptoms of a similar severity prior to service.  The lay statements from the Veteran and his mother indicate that he rarely experienced any flare ups of asthma after the age of 8 and before the in-service exposure event, and the Veteran only treated those occasional symptoms with over-the-counter medication.  The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his history of observable symptoms such as shortness of breath, wheezing, and coughing.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Board also finds the Veteran's reported history to be credible as his reports have been largely consistent throughout the appeal period.

The Board has also considered a negative December 2021 VA opinion that addressed whether there was sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption of soundness.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner noted a review of the claims file and relevant evidence showed that the Veteran had a history of asthma as a child, but no problems since around age 8.   The service records were silent for complaints of asthma symptoms in the service or treatment for asthma.  The first objective evidence of asthma treatment was in 2009, over 13 years since the Veteran's separation from service.  The examiner concluded that a nexus cannot be established of aggravation of the Veteran's childhood asthma to be the current condition.  However, the Board finds that this opinion provides minimal probative value as the examiner did not consider the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements indicating that his asthma symptoms increased in their severity during service, and the Veteran has experienced continued asthma symptoms since service.

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record is at the very least debatable as to whether there was aggravation of the preexisting asthma during the Veteran's active service.  Cotant, 17 Vet. App. at 131.  The presumption of soundness has therefore not been rebutted, and the Veteran's claim must be based on service incurrence.  See Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1094-1096.

Regarding the question of nexus, VA examiners provided negative nexus opinions addressing direct service connection in August 2017 and November 2021.  In the rationale for the August 2017 opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran related having asthma that began as a child at age 7 to 8, and this history was also documented in a July 1990 medical report.  The examiner then indicated that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's asthma was caused by service.

The November 2021 examiner later stated in the portion of the rationale relevant to direct service connection that it was less likely than not that the bronchial asthma was related to the exposure event experienced in Southwest Asia.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had childhood asthma as documented on his entrance examination.  In addition, the claims file was silent for any STRs showing complaints of wheezing or diagnoses of bronchial asthma.

After considering the August 2017 and November 2021 opinions, the Board finds that they provide little probative value.  The rationales reflect the opinions were largely based on the conclusion that the Veteran's asthma had existed prior to service without evidence of worsening during service.  However, as the Board has determined that the Veteran is presumed to have been sound at entry, the relevant question is whether the disorder manifested during, or is otherwise related to, service.  Moreover, the examiners' rationales failed to address the Veteran's competent and credible reports indicating that he experienced increased asthma symptoms following his established in-service exposure event that have persisted since that time.  In this regard, the Board notes that the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence does not warrant a conclusion of a lack of nexus.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

The Board notes that although VA medical opinions related to asthma were subsequently obtained in April 2022, these opinions addressed the theory that the Veteran's asthma is secondary to the Veteran's service-connected sinusitis and/or allergic rhinitis disabilities.  As such, they are not probative to determining whether direct service connection is warranted.

In August 2022, a VA examiner provided a positive nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's service connection claim.  The examiner explained that the Veteran's asthma was a diagnosable, chronic multi-symptoms illness with a partially explained etiology.  The examiner added that the asthma was primarily the result of breathing in tiny particles of allergens, long-term exposure to irritants, chemical fume, and dust that damage the lungs and airways.  Thus, the examiner opined that it is at least as likely than not that the disability pattern or diagnosed disease was related to a specific exposure event experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia.  

The August 2022 VA examiner's opinion supports the conclusion that the Veteran's current asthma is related to his established exposure to Gulf War environmental hazards during service.  The Board also finds that this opinion provides great probative value when considered with the other evidence of record as it addresses the relevant medical question at issue and was based on the examiner's understanding of the Veteran's relevant history as well as the examiner's medical expertise.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012) (providing that an examination is not rendered inadequate where the rationale provided by an examiner did not explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from facts to a conclusion,"); see also Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 294 (2012) (stating that medical reports must be read as a whole in the context of the evidence of record).

Later in February 2023, the AOJ obtained a negative VA medical opinion that addressed the Veteran's conceded TERA.  The examiner opined that the claimed asthma was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA(s), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  The examiner observed that the TERA memorandum noted that the Veteran served during the Gulf War, but it did not mention any specific exposure.  In addition, a review of the records noted that the Veteran had asthma prior to service as noted by the enlistment examination.  A nexus was not established.

In contrast to the August 2022 VA examiner's opinion, the Board does not find that the February 2023 VA opinion provides much probative value.  To the extent that the examiner's consideration of the Veteran's TERA was intended to encompass his established exposure to Gulf War environmental hazards, the examiner appeared to be unaware of the nature of this exposure and therefore unable to consider its significance.  Moreover, the examiner's reliance on the fact that the Veteran had asthma prior to service does not sufficiently address the relevant question at issue of direct incurrence.  

Based on the foregoing, the weight of the evidence reflects that the Veteran's current asthma disorder is related to his active duty service, and the presumption of soundness has not been rebutted.  Entitlement to service connection for asthma is therefore warranted on a direct basis.  As the Board is granting entitlement to service connection on this basis, it is unnecessary to address any other theory of entitlement that has been advanced.

2.  Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate a previously denied claim for entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder.

3.  Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate a previously denied claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

VA will readjudicate a previously denied claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).  "New" evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  "Relevant" evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue in a claim and includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.  Id.

The evidentiary record for a supplemental claim includes all evidence received by VA before VA issues notice of a decision on the supplemental claim.  For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(b).

As discussed above, the AOJ previously issued a rating decision that a May 2023 rating decision that denied entitlement to service connection for PTSD and entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder as the evidence submitted was not new and relevant for either claim.  Regarding PTSD, the AOJ noted in part that VA was unable to corroborate a combat or any other in-service stressor.  Regarding unspecified anxiety disorder, the AOJ similarly indicated that the Veteran's relevant in-service event had not yet been established by the evidence.  The AOJ noted that the Veteran had indicated that he had symptoms of unspecified anxiety disorder due to deployment and after a battery explosion.  However, there was no evidence of treatment in service for symptoms or the explosion in service.  In this regard, an October 2021 VA examination and a May 2023 private evaluation conducted by Dr. V., PhD, that were related to the claimed psychiatric disorder collectively indicated that one of the Veteran's relevant in-service events involved a battery explosion that occurred during the Veteran's deployment to Saudi Arabia when he was trying to start a forklift/bulldozer.

The evidence that has been received since May 2023 rating decision includes a July 2023 buddy statement from P.A. who reported that he served with the Veteran in Saudi Arabia at the Al Karg Air Base.  P.A. indicated that during this deployment on February 11, 1994, P.A. and the Veteran were assigned to the vehicle maintenance ship and attempted to fix a battery issue for a forklift.  During their efforts to jumpstart the forklift, an unknown issue with one of the batteries caused it to explode in their faces.  P.A. and the Veteran were then taken to an emergency eye flush location within the shop and took turns washing the acid out of their eyes.  P.A. opined that they were able to avoid permanent eye damage and facial burns by using this emergency eye flush.  Similar to the Veteran's reported medical history discussed further below, P.A. also reported that this event had been personally traumatic for P.A.

The Board finds that the July 2023 buddy statement is relevant to the question of whether the Veteran has an established stressor for his claimed PTSD and an in-service event for his claimed unspecified anxiety disorder.  As the new evidence at least tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in these previously denied claims, it is new and relevant.  Based on the foregoing, readjudication of the previously denied service connection claims for unspecified anxiety disorder and PTSD is warranted.

4.  Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder and PTSD.

In addition to the requirements for service connection discussed above, 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a) provides that all psychiatric diagnoses must conform to the fifth edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5).  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  Effective August 4, 2014, VA amended the portion of its Schedule for Rating Disabilities dealing with mental disorders and its adjudication regulations that define the term "psychosis" to remove outdated references to the DSM-IV and replace them with references to the recently updated DSM-5.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 45, 094 (August 4, 2014).  VA adopted as final, without change, this interim rule and clarified that the provisions of this interim final rule do not apply to claims that have been certified for appeal to the Board or are pending before the Board on or before August 4, 2014.  See Schedule for Rating Disabilities - Mental Disorders and Definition of Psychosis for VA Purposes, 80 Fed. Reg. 14,308 (March 19, 2015).  The Board notes that the DSM-5 is applicable in the present case.

The record has raised the theory that the Veteran has a psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder and/or PTSD, that is directly related to his active duty service.  The record has also raised the alternative theory that the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder is secondary to his service-connected lumbosacral strain with spondylosis.  The Board will first address whether direct service connection is warranted.

As explained further below, the Board finds that the record supports granting entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder as directly related to the Veteran's active duty service.  To the extent that the Veteran has also claimed service connection for PTSD, the Board notes that there are supplementary regulations governing PTSD claims imposing additional evidentiary requirements. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  Given the favorable disposition and considerations noted below, further discussion of the PTSD evidentiary requirements is not necessary.

A review of the Veteran's STRs shows that no psychiatric abnormalities were noted in the clinical evaluation of the July 1990 enlistment examination.  The Veteran also did not report having any relevant psychiatric symptoms in the July 1990 Report of Medical History.  In addition, the Veteran did not report having any psychiatric complaints in the April 1994 Report of Medical History, and an April 20, 1994 entry in the STRs for the separation physical examination stated under the assessment that the examination was normal.

After service, the Veteran was provided with a VA examination related to psychiatric disorders in October 2021.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had a DSM-5 diagnosis for unspecified anxiety disorder.  Regarding the Veteran's relevant medical history, the Veteran reported did not have any mental health diagnosis, prescribed medications, or therapeutic treatment prior to his military service.  The Veteran informed the examiner that after he joined the military, he experienced symptoms of anxiety, anger, and agitation.  The Veteran explained that he began to experience increased anxiety when he was in Korea due to his fear.  The Veteran further reported that his anxiety increased when he was deployed in Saudi Arabia following an explosion.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did seek or receive any mental health treatment during his military service.  The Veteran also indicated that he had continued to experience relevant psychiatric symptoms since that time, reporting that he continued to have symptoms of anxiety, being on edge, irritability, hypervigilance, dreams of the explosion, and difficulty sleeping.  During a May 2023 private evaluation with Dr. V., PhD, the Veteran similarly reported a history of anxiety that began during his time in service but has worsened over time due to chronic pain.  

Both the October 2021 VA examination and Dr. V.'s May 2023 evaluation indicate that the Veteran's relevant symptoms began in conjunction with different in-service events, including his periods of deployment to Korea and Saudi Arabia.  The October 2021 VA examiner indicated the relevant stressful events during service included the Veteran's training in Korea that was comprised of simulations of realistic events and entailed wearing full gear, explosions, and other training events.  Regarding the period of deployment to Saudi Arabia, the Veteran recalled encountering an explosion that resulted from a spark that occurred when the Veteran tried to start a forklift.  Acid was blown on the Veteran's face, and emergency medical technicians (EMTs) assisted the Veteran with a shower and rinsing out his eyes.

The May 2023 evaluation from Dr. V. also noted the Veteran's descriptions of the stressful circumstances involving military training exercises in Korea that included sirens and realistic scenarios simulating an attack.  The Veteran also recalled the generally stressful environment of his deployment to Saudi Arabia, including seeing tanks and armed hummers circling their compound which the Veteran indicated were part of the constant efforts to guard the compound.  Largely consistent with the October 2021 VA examination, the Veteran also reported that he had a large bulldozer battery explode in his face while working during the deployment, and this event resulted in treatment for the Veteran's eyes.  The Veteran summarized that although this event was one of the scariest experiences of his life, the Veteran and others at this location were always in fear during this deployment.

The Veteran's military personnel records include a performance evaluation for the period from March 1992 to April 1993, and the Veteran's organization, command, and location were noted to be the 8th Transportation Squadron (Pacific Air Forces (PACAF)), Kunsan Air Base, Korea.  The Veteran's duty title was special purpose vehicle mechanic.  As noted above, the October 2019 letter from the Department of the Air Force, Headquarters Air Force Personnel Center, also confirmed that the Veteran had a subsequent period of "boots on the ground" service in Saudi Arabia from November 1, 1993 to January 31, 1994.  In addition, the DoD military service information received in October 2017 noted that the Veteran's deployment periods included deployment to the Gulf War I theater from November 1993 to August 1994.

As previously discussed, the July 2023 buddy statement from P.A. also supports the Veteran's reported details regarding the battery explosion event that occurred in February 1994 shortly after his boots on the ground service in Saudi Arabia and during the Veteran's period of deployment to the Gulf War theater.  P.A. also submitted a personal STR to further support his account.  Although the STR is not clearly dated, it appeared to indicate that the relevant event occurred on February 11, 1994 at the vehicle maintenance shop; and P.A.'s Date Estimated Return from Overseas (DEROS) was in April 1994.  Consistent with P.A.'s report, the STR noted that P.A. sought treatment for a battery explosion that affected his right eye.  In addition, the Veteran's reported history is consistent with a May 2017 statement from the Veteran's mother in which she indicated that the Veteran was happy and without any relevant health problems prior to service, and she noticed a change in the Veteran's demeanor upon his return from his duties in Korea and Saudi Arabia.  Based on the foregoing, the Board accepts the Veteran's report of the foregoing in-service events that occurred during his deployment to Korea and Saudi Arabia as credible and consistent with the circumstances of his service.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  Regarding the Veteran's competent report indicating that he began to experience observable symptoms of anxiety during service in conjunction with these established events that have continued to be present since that time, the Board finds the Veteran to be credible as his reports have been largely consistent throughout the appeal period and are supported by the buddy statement from P.A. and the lay statement from the Veteran's mother.

Turning to the question of nexus, the October 2021 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion addressing whether the Veteran's claimed PTSD was directly related to his active duty service.  However, a review of the rationale reflects that it included a positive nexus opinion for the Veteran's diagnosed unspecified anxiety disorder.  The examiner stated that based on the findings of the evaluation, the Veteran's symptoms did not meet DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for PTSD and indicated that such a diagnosis was therefore not rendered.  The examiner then stated that the Veteran did experience some events during his military service that caused him to develop symptoms of anxiety that are considered to be related to the events.  The examiner added that the Veteran's symptoms are consistent with, and meet the DSM diagnostic criteria for, unspecified anxiety disorder that accounts more appropriately for the Veteran's symptoms.  As previously indicated, the associated October 2021 VA examination report reflects that the examiner was referencing the DSM-5 criteria.  As the examiner considered the details of the Veteran's established in-service events in Korea and Saudi Arabia while conducting the examination, the Board finds that the October 2021 VA examiner's positive nexus opinion supports the conclusion that the Veteran's unspecified anxiety is at least partly attributable to these events.  This opinion is also highly probative when considered with the other evidence of record as it addresses the relevant medical question at issue and was based on the examiner's understanding of the Veteran's relevant history as well as the examiner's medical expertise.  See Monzingo, 26 Vet. App. at 106; see also Acevedo, 25 Vet. App. at 294.

After considering the Veteran's competent and credible reports of experiencing symptoms of his current unspecified anxiety disorder since his active service, and the October 2021 VA examiner's positive nexus opinion relating this disorder to the Veteran's active duty service, the Board finds that the most probative evidence establishes a nexus between active service and the Veteran's current unspecified anxiety disorder.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (service connection must be considered on the basis of the places, types, and circumstances of his service as shown by his service records, the official history of each organization in which he served, his medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2006) ("[N]othing in the regulatory or statutory provisions [relating to evidence to be considered] require both medical and competent lay evidence; rather, they make clear that competent lay evidence can be sufficient in and of itself").  As such, service connection is granted for a psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as unspecified anxiety disorder.  As the Board is granting entitlement to service connection on this basis, it is unnecessary to address any other theory of entitlement that has been advanced.

In granting service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder, the Board has considered the fact that the Veteran's claim has been expanded to encompass PTSD.  In addition, the AOJ favorably found in the August 2023 rating decision on appeal that the Veteran's VA Medical Center Atlanta problem list showed a diagnosis of depression.  However, the October 2021 VA examination report reflects that the examiner specifically considered the claimed PTSD and symptoms related to depression before determining that the most appropriate DSM-5 diagnosis for the Veteran's symptoms is unspecified anxiety disorder.  The October 2021 examiner clearly noted that the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD under the DSM-5 criteria, and the examiner determined that the Veteran's symptom of depressed mood was attributable to his unspecified anxiety disorder.  The Board finds that the October 2021 examiner's determination is entitled to great probative weight given that it was based on current clinical findings and the Veteran's relevant medical history.  Moreover, the October 2021 examiner's diagnosis is consistent with Dr. V.'s findings from the May 2023 evaluation in which Dr. V. documented that the Veteran had a DSM-5 diagnosis of unspecified anxiety disorder.  

As such, the benefit sought on appeal is granted in a manner consistent with the fact that the most probative evidence shows that the proper diagnosis for the Veteran's current psychiatric symptoms is unspecified anxiety disorder. 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.C. Spragins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.