Citation Nr: A25033015
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240802-461153
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance/housebound is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2002 to November 2006.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to special monthly compensation, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. The issue of entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is in the need of aid and attendance of another as a result of his service-connected disabilities.

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a private examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance based on his cervical and lumbar spine disabilities. The examiner noted that the Veteran is confined to bed for eight hours a day between 9 am to 9 pm, during a flare up the Veteran is unable to feed himself because he requires assistance cutting food due to weakness of grip and the Veteran is unable to prepare his own meals because he experiences weakness of grip causing him to drop hot pots. In addition, if he gets a spasm in his leg, he will stumble, which creates a burn risk for working near a hot stove. The examiner noted that during a flare up, the Veteran needs assistance from his partner for bathing because he cannot bend over to wash his legs or reach his back and thus, he is a fall risk in the shower. The examiner noted that the Veteran requires nursing home care because he requires assistance due to poor balance, fall risk, and weakness in his grip, specifically noting that the Veteran's partner prepares meals, manages medications, ensures the Veteran's safety, and has taken on all of the caregiver responsibilities. The examiner noted that the Veteran's partner helps to organize medications due to the Veteran's poor memory. However, the examiner found that the Veteran has the mental capacity to manage his benefit payments, and he manages his finances online. The examiner noted that the Veteran hunches over and leans on surfaces or uses a cane, and when one leg turns, he will stand cock-eyed to take weight off one of his legs. His poor balance and instability make the Veteran a fall risk. He reported that his legs frequently spasm and he will use a cane or walker for stability. He has a foot drop and will trip often and avoids the stairs due to his foot drop. During a flare up the Veteran will neglect daily hygiene. He is also unable to turn his neck to check blind spots, experiences limited range of motion and severe pain in the neck and back and is unable to bend over to tie his shoes or pick up groceries from the ground during a flare up and requires his partners assistance with these tasks. In addition, the Veteran experiences bowel and bladder incontinence due to spine disease, including constipation and leakage. The Veteran reported that he only leaves home when required due to flare ups, fall risks, and the inconvenience with experiencing bowel and bladder leakage throughout the day. He also experiences difficulties driving due to weakness of grip and limited range of motion in the neck.

Although the private examiner indicated that the Veteran needed aid and attendance, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran was still able to drive at times or pick up groceries when he is not experiencing a flare up. Further, the evidence shows that the Veteran was working after submitting the private examination. While it is not clear what his job entailed, this evidence shows that he was working. See VA treatment records dated in May 2023 and July 2023.

However, in August 2023 statements, the Veteran reported a daily increase in the level of his symptoms. He reported constant and consistent pain from his thoracic and lumbar spine. His symptoms included pain, weakness, stiffness, tenderness, and radiculopathy which causes shooting pain and tingling down both legs, which cause significant functional limitations including a limited ability to walk more than 15 to 30 minutes, difficulty riding his bike, standing in place for more than 15 minutes, which he described as intolerable, and being able to sit in a normal chair no more than few minutes before sciatica and femoral pains become intolerable. He reported having to use a well cushioned couch that reclines or a bed for rest and that his back is typically under stress from walking and standing for four hours per day. He stated that during this time, he has to have frequent rest periods. He self-treats back symptoms with over the counter and VA prescribed pain medications, heat, and rest. He has a live in caregiver who is also a trained massage therapist and is able to mitigate his symptoms to tolerable levels within a few hours, thus negating the need to seek regular profession medical care for his back and lower extremity symptoms. He reported flare ups one to two days per week during which reduce his range of motion by half, occasionally by a quarter and at times range of motion reduced completely during which he cannot bend forward at all. He stated that during a typical flare-up standing in place for more than a couple of minutes is not possible and walking is limited to movements within his home, approximately 20 feet, such as going to the bathroom or answering the doorbell. He stated that during an extreme flare up, which typically occur once every two months, he is restricted to his couch with no possibility of weight bearing and requires assistance to move such as going to the restroom; however sometimes he is able to move using a crutch. He stated that radiculopathy flare ups occur at least twice monthly which severely limits his mobility and ability to sit or stand and he is often forced to lay on his side and that his caregiver is indispensable during this time. He stated that she will perform meal prep, cooking, and other household tasks. She also assists with self-care items such as bathing, dressing, and using the restroom. 

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA back conditions examination. He reported constant pain along the thoracic and lumbar spine and left sided paraspinals with intermittent sharp, shooting pains with numbness and tingling down his legs when going from sitting to a standing position. He reported being unable to tolerate prolonged inactivity without frequent repositioning or prolonged weight-bearing activities such as walking or standing without breaks to rest. The evidence reflects that the Veteran occasionally walks with a walker. However, the September 2023 examiner noted that the Veteran did not appear to require the use of the walker he was using. Nevertheless, the examiner noted that the Veteran's back condition would impact his ability to work because he reported an inability to tolerate prolonged inactivity without frequent repositioning or prolonged weight bearing activities such as walking or standing without breaks to rest. See VA examination report dated September 2023.

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA neck conditions examination. He reported constant pain in the neck, neck pain, and stiffness with movement in any direction that interferes with daily activities, and decreased range of motion. The examiner noted that the Veteran's neck condition would impact his ability to work because he reports neck pain and stiffness with movement in any directions which interferes with daily activities. See VA examination report dated September 2023.

Based on the foregoing, it is unclear whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him so helpless as to require the permanent need for regular aid and attendance of another. Because the Veteran indicated that his symptoms were worsening prior to the rating decision on appeal, and there is conflicting information in the record, there is insufficient evidence of record to make a proper determination on the issue. Thus, the AOJ should have obtained a VA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance due to service-connected disabilities. The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a predecisional duty to assist error requiring remand. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

In remanding these issues, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and render an opinion on whether he requires regular aid and attendance due to the limitation of function resulting from his service-connected disabilities.

If so, the examiner should determine, to the extent possible, when the need for regular aid and attendance arose and explain why.

If the reviewing health care provider finds that physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Aston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.