Citation Nr: A25033140
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240405-428726
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1978 to August 1981, May 1986 to September 1989, August 1990 to March 1993, August 1999 to January 2000, December 2001 to December 2002, October 2004 to January 2005, September 2007 to December 2008, and February 2009 to March 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability.

Although the Board regrets the delay, additional development is needed prior to further disposition of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability.

The Veteran contends that a left foot disability is the result of active service.

The AOJ favorably found in the rating decision on appeal that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded based on service in Afghanistan and Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.  As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by that favorable finding.

In disability compensation claims, the Secretary must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Two service medical records indicate that the Veteran may have experienced a left foot injury while on active duty.  A September 1980 service medical record stated that the Veteran was injured in hand to hand combat drills when a fellow member fell on his foot, resulting in trauma.  The record did not specify which foot was injured.  However, a January 1998 service medical record was more specific.  That record diagnosed plantar fasciitis of the left foot based on the Veteran's report of pain in the left heel and history of pain in the left heel.

The Board finds that the requirements to schedule an examination are met and that not scheduling an examination was a pre-decision duty to assist error.  Therefore, the AOJ should request that the Veteran be scheduled for an examination to determine whether there is any current left foot disability, and if so, whether any current left foot disability was incurred in service or caused by any incident of service.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should investigate and make a finding, in writing, as to whether the January 1998 service medical record documenting left foot plantar fasciitis occurred during a period of active duty for training or inactive duty for training.  If additional service records are necessary to make that determination, those records should be obtained.  Then, the AOJ should determine whether the Veteran's service at that time qualifies as a period of active duty for VA purposes. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to diagnose and determine the nature and etiology of any left foot disability.  The examiner should diagnose all left foot disabilities found during or contemporaneous to the appeal period.  After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should opine whether it is as likely as not that any left foot disability is etiologically related to active service or any event, disease, or injury during service, including whether any left foot disability (1) began during active service, or (2) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.  The examiner should opine whether any left foot disability is due to, the result of, or caused by the service-connected disabilities or any altered gait due to the service-connected disabilities, to include right plantar fasciitis and right ankle tendinitis.  The examiner should opine whether any left foot disability has been aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected disabilities or any altered gait due to the service-connected disabilities, to include right plantar fasciitis and right ankle tendinitis.  Aggravation need not be permanent.  The examiner should cite to evidence supporting that opinion.  The examiner is also asked to specifically address the September 1980 and January 1998 service medical records that address a foot injury.  A clearly stated rationale for each opinion should be provided and must not be based on the lack of any record in service of the claimed disability.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gernand, Timothy A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.