Citation Nr: A25033922
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 220122-506937
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The first appellant in this matter is the Veteran who served on active duty with the Army from May 1969 to January 1972, from January 1981 to July 1997, and from December 2007 to November 2010.   

The second appellant in this matter is K.B., the Veteran's spouse who is applying to become the Veteran's Primary Family Caregiver.  

The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) decision on appeal was issued in November 2021; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the January 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the appellants elected the Direct Review docket.  The AMA Direct Review does not allow submission of any additional evidence in support of an appeal.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed as of the November 2021 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2021 VHA decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the November 2021 decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the VHA in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The issue of eligibility for benefits under the PCAFC is remanded.

The Board finds remand is warranted to satisfy a pre-decisional duty to assist error including inadequate medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (the Board may remand for correction of any error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim).  

The November 2021 denial relied on a November 2021 review by the Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT), which found that the Veteran did not meet the eligibility requirements under the program; however, the Board finds that the CEAT review is legally inadequate to support the decision made.  

As a general matter, a determination by VA about the "furnishing of assistance or support" under the Caregiver Support Program shall be considered a medical decision, which is not within the Board's jurisdictional authority to review.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1720G; Beaudette v. McDonough, 93 F.4th 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2024).  These issues turn on the medical judgment of VHA and the CEAT in determining whether the Veteran met the medical eligibility criteria under PCAFC.  The CEAT is responsible for making the initial medical decision regarding eligibility for PCAFC benefits.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 46226, 46230 (July 31, 2020).

However, decisions as to eligibility under PCAFC are subject to Board review.  See Beaudette v. McDonough, 93 F.4th 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2024).  The Board has the authority to determine the types of Caregiver Program eligibility decisions that fall within its jurisdiction.  Id.  Decisions not related to the "furnishing of assistance and support" are within the Board's jurisdiction.  Id.  To this end, the Board finds that it is within its jurisdictional authority to review the adequacy of all medical opinions related to the CEAT's decision regarding the "furnishing of assistance and support."  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992).  This includes the CEAT's medical opinion upon which the instant eligibility decision was based. 

A VA opinion is adequate if it "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of the medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion."  The VA opinion need not discuss each piece of favorable evidence in the record.  Likewise, a VA opinion is not nonprobative simply because it does not "explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from the facts to a conclusion."  Rather, the VA medical report "must be read as a whole" to determine the examiner's rationale.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-06 (2012).  

A non-exhaustive list of factors that, depending on the case, may be relevant considerations in determining the adequacy and probative value of a medical opinion include: (1) whether there was personal examination of the patient; (2) the expert's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data; (3) whether the opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two; (4) whether the opinion is clear and susceptible of only one meaning; (5) the expert's familiarity with pertinent medical history; (6) whether there is any inconsistency in the expert's statements; (7) whether the expert has provided a thorough and detailed opinion about an area within his or her expertise; (8) whether the expert has provided factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for his or her conclusion; (9) whether the expert relied on sufficient facts or data; (10) whether the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; (11) whether the opinion is the result of principles and methods reliably applied to facts; and (12) whether medical text evidence that a medical opinion relies on contains qualifying or contradictory aspects where the text is entered into the record, at least in part.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).

An unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context.  Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240 (2012).  

In short, a medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions.  A medical opinion that is a factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  

Here, the CEAT's November 2021 review does not meet these requirements as it is conclusory and unexplained.  The decision found that the Veteran or service member does not require personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on an inability to perform an ADL and/or a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.  The CEAT determined that while the Veteran may require episodic caregiver assistance with one or more ADLs, he does not require caregiver assistance each time they perform the activity.  However, during the October 2021 Veteran Assessment, both the Veteran and Primary Family Caregiver applicant contended that the caregiver provides dressing, grooming, and bathing assistance to the Veteran.  The Board finds that an adequate opinion to needed to reconcile the inconsistences with the CEAT's determination and the appellants contentions.  Accordingly, a remand is required for a new medical opinion that adequately addresses the criteria for eligibility for PCAFC benefits as set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 1720G(a)(2)(C).  

The CEAT also determined that the Veteran does not require caregiver assistance for supervision protection, or instruction in everyday living.  However, the Board finds that this determination was based on an incorrect interpretation of a "need for supervision, protection, or instruction" as defined under 38 C.F.R. § 71.15.  The Board notes that the Federal Circuit has since invalidated 38?C.F.R. §?71.15 to the extent that the definition for a need for supervision, protection, or instruction included a single frequency requirement ("on a daily basis") and a personal safety requirement that were inconsistent with 38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(2)(C)(ii)-(iii).  See Veteran Warriors, Inc. v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 29 F.4th 1320, 1342-43 (Fed. Cir. 2022).  As such, the Board remands the claim for a pre-decisional error based on the precedential rule announced in Veteran Warriors.  VAOGCPREC 7-03 (rules announced in judicial decisions apply retroactively to all cases still open on review when the new rule is announced); see also Brewer v. West, 11?Vet. App.?228, 234 (1998).  Upon remand, the Veteran's eligibility should be evaluated under the correct statutory criteria for "need for supervision, protection, or instruction." 38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(2)(C). 

Additionally, the CEAT should consider and address the discrepancies presented in the October 2021 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument (VFAI) regarding whether the Veteran is in need of supervision, protection, or instruction to ensure that he is managing his medications properly.  The VFAI stated that the Veteran did not need any help of supervision with medication.  However, the VFAI also indicated that the Veteran becomes overwhelmed due to having so many pills, and the caregiver orders the medications and sets them up for the Veteran.  The CEAT must consider and address whether the Veteran needs assistance with medication management when determining whether the Veteran requires personal care services due to a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain a medical opinion from the CEAT as to whether the Veteran:

(a)	Requires personal care services each time he completes one or more of the following: 

"	Dressing or undressing oneself;

"	Bathing; 

"	Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable; 

"	Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); 

"	Toileting or attending to toileting; 

"	Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 

"	Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.)

(b)	Has a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or 

(c)	Has a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired

In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion must be articulated.  That is, the CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.  

The CEAT must consider and address whether the Veteran needs assistance with medication management, as he contends that he becomes overwhelmed with his medications, when determining whether the Veteran requires personal care services due to a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.    

2. Issue the Veteran, Primary Family Caregiver applicant, and appointed representative notice of the decision on the issue of entitlement to eligibility for PCAFC benefits as described in 38?U.S.C. §?5104.  The notice shall include but is not limited to a summary of the evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and identification of the elements not satisfied but necessary for establishing eligibility for PCAFC benefits under 38?C.F.R. §§ 71.15-71.25.

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.