Citation Nr: A25033214
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 220406-233600
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to the service-connected persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress, is granted.

Assignment of special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) for loss of use of a creative organ is granted

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by muscle cramping is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left restless leg syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity sciatica is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress was incurred during service.

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is proximately due to the service-connected persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.

3. The Veteran is in receipt of service connection for erectile dysfunction.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for erectile dysfunction as secondary to the service-connected persistent depressive disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

3. The criteria for assignment of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) based on loss of use of a creative organ have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(k), 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a), 4.7, 4.59.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1992 to December 1995.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 6, 2021, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that decision, the RO denied entitlement to service connection for depression and anxiety, erectile dysfunction, a bilateral foot disability, a left ankle collateral ligament sprain, obstructive sleep apnea, chronic muscle cramping, tinnitus, hypertension, restless leg syndrome, and sciatica.  All claims were addressed on the merits.

By way of history, in a January 2016 rating decision issued in the legacy system, the RO denied service connection for depression and anxiety, hypertension, erectile dysfunction, an undiagnosed sleep disorder/obstructive sleep apnea, chronic muscle cramping, and sciatica.  In January 2017, VA received the Veteran's timely legacy Notice of Disagreement (NOD).

In a March 2017 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for tinnitus.  In January 2018, VA received the Veteran's NOD.

In October 2018, the Veteran opted into the modernized review system via the Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP).  The Veteran selected the Supplemental Claim lane.

In a July 2019 rating decision, the RO continued the denials of service connection for depression and anxiety, hypertension, erectile dysfunction, an undiagnosed sleep disorder/obstructive sleep apnea, chronic muscle cramping, sciatica, and tinnitus.

In October 2019, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.  In a November 2019 rating decision, the RO found that no new and relevant evidence had been received as to the claims for service connection for depression and anxiety, hypertension, erectile dysfunction, an undiagnosed sleep disorder/obstructive sleep apnea, chronic muscle cramping, sciatica, and tinnitus.

In a February 2020 rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's original claim for service connection for a bilateral foot disability.

In April 2020, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim as to the issues of service connection for depression and anxiety, hypertension, erectile dysfunction, an undiagnosed sleep disorder/obstructive sleep apnea, chronic muscle cramping, sciatica, tinnitus, and a bilateral foot disability.

In September and December 2020 rating decisions, the RO concluded that no new and relevant evidence had been received sufficient to readjudicate the claims for depression and anxiety, hypertension, erectile dysfunction, an undiagnosed sleep disorder/obstructive sleep apnea, chronic muscle cramping, sciatica, tinnitus, and a bilateral foot disability.

In the interim, in November 2020, the RO denied original claims for service connection for restless leg syndrome and a left ankle disability.

In February 2021, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 20-0996 Decision Review Request: Request for HLR of the September, November, and December 2020 rating decisions.  After a March 2021 HLR rating decision identified duty-to-assist errors associated with all claims, the RO moved the claims to the Supplemental Claim lane, and on May 6, 2021, issued the rating decision on appeal.

On April 6, 2022, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182 NODs.  The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board will decide the appeal based on the evidence of record at the time of the May 6, 2021, rating decision."  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Given that the RO readjudicated all claims appealed in the April 6, 2022, 10182 NOD based on receipt of new and relevant evidence and readjudication was not clearly erroneous, the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

At the outset, the Veteran's claim for service connection for depression and anxiety has been expanded to include all acquired psychiatric disorders.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Because the Board is remanding the claim(s) for service connection for a bilateral foot disability, a left ankle disability, obstructive sleep apnea, a disability manifested by muscle cramping, tinnitus, hypertension, left restless leg syndrome, and left lower extremity sciatica, any evidence that the Board could not consider with respect to the claims will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of the claims on remand.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1)?a current disability; (2)?in-service incurrence or aggravation of a?disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden?v.?Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for a claimed disability may be established?on a?secondary?basis if?that?disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a).?  Establishing service connection as secondary to a service-connected disability requires a current disability that was either caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a).? Regarding aggravation,?38?C.F.R. §?3.310(b) provides that any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the disease, will be service connected.  In reaching this determination as to aggravation of a nonservice-connected disability, consideration is required as to the baseline level of severity of the nonservice-connected disease or injury (prior to the onset of aggravation by service-connected condition), in comparison to the current level of severity of the nonservice-connected disease or injury.

It is the defined and consistently applied policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. By reasonable doubt is meant one which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.

The Veteran contends that his psychiatric disorder, claimed as generalized anxiety disorder, had onset during service.  Specifically, during a February 2019 VA psychiatric examination, he reported that he developed symptoms of depression and anxiety related to "self-induced pressure" from managing his active duty service, working a part-time job, taking college classes, and raising a family at the same time.

The February 2019 VA psychiatric examination revealed a diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.

In this case, the evidence is at least approximately evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress had onset during service.

First, service treatment records (STRs) are negative for report of or treatment for psychiatric symptoms.  However, in a January 2017 statement, the Veteran reported that he was not afforded a separation medical examination and, as a result, would not have had the opportunity to report psychiatric symptoms at the time of separation.  Although some of the Veteran's service records may remain outstanding, as discussed in the "Remand" section below, review of STRs suggests that the Veteran was indeed not afforded a separation examination.

Nonetheless, of record is a January 11, 2017, letter from M.B., the Veteran's former therapist, indicating that, based on review of office records (which do not appear to have been full treatment records), the Veteran had visited his office on an undetermined number of occasions in 1997 and on eight occasions in 2000 and 2001.  M.B. indicated that the Veteran's diagnosis had been generalized anxiety disorder.

Next, of record is a July 31, 2017, opinion letter from a private psychologist, M.S.F., Ph.D., who had treated the Veteran in 2006.  M.S.F. noted that, although the Veteran's treatment had been prompted by work-related stress, he concluded that the Veteran's difficulty in handling job related stress was associated with "an underlying mood and anxiety comorbidity associated with his military service involvement."

Similarly, the February 2019 VA examiner opined that the persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  While the examiner did not provide an extensive rationale in support of the opinion, in the accompanying examination report, the examiner noted that the Veteran had "a long history of depression and anxiety, at least since military service."  Furthermore, in reaching this conclusion, the examiner reviewed the claims file and interviewed the Veteran regarding his relevant mental health history.  Accordingly, the opinion is afforded at least some probative value as to nexus.

Here, the Veteran's statements regarding persistence of his psychiatric symptoms following service are partially corroborated by the January 11, and July 31, 2017, letters from prior mental health treatment providers regarding past psychiatric treatment in 1997, 2000-01, and 2006.  There is no reason to doubt his credible statements and they are similarly afforded some probative value in this regard.

Given the above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress was incurred during service.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 53 (1990).

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to the service-connected persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.

A February 2019 VA examination confirmed that the Veteran has a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction.

Furthermore, the examiner addressed the question of secondary nexus to the now-service-connected persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.  Accordingly, a theory of secondary nexus is reasonably raised.

The examiner opined that the erectile dysfunction was proximately due to or the result of the now-service-connected persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The examiner first noted that erectile dysfunction could be organic, psychogenic, or mixed psychogenic, and organic.  Psychological factors mentioned by the examiner included "performance-related issues...traumatic past experiences, relationship problems, anxiety, depression, and stress."  The examiner noted that the Veteran's hypertension could also be a contributor to his erectile dysfunction.  Nonetheless, the examiner found that there was an "at least 50% probability that the [erectile dysfunction] is secondary to the depressive disorder with anxious distress.

The examiner noted review of the claims file and provided a reasoned analysis in support of the opinion based on review of pertinent literature and the Veteran's medical history.  Accordingly, it is afforded significant probative value as to nexus.

Given the above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the erectile dysfunction is proximately due to the now-service-connected persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress.  Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for erectile dysfunction is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

SMC

3. Entitlement to assignment of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) for loss of use of a creative organ.

VA provides SMC if a veteran, as a result of service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of one or more creative organs.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).  Entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ can also be granted based on erectile dysfunction.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(1)(ii).

In light of the grant of service connection for erectile dysfunction,  SMC for loss of use of a creative organ is also warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability.

Initially, January and September 2020 VA examinations for the feet revealed a diagnosis of bilateral pes planus.  Furthermore, the January 2020 examination revealed arthritis in the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint in both feet and the September 2020 examination report also includes a diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis.  X-rays taken during the September 2020 examination were negative for arthritis.

The Veteran's May 9, 1991, entrance examination reveals that moderate pes planus was noted at the time of his entrance into service.  Therefore, he is not presumed sound as to pes planus at the time of entrance into service.  However, the entrance examination did not include notations that the Veteran had plantar fasciitis or arthritis of the feet; as such, he is presumed sound as to these diagnoses at the time of entrance into service, and there is no evidence suggesting that they may have otherwise preexisted service.

STRs from April 6 and 7, 1994, indicate that the Veteran injured his left foot and ankle during a basketball game.  The initial diagnosis was a left foot strain; however, an x-ray taken on April 7, 1994, revealed calcific tendonitis in the left foot.

The January 2020 examiner found that the Veteran's pes planus was less likely than not aggravated beyond the natural progression during service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's entrance examination revealed moderate pes planus and that the bilateral MTP arthritis was an expected complication due to the natural progression of pes planus.

However, the September 2020 examination included the additional diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis.  The September 2020 examiner opined that the Veteran's current foot disabilities were less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned only that "[i]n review of service medical records, veteran was seen w/ foot pain.  No continue (sic) medical care found.  No nexus can be establish (sic)."

Here, the September 2020 examiner erred in several ways.  First, the examiner failed to distinguish between potential aggravation of the Veteran's preexisting pes planus during service and incurrence of an additional foot disability, such as plantar fasciitis, during service, or whether the plantar fasciitis may have represented aggravation of the pes planus beyond the natural progression.  Furthermore, although the Veteran has reported persistent foot symptoms following discharge from service, and the September 2020 opinion references only lack of continuity of care following service.  The remainder of the opinion is conclusory.  

Given the above, the September 2020 opinion is inadequate to support a decision on the claim.  Failure to provide an adequate VA opinion is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability.

An October 2020 VA ankle examination revealed diagnoses of left collateral ligament sprain and tendonitis, with a 1994 date of diagnosis.  As noted above April 6 and 7, 1994, STRs describe trauma to the left ankle as well as the foot.

In an accompanying opinion, the examiner that it was less likely than not "that the current ankle claim is related to the injury with a diagnosis of sprain/strain in 1994."  Although the examiner acknowledged the April 1994 STRs, the examiner found, in essence, that the Veteran did not have an "ongoing" ankle disability, despite references in the same opinion to an October 2019 statement from the Veteran's wife and a private opinion from Dr. W.M., a private podiatrist, describing a history of and current left ankle pain.  Furthermore, in the examination report, the examiner acknowledged functional impacts including "[n]o prolonged standing, walking, limit stairs, and avoid uneven surfaces."

Additionally, a private treatment record dated March 1, 2021, references a diagnosis of left ankle sprain and a December 23, 2021, VA primary care attending note references chronic left ankle pain and "popping and twisting of the ankle on a daily basis."

Here, the medical evidence of record on the date of the October 2020 examination as well as following examination suggests that the Veteran does, in fact, have a current left ankle disability.  Therefore, as the October 2020 opinion was based exclusively on lack of a current left ankle disability, it is inadequate to support a decision on the claim.  Failure to provide an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Finally, while Dr. W.M. opined that the Veteran's "chronic ankle pain" was the "result of injury suffered during his military service," he did not provide any rationale in support of this opinion.  Accordingly, it is insufficient for a grant of service connection at this time.

3. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by muscle cramping.

5. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

6. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

7. Entitlement to service connection for left restless leg syndrome.

8. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity sciatica.

Finally, review of the claims file suggests that the Veteran's non-medical service personnel records have not yet been obtained.  In this regard, the sole personnel record in the claims file is the Veteran's DD Form 214.  There is no suggestion that the RO has attempted to obtain service personnel records or found that the records are unavailable (and notified the Veteran of the determination).  This is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error affecting all claims on appeal which requires remand for an additional attempt to locate service personnel records.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current nature and likely etiology of any bilateral foot disabilities, to include pes planus and plantar fasciitis.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner and the examiner must indicate that the claims file was reviewed in the examination report.  A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided.

Applying general medical principles and the examiner's own expertise, the examiner should state answer the following questions:

(a.) Was the Veteran's pes planus, which preexisted service, at least as likely as not (the evidence is at least evenly balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated (beyond the natural progression) during service, to include whether the plantar fasciitis represents aggravation of pes planus?  Why or why not?

(b.) If (a.) is answered in the negative, is it at least as likely as not that any other diagnosed foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis, was incurred in or is otherwise related to service?  Why or why not?

In answering the above questions, the examiner is referred to the April 6 and 7, 1994 STRs describing a left foot an ankle injury and diagnoses of left foot sprain and calcific tendonitis.  The examiner is also referred to the Veteran's reports of worsening foot pain following service.  Finally, the examiner should consider the Veteran's asserted marching and groundskeeping duties.

In providing the requested opinion, please discuss the significance, if any, of the above evidence in forming the opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current nature and likely etiology of any left ankle disability.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner and the examiner must indicate that the claims file was reviewed in the examination report.  A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided.

Applying general medical principles and the examiner's own expertise, the examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (the evidence is approximately evenly balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that any left ankle disability was incurred in or is otherwise related to any in-service injury or disease.  Why or why not?

The examiner is referred to the April 6 and 7, 1994 STRs describing a left foot an ankle injury and diagnoses of left foot sprain and calcific tendonitis.  The examiner is also referred to the Veteran's reports of worsening left ankle symptoms following service.

In providing the requested opinion, please discuss the significance, if any, of the above evidence in forming the opinion.

3. Attempt to obtain any outstanding service records from all appropriate sources.  If unable to obtain additional records, the RO should prepare a formal finding of unavailability and notify the Veteran of the determination.

In remanding this matter, no finding is made, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions. Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand unless otherwise stated.

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Small, Attorney Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.