Citation Nr: A25033825
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 241028-486834
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), as secondary to obesity associated with the service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence suggests that his OSA was caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities and their manifestations. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish service connection for OSA are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from January 2001 to January 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a November 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be granted for a disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease is due to disease or injury that was incurred or aggravated in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a); Harder v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 183, 187 (1993). The controlling regulation has been interpreted to permit a grant of service connection not only for disability caused by a service-connected disability, but for the degree of disability resulting from aggravation of a non-service-connected disability by a service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-782 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Service connection for OSA, as secondary to obesity associated with the service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities, is granted.

The Veteran contends his OSA is secondary to his currently service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities. See May 2023 Statement In Support of Claim. He explained that because of his mental health condition, he has nighttime sweating and vivid nightmares. Id. He also stated that his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions prevent him from exercising. Id. He further stated that pain from his musculoskeletal conditions make it difficult to fall or stay asleep. Id. The Veteran noted that symptoms of his OSA include pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings, daytime fatigue, poor concentration, and difficulty completing tasks. Id. He does not allege, and neither does the record indicate, that his OSA is directly or presumptively related to his active service. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (2008). As such, this decision will only address secondary service connection for OSA.

In this regard, a favorable finding noted in the November 2023 rating decision is that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of OSA. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. Additionally, the Veteran is currently service-connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depressive disorder (MDD), generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), with ADHD and alcohol related disorder; right wrist ganglion cyst; residuals of shell fragment wound, right lower extremity; residuals of shell fragment wound, right forearm; residuals of shell fragment wound, left thigh; residuals of shell fragment wound, right thigh; residuals of sprain, left ankle with achilles tendonitis; residuals of right ankle sprain with achilles tendonitis; left hip trochanteric pain syndrome, limitation of flexion; left knee strain; right knee strain; right lower extremity neuropathy; left hip trochanteric pain syndrome, limitation of extension; and left hip trochanteric pain syndrome, thigh impairment. 

Based on the evidence of record, both lay and medical, the Board finds that the evidence weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to his psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities. Specifically, the Board concludes that there is probative evidence to support finding that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to obesity associated with his service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities.

In May 2023, a private physician conducted an OSA assessment of the Veteran, after which the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA. The physician opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity is due to his service-connected conditions of PTSD, left ankle achilles tendonitis residuals from sprain, right ankle achilles tendonitis residuals from sprain, right lower extremity neuropathy, left thigh residuals from shell fragment wound, right thigh residuals from shell fragment wound, right forearm residuals from shell fragment wound, right lower extremity residuals from shell fragment wound, and right wrist ganglion cyst. He emphasized that obesity led to, caused, or aggravated the current OSA. The clinician explained that he reviewed all available pertinent medical records, to include documentation of lay statements inclusive of OSA symptomatology and an OSA screening tool. He stated that based on the evidence, he provided a current clinical diagnosis of OSA, which requires the use of a breathing assistance device. He also stated that the Veteran's service-connected conditions, noted herein, have caused pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances (related to pain and forced sleep positions related to disabilities), diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure, leading to, and promoting, weight gain and obesity. 

The physician explained that the medical literature has documented that obesity is known to predispose patients to, and directly cause, OSA. He also explained that the medical literature has described, from a pathophysiological perspective, how OSA is associated with obesity, exacerbates hyperglycemia and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome, with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the OSA condition. It was further stated that sleep loss results in metabolic and endocrine alterations, including decreased glucose tolerance and decreased insulin sensitivity, which can lead to an increased body mass index (BMI) and obesity.

The physician noted that pathophysiological processes lead to the deposition of fat around the pharyngeal airway which increases the collapsibility of the upper pharyngeal airway. He stated that fat deposition around the abdomen leads to reductions in functional residual capacity which would reduce lung volumes, tethering effects on the upper airway. He explained that low lung volumes are also associated with diminished oxygen stores, which would contribute to ventilatory control instability (high loop gain). He further explained that obesity has been associated with functional impairment and weakening in the upper airway muscles, and that snoring is noted to further weaken them and contribute to further collapsibility. The clinician stated that the OSA screening tool, which was used in the Veteran's case, is comprised of eight questions that have a high sensitivity and specificity in clinically diagnosing OSA. He noted that the questionnaire assesses snoring, tiredness, observed apneas, blood pressure, BMI, age, neck circumference, and gender to assess the level of risk of OSA. He related his medical literature studies to the Veteran's situation and current diagnosis of OSA.

In September 2023, after examining the Veteran and diagnosing him with OSA, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by any indicated toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. The examiner stated that the Veteran's records are silent for objective evidence supporting a nexus between in-service exposures and OSA. However, the examiner also noted that a literature review was performed, and it revealed the known risk factors for OSA include excess weight, neck circumference, a narrowed airway, family history, use of alcohol, sedatives or tranquilizers, smoking, and nasal congestion.

Additionally, the Board acknowledges arguments from the Veteran's attorney, submitted in October 2024 with the NOD. The attorney's arguments state, inter alia, that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in substantial weight gain, and that the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred without the weight gain and obesity. The attorney provided reference to medical literature to support the relationship between weight gain and OSA, concluding that it is well known that obesity is one of the strongest OSA risk factors, with even only mild to moderate obesity associated with markedly increased OSA prevalence. 

After reviewing the evidence above, the Board finds that the Veteran's OSA was etiologically caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities and their manifestations. Notably, the Board has determined the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to obesity associated with his service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In making this determination, the Board finds that the private medical opinion is probative to the issue at hand. The physician, who indicated that he is dually certified in sleep medicine by both the American Board of Sleep Medicine (ABSM) and the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN), assessed the Veteran, reviewed the claims file, and discussed relevant medical literature. Although arriving at different conclusions, the private clinician and VA examiner both acknowledged that the Veteran's weight gain or obesity was a risk factor for developing OSA. The private clinician specifically indicated that obesity was an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric and musculoskeletal disabilities and OSA. The medical opinion includes an adequate rationale supported by the Veteran's medical records, medical literature, and the medical professional's expertise. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Thus, resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that service connection for OSA is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.