Citation Nr: A25033994
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240902-470641
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has a single healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh that is painful, but not unstable, and measures no more than 4 cm by 1 cm; he does not have three or four scars that are unstable or painful.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7804.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active duty service from February 1955 to January 1958.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023.  In this rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) made an implicit finding that new and relevant evidence had been received, and readjudicated the previously denied claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. This is a favorable finding by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to the address that issue on the merits. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Hearing Docket option. On November 15, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As the Board is remanding the acquired psychiatric disorder claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c). 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2).

INCREASED RATING 

A disability rating is determined by applying VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate DCs. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where, as in this case, entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the current level of disability that is of primary concern, and VA must only address the evidence concerning the state of the disability from the time period one year before the claim for an increase was filed until VA makes a final decision on the claim. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). When factual findings show distinct time periods during which the veteran exhibits symptoms of the disability at issue, and such symptoms warrant different disability ratings, staged ratings may also be assigned. Hart v. Mansfield,21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). If there is a question as to which evaluation to apply to the Veteran's disability, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and coordination of rating with impairment of function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of his disability in reaching its decision. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh

In the November 2022 claim, the Veteran wrote that his scar was due to a piece of shrapnel being removed from his thigh. The AOJ generated a rating decision for "backfill purposes only" in July 2023.  

A rating decision was issued in August 2023, continuing a noncompensable evaluation for cicatrices over right the thigh, healed scar because the Veteran failed to attend a scheduled VA examination in August 2023. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655. 

In an August 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim, received prior to the August 2023 rating decision, the Veteran asserted that he had not received sufficient notice of the scheduled examination.

In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted an increased rating for the Veteran's healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh to 10 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7804, effective from November 23, 2022, the date of the original increased rating claim. 

The Veteran seeks a higher rating. The appeal period under review begins on June 17, 2017, and includes a one-year lookback period. See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

There are no relevant private or VA medical records available for the appeal period in question.

In the October 2023 VA examination for scars, the Veteran had one painful scar located on the right anterior thigh. The pain was described as an ache and was infrequent in nature. The scar was not unstable with frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. The scar was not due to burns. The scar measured as 4 centimeters (cm) by 1 cm. It was described as 'tender to palpation.' The scar covered approximately 4 cm squared. The scar did not cause limitation of motion or function.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran submitted a lay statement about his scar. The Board, however, cannot consider this lay evidence because it was received outside of an evidentiary window.

In a November 2024 statement, submitted within 90 days of the Board hearing withdrawal, the Veteran's son wrote that the Veteran injured his right leg in 1957 when he was hit by shrapnel on a firing range.

Under DC 7804, one or two scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 10 percent rating. Three or four scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 20 percent rating. Five or more scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 30 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118. Note 1 to DC 7804 instructs that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. Id. 

In this case, the Board finds that the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent under DC 7804 because the Veteran's disability is not manifested by three or four scars that are unstable or painful. The Veteran does not contend that he currently has three or four scars that are unstable or painful, nor does the evidence show that he has more than one painful or unstable scar. Absent evidence showing three or four painful or unstable scars, a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted under DC 7804.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects. Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). His report of pain and tenderness are credible and fully contemplated by the disability rating assigned. However, he does not assert, and the medical evidence of record does not show, that his healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh is manifested by three or four scars that are unstable or painful. There is no evidence of any additional limitation of motion or function.

The Board acknowledges that in the September 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran wrote that his condition was getting worse, and that he experienced frequent pain. However, because the Veteran first raised this argument after the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not have a duty at the time of the decision to obtain a new examination. A remand is not required on this basis.

In conclusion, because the Veteran does not have three or four scars that are unstable or painful, a higher 20 percent rating is not warranted under DC 7804.

Finally, the Board has considered the other diagnostic codes pertaining to scars to see whether any are applicable or would entitle the Veteran to a higher or separate rating. 

DC 7800 only pertains to scars of the head, face, or neck, so it is inapplicable to the Veteran's healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh. 

DC 7801 is for burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are associated with underlying soft tissue damage. A 10 percent rating requires area or areas of at least 6 square inches (39 sq. cm.) but less than 12 square inches (77 sq. cm.). The evidence persuasively weighs against a 10 percent rating under these criteria. The measurements provided by the October 2023 VA examiner show the Veteran's scar comprises a total area of only 4 square cm. and is not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.

Diagnostic Code 7802 is for burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, which are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage. A 10 percent rating is warranted where the area or areas of the scars are 144 square inches (929 square cm) or greater. The Veteran's scar covers a total area of only 4 square cm.

DC 7805, for other scars (including linear scars) and other effects of scars evaluated under DC 7800, 7801, 7802, and 7804, provides for evaluation of disabling effects not considered in a rating provided under DC 7800-04 under an appropriate diagnostic code. The evidence of record shows there are no disabling effects not considered in a rating provided under Diagnostic Codes 7800-04. Therefore, a compensable rating is not available under Diagnostic Code 7805.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether entitlement to a higher rating for the Veteran's healed scar, cicatrices over the right thigh from November 23, 2022, is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against this. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). The claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran initially claimed entitlement to service connection for anxiety and posttraumatic stress disorder. After reviewing the Veteran's medical records, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as a claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, as reflected on the title page of this decision. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  

In his November 2022 claim application, the Veteran wrote that during service, he was in a truck containing ammunition that lost its brakes while going downhill. In a November 2022 statement, the Veteran wrote that his stressor occurred while he was in Korea. He wrote the date the incident occurred was in 1957.

In a November 2022 statement, the Veteran's son wrote:

It wasn't until I was a teenager in the 1970s that I became aware of [the Veteran's] issues with anxiety and depression. To remedy this, he sought medical attention from his medical provider...and prescribed numerous medications. Although the medications were not a total cure, he still displayed fear, nervousness, and anxiety. He found himself isolated from family and social functions, electing to remain at home. However, being the sole financial provider, he forced himself to leave the house in order to reach his job site, despite his fear of driving or being alone...He still displays the symptoms of anxiety, depression, insomnia, and nightmares. It wasn't until recently that he revealed that suicide was a consideration at several points in his life. His condition at this point is still considered as "severe" by his family and friends.

In a November 2022 statement the Veteran's granddaughter wrote that she had witnessed the Veteran having an anxiety attack and suicidal ideation. She wrote:

[He] reports having flashbacks, nightmares, and suicidal ideation during the past 60 years at least two to three times a month. I have witnessed [him] experiencing anxiety attacks (i.e. shortness of breath, shaking of hands and legs, and increased heart rate). [He] has...reported in the past "not wanting to be here," however, he does not have a plan or intent but does have the means (i.e. a gun) but does not have access to a gun currently...[He] has a fear of driving due to an incident during the war. [He] has difficulty discussing the war and will often isolate or emotionally shut down (i.e. not talking with people or not speaking about his feelings).

In a November 2022 statement, the Veteran wrote that in 1957, while he was in Korea, he was in a truck carrying ammunition, bombs, and a canon. He wrote that once they began driving, they gained speed. He kept yelling at the driver to slow down but the driver yelled back that there were no brakes. He wrote that he kept yelling as they continued to gain speed until the vehicle was eventually stopped by another hill. He wrote that since that incident, he had developed body sweats, stomach cramps, and fear. He reported that he began seeking treatment in March 1958, two months after separating from service. He was no longer able to drive, and his sons and wife drove him to and from work. He also experienced bad moods. He was eventually told by a physician that he was experiencing panic attacks, and he was prescribed medication for treatment.

In an August 2023 statement, the Veteran wrote:

I was assigned to a Field Artillery Unit. I believe the incident occurred in November or December of 1957. Headquarters 82d Field Artillery Battalion. I was sent from a ship on a transfer boat to the port of entry, placed on a train and then sent inland to our duty station. I remember it being very cold.

In a statement received in August 2023, the Veteran wrote that his psychiatric disorder affected his ability to drive, and that his wife and sons had to take him to and from work. He began seeing a doctor in 1958 who was unable to diagnose him at the time.

In a statement received in September 2023, the Veteran wrote that the specific date of his stressor was late October to November 1957 in Korea. He wrote that he experienced nervousness and stress following the incident. He wrote that when he came home in January 1958 on a ship, he could not be on the bottom bunk because of the stress. He reportedly went to a VA medical clinic in February 1958 because he felt sick, uncomfortable, nervous, and had sweats. The doctor could not find anything wrong with him at the time. He wrote that he lived with this illness until he was diagnosed with anxiety disorder in the 1970s and was prescribed medication for treatment. He also submitted photographs of his time in Korea in 1957.

An October 2023 Records Research Center response found that no evidence was located to support documentation of the claimed incident/event, due to an inability to "locate the 1957 unit history or daily journals for the 17th Field Artillery Battalion or I Corps Artillery higher headquarters or the 1957 chronology for the Eighth U.S. Army."   

In a November 2024 statement, received within 90 days from the Board hearing cancellation, the Veteran's son wrote that in the summer of 1957, the Veteran was involved in a roll-over as a passenger of a large transport vehicle weighing several tons. The vehicle was carrying armaments including large bombs and various other types of ammunition. He wrote that the experience still lived with the Veteran to this day.

This issue is being remanded to correct two pre-decisional duty to assist errors; the Veteran has not undergone a VA examination regarding this claim and additional military record development is required. 

The Veteran currently has DSM-5 diagnoses of anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and major depressive disorder with recurrent episodes. See private medical treatment records dated in March 2021, April 2021, and May 2021. The Veteran also has a reported an in-service event that was stressful. He has consistently described the in-service incident, and his lay statements indicate a potential link between his acquired psychiatric disorder and service. He has reported that his psychiatric symptoms have persisted following separation from service, and that he was eventually put on medication for treatment. 

The Board finds that the low threshold was met to trigger VA's duty to provide a VA examination at the time of the decision on appeal. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  There is evidence of a current disability; a report of an in-service event; and an indication that the Veteran's current psychiatric disorder (s) may be related to his military service. 

Based on the presence of the foregoing evidence in the record prior to the rating decision on appeal, and the heightened duty to assist, the Board finds that the failure to provide an examination was a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, remand is required.

Moreover, the evidence showed the Veteran's service records are fire-related. When records in the possession of the government are lost or destroyed, such as in this case, VA has a heightened obligation to explain its findings and conclusions and carefully consider the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. See O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365 (1991).  

An April 2023 PIES response indicated that his service records had been reconstructed and associated with the claims file. The Veteran was advised of such and asked to assist in the reconstruction attempt.  The Board observes that there are only a few service treatment and personnel records in the claims file. Regarding the Veteran's assertion that he sought treatment beginning in early 1958, the AOJ did issue a formal finding in June 2023 and inform the Veteran of the unavailability of his VA treatment records.

Regarding, however, the October 2023 records research center inability to "locate the 1957 unit history or daily journals for the 17th Field Artillery Battalion or I Corps Artillery higher headquarters or the 1957 chronology for the Eighth U.S. Army;" the AOJ did not provide a formal finding of unavailability to the Veteran or indicate that further efforts to locate those records would be futile.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(2), VA must make as many requests as necessary to obtain relevant records from a Federal department or agency.  VA may only discontinue its efforts only when it concludes that continued efforts would be futile, which requires that the Federal department or agency advise VA that either the requested documents do not exist or that the custodian does not have them. Upon making such a determination, VA must notify the Veteran of the records which could not be obtained, explain the efforts VA made to obtain them, and describe any further action VA will take with respect to the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (c)(2). Thus, the issue is remanded also for the AOJ to make additional attempts to obtain the relevant military records and issue a formal finding of unavailability if necessary.

By this remand the Board makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any lay statements on file.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Undertake appropriate steps to obtain the 1957 unit history or daily journals for the 17th Field Artillery Battalion or I Corps Artillery higher headquarters or the 1957 chronology for the Eighth U.S. Army.  If unsuccessful, AOJ may discontinue its efforts only when it concludes that continued efforts would be futile. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(2).

If the custodian of such records advises that either the requested documents do not exist or that the custodian does not have them, then a formal finding of unavailability should be added to the file, and notice afforded to the Veteran.

2. After concluding attempts to corroborate the claimed in-service event, schedule an examination to evaluate the Veteran's claimed psychiatric disorder. Based upon examination and review of the claims file, the examiner is requested to provide an opinion as to the following:

3. Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder(s) (including anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and mild MDD with recurrent episodes) began in service or are otherwise related to service, to include the reported in-service vehicular incident that occurred in 1957? 

Explanations for all opinions must be provided.  

	 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

 

Attorney for the Board	K.M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.