Citation Nr: A25033190
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241002-481630
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for brain tumors manifested by memory loss (claimed as a head injury) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from April 1970 to July 1983.  Among the Veteran's many decorations are the Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal and Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry with Palm.  This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In the February 2024 rating decision, although the AOJ's decision stated the evidence presented was not new and relevant, the decision included adjudication of the merits of the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for both issues.  The Board accepts the AOJ's merits determination as an implicit favorable finding that the Veteran did present new and relevant evidence to readjudicate the claims.  See generally 38 U.S.C. § 5104A (explaining that favorable findings are binding upon the Board absent clear and convincing evidence to the contrary); 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Thus, the Board's decision only addresses the issues of the Veteran's entitlement to service connection.

In his December 2014 claim, the Veteran sought compensation for PTSD. However, under Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009), claims for service connection for PTSD also encompass claims for all psychiatric disabilities affecting a Veteran based on a review of the medical evidence.  Here, the medical evidence indicates that the Veteran had an in service diagnosis of anxiety.  See July 1983 Service Treatment Record.  Accordingly, the Board has broadened the Veteran's claim to include service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

Similarly, the medical evidence shows evidence of brain tumors with memory loss during the appeal period.  See, e.g., February 2016 VA Treatment Record.  Accordingly, the Board has broadened the claim for service connection for a head injury to include brain tumors manifested by memory loss.  See Clemons, 23 Vet. App. at 4-5.

1. Entitlement to service connection for brain tumors manifested by memory loss (claimed as a head injury)

The Veteran and his representative assert that entitlement to direct service connection is warranted.  See October 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation.  In April 1984, the Veteran reported a February 1983 accident in which he was struck by a vehicle, to include the head, while stationed at Fort Hood.  See April 1984 Report of Accidental Injury.  He contends that he incurred a head injury and memory loss as a result.  See November 1983 VA Form 21-526; October 2023 VA Form 20-0995.

The AOJ has favorably found that the Veteran experienced a qualifying in service injury, event, or illness based on evidence that he was struck in the head during an accident.  See February 2024 Rating Decision.  However, the Board cannot yet adjudicate the Veteran's claim because the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to ensure all relevant treatment records were obtained and did not obtain a VA examination or opinion with sufficient information to adjudicate the claim.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (explaining that the Board shall remand to the AOJ for correction of a pre decisional duty to assist error); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

Regarding treatment records, the AOJ had pre decisional notice that the Veteran was treated at Sentara for brain symptomatology due to meningioma.  See September 2017 VA Treatment Records.  A June 2016 VA treatment record gave the AOJ notice of private treatment by UVA.  The AOJ also had notice that the Veteran had brain tumors removed at George Washington Hospital in Washington, D.C.  See August 2016 VA Treatment Record; March 2016 VA Treatment Record; May 2015 VA Treatment Record.  The AOJ did not make any efforts to obtain these records.  Accordingly, remand is warranted for reasonable efforts to obtain the missing records.

Additionally, remand is warranted for an updated VA examination and medical opinion.  The Veteran had a general VA examination in May 1984, at which time the examiner found that the Veteran's head was within normal limits.  The examination report noted the Veteran's 1983 injury, stating that the Veteran hit his head, but did not lose consciousness.  The examination report found that the Veteran did not have any scars on his face or scalp from the accident.  No medical nexus opinion was obtained.

At the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the evidence of the Veteran's brain tumors and accompanying symptomatology was of record.  Accordingly, the AOJ erred in failing to obtain an updated VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of all relevant diagnoses.  

To the extent a remand for a medical nexus opinion implicates McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006), the Board finds the McLendon elements satisfied.  Under McLendon, a medical opinion is warranted when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease, (3) an indication that the current disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another disability already service connected, and (4) the evidence is otherwise insufficient to adjudicate the claim.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81.  

The competent evidence of record satisfies the four McLendon elements such that an opinion is required.  First, the Veteran's treatment records show brain tumors with symptoms post-surgery throughout the appeal period.  See, e.g., February 2022 VA Treatment Record; September 2017 VA Treatment Record; March 2017 VA Treatment Record; August 2016 VA Treatment Record.

Second, the AOJ has conceded an in-service head injury.  There is also competent evidence of an in-service event based on (1) the March 1983 military personnel record demonstrating that the February 1983 accident occurred in the line of duty, and (2) the Veteran's statement that he was hit in the head during the February 1983 accident.  See April 1984 Report of Accidental Injury.  Additionally, at separation, the Veteran reported a head injury.  See June 1983 Report of Medical History.  Accordingly, there is evidence of in-service injury.

Third, there is an indication that the current disability may be associated with the Veteran's service, as he filed his initial claim shortly after service and seeks service connection for an injury to his head, which is the same type of injury he incurred during service.  Fourth, the evidence is otherwise insufficient for the Board to adjudicate the claim.  Because the McLendon test is satisfied, remand for a medical opinion is warranted.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability

The Veteran and his representative assert that the Veteran has a psychiatric disability directly related to service.  See October 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation.  

The Veteran asserts that during the February 1983 accident in which he was struck by a vehicle, he also witnessed the death of another soldier.  See December 2014 Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD.  He contends that after the accident, his performance was negatively impacted because he was unable to be near a vehicle without fear, and his request for a transfer was denied.  See March 2023 Correspondence.  The Veteran has claimed symptoms of sleep disturbance because of the accident.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The AOJ has not made any favorable findings with respect to the claim.  However, the Board cannot yet adjudicate the Veteran's claim because the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to ensure all relevant treatment records were obtained and did not obtain a VA examination or opinion with respect to the claim.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (explaining that the Board shall remand to the AOJ for correction of a pre decisional duty to assist error); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

Turning to the Veteran's treatment records, in the December 2014 VA Form 21 526b, the Veteran gave VA notice that he had private treatment for his claimed psychiatric disability.  As the AOJ did not make any efforts to obtain the missing records, remand is warranted for reasonable efforts to obtain the records.

Additionally, the AOJ did not obtain a VA examination or opinion in conjunction with the claim.  A medical examination is warranted on the same basis as a medical opinion, when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease, (3) an indication that the current disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another disability already service connected, and (4) the evidence is otherwise insufficient to adjudicate the claim.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81.  

The competent evidence of record satisfies the four McLendon elements such that an examination and opinion are required.  First, the Veteran has continuous symptoms of a psychiatric disability, as he took psychotropics during the appeal period.  See September 2017 VA Treatment Record.  Additionally, he has complained of sleep disturbance, and nightmares about a traumatic event.  See  May 2023 VA Treatment Record; March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Second, there is competent evidence of an in-service event based on the records of the Veteran's February 1983 accident.  See, e.g., March 1983 Military Personnel Record.  Furthermore, the Veteran had mental health treatment after the accident and was assessed with anxiety.  See July 1983 Service Treatment Record.  At separation, the Veteran reported nervous trouble and frequent trouble sleeping.  He stated that after the February 1983 accident, he was unable to be around any type of track vehicle, and he was afraid when he heard the noises of such vehicle.  See June 1983 Report of Medical History.  Accordingly, there is evidence of in-service injury, event, or disease.

Third, there is an indication that the current disability may be associated with the Veteran's service as he has complained of similar symptoms during service and afterwards.  Fourth, the evidence is otherwise insufficient for the Board to adjudicate the claim.  Because the McLendon test is satisfied, remand for an exam and opinion is warranted.  

In making this determination, the Board does not opine on the underlying merits of the Veteran's claims.  The AOJ must assist the Veteran in obtaining private records, VA examinations, and medical opinions to substantiate his claims.  The medical opinions must consider all relevant evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements.

On remand, the AOJ will readjudicate the claims for service connection for brain tumors manifested by memory loss and an acquired psychiatric disability.  In so doing, the AOJ will consider all relevant evidence of record, including subsequent treatment records.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(c).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. First, make reasonable efforts to obtain private treatment records for treatment the Veteran received for brain tumors and a psychiatric disability, to include any missing records from Sentara, UVA, and George Washington Hospital.

2. Second, and only after completing the first directive, schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed brain tumors manifested by memory loss and acquired psychiatric disability.  Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate VA clinician.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be provided to, and reviewed by, the clinician before rendering the opinion.  

The reviewing clinician must opine on:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's brain tumors manifested by memory loss are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include the February 1983 in-service accident in which he was hit in the head by a vehicle.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is at least as likely as not related to an in service injury, event, or disease, to include the February 1983 in-service accident, in-service anxiety, nervous trouble, and frequent trouble sleeping.

The clinician should provide full explanation of the rationale for each opinion.  In formulating any opinion, the reviewing clinician should also address all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including the March 1983 military personnel record, April 1984 report of accidental injury, July 1983 service treatment record, and lay statements at separation.

The reviewing clinician is not to mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.  The Board reminds the clinician that the absence of in-service evidence of a medical diagnosis is not always fatal to a service connection claim, as the laws and regulations do not require in-service complaints of, or treatment for, a diagnosed condition to establish service connection.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Garcia, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.