Citation Nr: A25033548
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240531-444280
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, to include chronic denervation, is remanded.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity (LUE) radiculopathy is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity (RUE) radiculopathy is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2007 to March 2013.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, RUE radiculopathy, and LUE radiculopathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board also notes the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement attempting to appeal the August 2014 rating decision that originally denied the claim for entitlement to service connection claim for a traumatic brain injury (TBI).  The Board notes that the appeal of the August 2014 rating decision is untimely, as the Veteran had one year from the August 2014 to file a timely notice of disagreement.  As a result, an appeal of this issue is not properly before the Board in the AMA system, and the Board will not address this issue in its decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, to include chronic denervation, is remanded.  

The Board regrets the delay associated with this remand.  However, upon review, the Board finds that remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his cervical spine condition.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

In April 2024, a VA medical opinion was obtained addressing the Veteran's claimed cervical spine condition.  See April 2024 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's cervical spine denervation with bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, his active-duty service.  Id.  In support of this opinion, the examiner stated that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) were "silent for the chronicity of care for neck condition during the service," and that the Veteran's "separation exam [was] silent for the neck condition and for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy."  Id.  

The Board finds that the April 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes as it improperly relies on the absence of evidence, specifically, the lack of treatment records during the Veteran's active-duty service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a veteran's report of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a veteran's service medical records to provide a negative opinion).  

Moreover, the Veteran's STRs document repeated complaints of back pain during service.  See STR - Medical.  Notably, on a December 2012 Report of Medical Assessment, the Veteran inquired as to why he was in "so much pain" in his joints and back.  See December 2012 Report of Medical Assessment.  In January 2013, prior to undergoing his separation physical, the Veteran completed a Report of Medical History.  See January 2013 DD Form 2807-1.  The Veteran reported experiencing recurrent back pain.  Id.  In the examining clinician's summary, it was noted that the Veteran's back pain began in 2011 but that it was not associated with a specific injury.  See January 2013 DD Form 2807-1 (pg. 3).  The examiner further indicated that the Veteran had not been treated for this complaint.  Id.  As the April 2024 VA examiner did not address relevant STRs, the Board finds that the medical opinion is conclusory and inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of his cervical condition.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for LUE radiculopathy is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy is remanded.  

In April 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his claimed cervical spine condition.  See April 2024 Neck Conditions (Cervical Spine) DBQ.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic denervation in the cervical spine as well as bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy.  Id.  With regard to radiculopathy, the examiner indicated that it was due to the chronic denervation in the Veteran's cervical spine.  Id.  

Given the opinion of the April 2024 VA examiner, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim of service connection for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy is inextricably intertwined with his claim for a cervical spine condition which has been remanded herein.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (stating that issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a claim for the second issue).  As such, the appropriate remedy for the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy is remand.  Id.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine condition.  The entire claims file must be provided to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  If deemed necessary, an examination should be conducted and any indicated tests, studies, or evaluations should be performed.

The examiner is asked to: 

(a.) If an examination is conducted, obtain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including the onset and progression of symptomatology.  

(b.) Opine as to whether the Veteran's cervical spine condition was at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the Veteran's active-duty service.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner should consider and specifically address the following:

i.	The December 2012 Report of Medical Assessment in which the Veteran asked why his joints and back were in so much pain. 

ii.	The Veteran's January 2013 Report of Medical History in which he indicated experiencing recurrent back pain, and the examining clinician noted an onset date of 2011.  

iii.	The lay statements of the Veteran, to include any assertions made during prior VA examinations.  

"	The term at least as likely as not does not mean within the realm of medical possibility.  Rather, it means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as it is to find against the conclusion.

"	Any opinion expressed by the physician should be accompanied by a complete rationale.  If medical literature is relied upon in rendering a determination, the physician should specifically cite the reference material utilized.  If the physician cannot offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why should be provided.

"	The physician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be taken into account in formulating the requested opinions.

"	The examiner should not rely solely on silence of the medical records without explaining: (a) why silence can be taken as proof that the symptom(s) did not occur, including why it would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

2. The AOJ must review the claims file and ensure that the foregoing development actions have been completed in full.

(a.)  If any development action is incomplete, the appropriate corrective action must be implemented.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(b.)  If any report or opinion does not include adequate responses to the specific opinions requested, it must be returned to the providing examiner for corrective action.

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zachary J. Ellis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.