Citation Nr: A25033850
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240117-408293
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's left foot disability is incurred in service or caused by an incident or injury in service.

2. The evidence is not in approximate balance, but persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's neck disability is secondary to a service-connected disability.

3. The Veteran is not service connected for any disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a neck disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.16(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran has active service from August 1979 to June 1983.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records. Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same.  Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

38 C.F.R. § 3.103 provides that a Veteran, upon request, is entitled to a hearing prior to VA's adjudication of an initial or supplemental claim.  The Board observes that notice regarding the opportunity for a hearing at the AOJ was not provided in this case. In Bowen, the Court found that there was no due process violation in the denial of the Veteran's requested hearing before the AOJ because the Veteran had subsequently been offered the opportunity to have a hearing before the Board. Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253 (2012). Here, the Veteran was offered a choice of three dockets in the AMA framework to include the Board hearing docket. Although the issue in Bowen was not one of notice, the Board cannot discern a basis to find that the underlying holding and logic of Bowen would not lead to the same finding of a lack of prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.

Although all the evidence of record has been thoroughly reviewed, only the most relevant and salient evidence is discussed below. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The analysis in this decision focuses on what the evidence shows or fails to show with respect to the matter decided herein. The Veteran should not assume that pieces of evidence not explicitly discussed herein have been overlooked. See Allday v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 517, 527 (1995).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability.

The Veteran is claiming service connection for a left foot disability.

Legal Criteria

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from a disease or injury incurred in active service or that a preexisting injury or disease was aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during service. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Background Facts

The Veteran's service treatment and personnel records do not document any in-service symptoms, injuries, or diagnoses regarding the left foot. There is a single treatment report of a medial left shin splint. 

On a VA Form 526EZ, the Veteran claimed service connection for "bilateral foot injuries due to ruck marching during basic training full load."

An April 2021 private treatment report noted the Veteran reported an onset of left foot pain following hiking about 10 days beforehand. X-rays noted some degenerative osseous changes. Subsequent private and VA treatment records note similar foot pain complaints with no specific reference to the Veteran's military service.

During a June 2023 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran was prompted to discuss his in-service foot injury as it related to a claimed psychiatric condition. The Veteran reported that he was treated for right foot achilles tendonitis in service and subsequently tore a tendon in his right foot. There was no mention of a left foot injury during service.

A July 2023 VA foot examination diagnosed the Veteran with left hallux valgus, pes cavus, metatarsalgia, and sprain of the first and second MTP joints. The Veteran reported chronic right foot pain since an injury to his achilles tendon during service but did not report any left foot symptoms or injury during service. The Veteran reported an onset of left foot pain in April 2021 after a hike. The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed left foot disabilities were less likely than not related to his service because there were no complaints of any left forefoot symptoms or injuries during service, no medical evidence to support a nexus between an acute shin splint and hallux valgus, and hallux rigidus is common in the general population and the most common arthritis condition in the foot. 

Legal Analysis

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record is not in approximate balance but is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's diagnosed left foot disabilities were incurred in or caused by service. 

The Veteran's private and VA treatment records along with July 2023 VA examination showed a diagnosis of left foot hallux valgus, pes cavus, metatarsalgia, and sprain of the first and second MTP joints. Therefore, the first element of service connection is met.

The Veteran's service treatment reports do not show any in-service injury, event, symptom, or diagnosis of a left foot disability. The Veteran was seen for right achilles tendonitis after a march; however, the left foot was not mentioned. The Veteran was also seen in service for medial left shin splints; however, there was no documentation of any left foot complaints related to the treatment of the shin.

The Veteran's only explicit statement that his left foot disabilities are related to his service was on a January 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. On this form, the Veteran wrote "bilateral foot injuries due to ruck marching during basic training full load." When prompted to explain his in-service foot injuries by a July 2023 VA examiner, the Veteran only discussed his right lower extremity indicating that he believed his right achilles tendonitis treated in service led to his current right foot problems. The Veteran did not discuss any left foot symptoms or issues with the examiner. Finally, The Veteran consistently reported to both private and VA treatment providers the onset of his left foot symptoms began in 2020 after hiking with no report of an in-service injury, event, or symptoms. The Board finds any indication in the record that the Veteran's left foot problem was chronic since service to be not credible when weighed against the other statements of record.

The Board notes the July 2023 VA examiner opined as to whether the Veteran's current left foot disabilities were related to rucking, or a left shin splint treated in service. The examiner stated that there was no relationship between the Veteran's left foot diagnoses and his military service because there is no medical relationship between shin splints and the Veteran's diagnoses, the Veteran's service treatment records did not discuss the left forefoot, the location of most Veteran's current diagnoses, and post-service medical records do not show any issues until 2020 when the Veteran was seen following a hiking injury. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the evidence does not support and instead weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's left foot disability was incurred in service or caused by an incident or injury during service. Therefore, service connection is not warranted, and the Veteran's claim is denied.

Consideration has been given to the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the most probative evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, it is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 56. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability.

The Veteran asserted that he believed his claimed neck disability was specifically caused by a foot disability. See January 2023 VA Form 21-4138. 

Because the Veteran's insisted the neck disability caused by a foot disability and the record does not reasonably raise entitlement to direct service connection, the Board's adjudication will consider only entitlement to secondary service connection.

Legal Criteria

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Background Facts and Analysis

The Veteran is not currently service connected for any disability, including any foot disability. As the Veteran is claiming a neck disability as secondary to a foot disability and because service-connection is not in effect for any foot disability, service connection on a secondary basis is not allowed under VA law and regulation. Based on the foregoing, the claim for entitlement to service connection for a neck disability must be denied.  

3. Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to TDIU.

Legal Criteria

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a), when a veteran's schedular rating is less than total, a TDIU rating may be assigned when the veteran, in the judgment of the rating agency, is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 

To meet the requirements for a schedular TDIU rating, individual disabilities must equal a combined rating of 70 percent or more (with at least one such disability rated at 40 percent or more), or, if there is only one single disability, it must be ratable at 60 percent or more.  See 38 C.F.R § 4.16(a).

The economic component of "unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation," means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a); Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 72-73 (2019). The non-economic component involves consideration of the veteran's history, education, skill, and training as well as whether he/she has the physical and mental ability to perform the type of activities required for that occupation. Id.; Pederson v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 276, 286-287 (2015).

Background Facts and Analysis

The record shows the Veteran is not service connected for any disability. Service connection is a pre-requisite for entitlement to TDIU. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16; see also Rice v. Shinseki 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009). Since the Board is denying service connection for the disabilities listed herein and the Veteran is not otherwise service connected for any disabilities, entitlement to TDIU must be denied.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. MacTavish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.