Citation Nr: A25033707
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473113
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of foot injury (bilateral foot pain) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection paralysis of the radial nerve (numbness in arm) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from May 1987 to July 1987.  He enlisted in the Army National Guard in April 1986.  He was ordered to ADT in April 1987.  He was discharged from the Army Reserve in April 1992.

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal of July 1, 2024, and July 17, 2024, rating decisions of a Department of Veteran's Affairs (VA) Regional Office of the Veteran's Benefits Administration, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The July 1, 2024, rating decision denied service connection for back pain, bilateral foot pain, and numbness in arm, and deferred a decision on service connection for bilateral hearing loss for a medical examination and opinion.  The July 17, 2024, rating decision denied service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

In September 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and selecting the direct review docket.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed on the date of the prior AMA decisions.

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Favorable Findings identified in the July 17, 2024, rating decision were:  The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  Your DD214 shows that your military occupational specialty of fabric repair specialist had a low probability of exposure to hazardous noise.

The Board notes that the Veteran's military personnel records note an additional MOS of wheeled vehicle repairer, which has a high probability for noise exposure. Therefore, hazardous noise exposure is conceded.

The record reflects that the Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination for his bilateral hearing loss but did not appear.  Thereafter, a July 17, 2024, rating decision denied service connection based on the evidence of record, finding good cause had not been shown for failure to attend the examination as scheduled.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.655.  With his September 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran requested an "extension," stating that "I did not see a doctor, and no one picked me up for my appointment."  Absent a clearer record, the Board considers his statement to establish good cause for missing the examination.  More specifically, the record does not include any documentation of the notification to the Veteran of the time, date and place of the scheduled examination.  Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence is insufficient to establish notification of such examination was provided to help the Veteran proceed with his claim.  In addition, the record lacks sufficient evidence for the Board to make a decision on the merits.  Therefore, the Board finds that due to a failure to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty, it is necessary to remand the claim to afford the Veteran another opportunity, with proper notice to him, to attend a VA examination for his bilateral hearing loss claim.  In remanding this claim, the Veteran is notified that failure to appear for examinations as scheduled with proper notice, without providing good cause, may result in the denial of the claim.  When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.655 (b).  The duty to assist is not a one-way street; a claimant is obligated to cooperate in the development of a claim.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of foot injury (bilateral foot pain) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for paralysis of the radial nerve (numbness in arm) is remanded.

As explained below, the Veteran's claims for back pain, bilateral foot pain, and numbness in arm are remanded pursuant to McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The July 1, 2024, rating decision denied service connection for back pain, bilateral foot pain, and numbness in arm, based on findings that the evidence does not show a current diagnosed disability.  

Service treatment records include a periodic examination in January 1991 that notes swollen or painful joints; dizziness or fainting spells; hay fever; broken bones; foot trouble; frequent trouble sleeping.  

In addition, the Veteran has asserted that he was given the anthrax experimental vaccine and due to his vaccine, years after, he is experiencing numbness in his right arm and his legs.  He stated that sometimes he feels like his whole body is on fire. 

Generally, a VA medical examination is required for a service connection claim when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service; but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The third prong, requiring that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold.  Id.

The Board finds that a VA medical examination is required under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006) for each of these disabilities and that failure to provide such examination constitutes a pre-decisional error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, requiring remand.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran with VA examinations and medical opinions to address the nature and etiology of his bilateral hearing loss; a back disorder; residuals of foot injury; and paralysis of the radial nerve (numbness in arm).  The examiner should provide the following opinions:  

(a.) Whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to active service.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's back disorder is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to active service.

(c.) Whether the Veteran's residuals of foot injury (bilateral foot pain) are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to active service.

(d.) Whether the Veteran's paralysis of the radial nerve (numbness in arm) is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to active service.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mcloughlin, Debra

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.