Citation Nr: A25033078
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-434405
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's allergic rhinitis does not result in greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, complete obstruction of the nasal passage on one side, or nasal polyps.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.31, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1992 to March 1997, with additional service in the Air Force Reserve.  For his service, he was awarded the Air Force Commendation Medal, Air Force Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Air Force Longevity Service Award Ribbon, and Air Force Training Ribbon.  The Board is grateful for the Veteran's service to our Nation.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a Higher-Level Review rating decision issued in March 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

By way of background, the Veteran filed an Application for Disability Compensation (VA Form 21-526EZ) in November 2021 for entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis, which was denied by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) in December 2021.  In August 2022, the Veteran filed a Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) for entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis.  The AOJ identified a duty to assist error during its Higher-Level Review and assigned the Veteran's claim to the Supplemental Review lane in October 2022 for additional development.  In its September 2023 supplemental claim rating decision, the AOJ found new and relevant evidence had been received and granted service connection for allergic rhinitis, with a zero percent rating effective August 10, 2022.

In October 2023, the Veteran filed a Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis.  The AOJ continued the zero percent evaluation for the Veteran's allergic rhinitis in its March 2024 rating decision.

In April 2024, the Veteran filed a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 supplemental claim rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the September 2023 supplemental claim rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis.

The Veteran contends his allergic rhinitis is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned, zero percent rating.

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found-a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart, 21 Vet. App at 509-10.

For the entire appeal period, stemming from August 10, 2022, the date of service connection, the Veteran's allergic rhinitis has been assigned a noncompensable rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 6522.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.  In this regard, such Diagnostic Code provides that a 10 percent rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, or complete obstruction on one side.  Id.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis with nasal polyps.  Id.  In every instance where the Rating Schedule does not provide a zero percent rating for a Diagnostic Code, a zero percent rating is assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Turning to the evidence of record, in his November 2021 Statement in Support of Claim for entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis, the Veteran stated that his allergic rhinitis symptoms included coughing, sneezing, headaches, runny nose, post-nasal drip, nasal stuffiness, thick mucus, and congestion, which caused difficulty breathing.  In his November 2021 Statement in Support of Claim for entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis, the Veteran stated that his chronic sinusitis symptoms included coughing, runny nose, post-nasal drip, nasal stuffiness, mucus, nasal crusting, congestion, sinus pressure, facial pain, and fever.  The Board notes that the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for chronic sinusitis, rated as 50 percent disabling as of August 10, 2022, as well as for headaches, rated as zero percent disabling as of June 8, 2021.

At a December 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his currently diagnosed allergic rhinitis resulted in nasal congestion with runny nose and itchy eyes and that he treated such symptoms with antihistamines ("with partial relief").  Upon examination, the Veteran's rhinitis did not result in greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, complete obstruction on the left or right side, nasal polyps, or a granulomatous condition; it did result in permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates.  The examiner noted no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

At a February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his rhinitis had remained the same-resulting in a runny nose and pressure around the eyes, nose, and ears-and that he used no medication to treat such symptoms.  Upon examination, the Veteran's rhinitis did not result in greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, complete obstruction on the left or right side, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, nasal polyps, or a granulomatous condition.  Additionally, a February 2023 X-ray of the sinuses revealed no radiographic abnormality.  Further, the examiner noted no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

VA treatment records of May 2022 and October 2022 note that the Veteran denied rhinorrhea (runny nose), as well as ear and eye pain.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that, for the entire appeal period, the Veteran's rhinitis did not result in greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, complete obstruction of the nasal passage on one side, or nasal polyps, which is required for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 6522.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.  Thus, in the absence of such symptomatology, a compensable rating for such disability is not warranted under such Diagnostic Code.

The Board further finds that a higher or separate rating is not warranted under any other potentially applicable Diagnostic Code.  In this regard, in Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336-37 (2015), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that when a condition is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule, it may not be rated by analogy.  See also Suttman v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 127, 134 (1993) (providing that an analogous rating may be assigned only where the service-connected condition is unlisted).  Thus, as the Veteran's allergic rhinitis is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule under Diagnostic Code 6522, such disability may not be rated by analogy.  The Board further notes that, although the February 2023 VA examination report reflects a diagnosis of non-allergic rhinitis-as opposed to allergic rhinitis-the corresponding symptomatology did not change.  Therefore, the Board declines to rate the Veteran's non-allergic rhinitis by analogy to a condition other than allergic-rhinitis.

The Board also acknowledges the December 2021 VA examiner's finding of the Veteran's allergic rhinitis resulting in permanent hypertrophy of turbinates.  Nonetheless, the Board declines to rate the Veteran's allergic rhinitis under Diagnostic Code 6523, for bacterial rhinitis, which provides for a ten percent rating "With permanent hypertrophy of turbinates and with greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side" (emphasis added).  As mentioned above, when a condition is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule-as in the case of allergic rhinitis-such condition may not be rated by analogy.  See id.  Furthermore, even if the Board were to rate the Veteran's allergic rhinitis by analogy under Diagnostic Code 6523, he would still not be entitled to a compensable rating.  That is, he was not found to also have greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side at any time during the period on appeal.

The evidence does not show any symptoms that are not already contemplated by the service-connected disabilities of allergic rhinitis and headaches or by the Veteran's separately compensated chronic sinusitis.  Consideration of an extraschedular rating is therefore not warranted.

In reaching its decision, the Board notes that, at the time of the December 2021 VA examination, the Veteran took antihistamine for his allergic rhinitis; however, the ameliorative effects of such medication were not considered in evaluating the severity of such disability.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012) (when a Diagnostic Code is silent as to the effects of medication, VA may not deny entitlement to a higher disability rating based on the relief provided by medication).

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board has afforded probative value to the Veteran's assertions that his allergic rhinitis is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned disability rating.  In this regard, however, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the Rating Schedule.  While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  Ultimately, the Board finds that the medical evidence of record-in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of his rhinitis in light of the rating criteria-to be persuasive.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected allergic rhinitis; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the period on appeal.  Thus, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  Furthermore, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, regarding the initial rating claim adjudicated herein.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is not warranted.  In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, insofar as the Board has denied higher or separate ratings for the Veteran's rhinitis, the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspects of the Veteran's claim.  Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard, and his initial rating claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

Finally, the Board notes that the Veteran appears to be entitled to a compensable rating for his service-connected allergic rhinitis as of March 4, 2024, based on the findings contained in the March 2024 VA examination report.  However, the March 2024 examination report is outside the evidentiary window of the current appeal and therefore cannot be considered by the Board in the instant case.  See C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dumas, Rebecca H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.