Citation Nr: A25033521
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-456528
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder (claimed as a respiratory condition to include obstructive sleep apnea) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Army from June 1978 to June 1998.

The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the rating decision on appeal in August 2023, which constitutes an initial decision. Therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder (claimed as a respiratory condition to include obstructive sleep apnea)

The Veteran seeks service connection for a respiratory condition, to include obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), that he contends is secondary to his service-connected mental health condition, through obesity as an intermediate step. See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ; July 2024 VA Form 10182 and associated correspondence.

The Veteran has undergone VA sleep apnea examinations and received negative nexus opinions based on the finding of no diagnosis of sleep apnea. As such, the clinicians did not opine on any causation as to sleep apnea. However, the clinicians did not address the Veteran's significant sleep disturbances, to include marked reduced sleep efficiency and prolonged REM sleep latency. See VA treatment records dated May 20, 2023  (polysomnography results finding the Veteran experienced no REM sleep) and July 6, 2023.  

VA treatment records repeatedly document that the Veteran undergoes pulmonary care at a non-VA facility. See e.g., VA treatment records dated November 10, 2022 and August 15, 2023. The VA sleep medicine physician recommended the Veteran share the results of his polysomnography with his civilian pulmonologist, and noted the Veteran was using his CPAP machine without effective relief. Id. Further, the sleep medicine physician recommended the Veteran follow up with his primary care physician for the contributing symptoms of restless leg and reflux. No further information on the issue is in the records.   

Thus, there are outstanding private treatment records that are relevant to this appeal that have not yet been associated with the claims file. Therefore, the Board must ensure the duty to assist is satisfied. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(1). The AOJ's failure to obtain all relevant medical evidence and treatment records is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any outstanding private treatment providers that treated him for the relevant conditions, such as respiratory conditions, sleep disorders, or obesity.

2. Thereafter, attempt to obtain the authorized private treatment records and associate them with the record, in addition to any outstanding VA treatment records and an Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record.

.

3. After the above development, obtain a VA addendum medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's disabilities. 

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

4. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

5. Is the Veteran's sleep disorder at least as likely as not directly related to service?  

6. Is the Veteran's sleep disorder at least as likely as not proximately due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include a mental health condition and/or sarcoidosis?

7. Is the Veteran's sleep disorder at least as likely as not aggravated, i.e., made worse, by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities?

8. Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that

-	any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, or the medication used to treat said disabilities (particularly his psychiatric medication), caused or aggravated his obesity; and

-	if so, whether the caused or aggravated obesity as of result of his service-connected disability(ies) was a "substantial factor" in causing the sleep disorder; and

-	if so, whether the sleep disorder would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability(ies).

9. Provide a rationale to support the opinion(s).  

 

Leetra J. Harris

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Black, Julie A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.