Citation Nr: A25033208
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-463716
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for reactive airway disease is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2008 to July 2013.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for reactive airway disease, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of these issues on remand. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the Veteran's right to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for reactive airway disease.

Under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy the duty to assist an appellant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Board remands the claim for an initial rating higher than 10 percent for reactive airway disease to correct an error in satisfying VA's duty to assist, as the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In the AOJ decision on appeal, the Veteran was assigned an initial rating of 10 percent for his service-connected reactive airway disease under Diagnostic Code (DC) 6602 for Asthma, bronchial. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6602. The Veteran asserts that his symptoms are not adequately reflected in this rating. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA Respiratory Conditions DBQ in May 2024. While the Veteran reported a "persistent cough" and current treatment of an albuterol inhaler, the May 2024 VA examiner indicated his condition required "intermittent" rather than "daily" use of inhalational bronchodilator therapy. Private treatment records reflect that the Veteran was prescribed albuterol, to inhale every six hours as needed for wheezing; and that he reported experiencing flare-ups of his symptoms, including in the spring around allergy time. See Private Treatment Records, PeaceHealth Family Med. Clinic, September 2023.   

?

The May 2024 VA examiner noted results of pulmonary function testing (PFT) completed in May 2024 and indicated that the FEV-1 % predicted test result most accurately reflects the Veteran's level of disability. The examiner indicated that DLCO (SB) testing was not completed, noting, "not indicated in Veteran's particular case." The examiner indicated the Veteran's respiratory disability impacted his ability to work, noting shortness of breath when having to run or in colder weather, as well as a hacking cough in the early mornings. Regarding other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms, the examiner noted the Veteran had asbestos exposure.  

The Veteran's PFT results from May 10, 2024 noted: "Caution: Poor session quality. Interpret with care." As to Session Quality, the following was noted: Pre, "D - Result not repeatable..."; and Post, "F." As to System Interpretation, the following was noted: Pre, "Restriction probable; further examination recommended"; and Post, "No interpretation, not enough acceptable maneuvers[.]" 

In relying on the May 2024 PFT results and indicating that the FEV-1 % predicted test result most accurately reflects the Veteran's disability, the VA examiner did not offer an explanation or address the PFT results' notes pertaining to poor session quality and/or recommending further examination. The VA examiner also did not provide an explanation as to why DLCO (SB) testing would not be useful or valid in the Veteran's particular case. 

Therefore, the Board finds the May 2024 VA examination to be inadequate, constituting a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  As such, the Veteran should be scheduled for an additional VA examination on remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the current severity of his service-connected reactive airway disease. 

(a.) The examiner should provide a full description of the Veteran's disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the disability under the rating criteria. The examiner should consider the Veteran's descriptions of his signs and symptoms, to include his descriptions of how frequently he uses treatments including inhalational therapy.  The examiner should consider the Veteran's private treatment records showing that he was prescribed Albuterol to inhale every six hours as needed for wheezing, and that Singulair may be considered during allergy season.

(b.) It is essential the PFT's contain the full range of results necessary to rate the Veteran's respiratory disability under relevant rating criteria (including FEV-1, FVC, FEV- 1/FVC, DLCO (SB)). 

The examiner is also requested to address any note pertaining to poor PFT session quality and/or recommending further examination, and to conduct any further examination needed to accurately reflect the Veteran's level of disability.  

If DLCO SB tests cannot be completed or would not be useful or valid in the Veteran's particular case, the examiner should provide an explanation with sufficient rationale as to why. 

If the PFT's are inaccurate measurements of the Veteran's disability or respiratory functional impairment, the examiner must state the reason why.

The examiner must include a complete rationale for all opinions and conclusions provided.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Boldt, Allison W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.