Citation Nr: A25033203
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240903-472198
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; low back condition; cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; tinnitus; erectile dysfunction; headaches, and to include as due to obesity as an intermediate step, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in service, is otherwise related to service, or was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include a service-connected disability or disabilities causing obesity as an intermediate step.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, claimed as secondary to service-connected right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; low back condition; cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; tinnitus; erectile dysfunction; headaches, and to include as due to obesity as an intermediate step, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1168, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310; VAOPGCPREC 01-17 (January 6, 2017).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1975 to March 1979.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a January 2024 rating decision, which denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran appealed the decision to the Board. In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review. In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Veteran asserts that his obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected disabilities. In a January 2023 statement, the Veteran said that his musculoskeletal disabilities keep him from exercising. The Veteran said he takes medications for these disabilities, and he is prevented from being able to sleep on his side. He also stated that the pain from his musculoskeletal disabilities made it difficult for him to fall or stay asleep. The Veteran also said that the pain and loss of sleep caused him to develop agitation and anxiety. The Veteran reported that he had pauses in breathing while sleeping; snoring; trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings; headaches; daytime fatigue; poor concentration; and difficulty completing tasks.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). The three-element test to establish service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). The controlling regulation has been interpreted to permit a grant of service connection not only for a disability caused by a service-connected disability, but for the degree of disability resulting from aggravation of a non-service-connected disability by a service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). In other words, service connection may be granted for a disability found to be proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disease or injury.

In an opinion issued by VA's General Counsel, the General Counsel determined that obesity cannot be service connected on a direct basis and obesity cannot qualify as an in-service event for service-connection purposes. However, the General Counsel determined that obesity may serve as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). VAOGCPREC 1-2017. In such case, that evidence would need to reflect: (1) a service-connected disability or disabilities that caused the veteran to become obese; (2) the obesity was a substantial factor in causing another disability; and (3) the disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities. Id.

In a decision by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), it held that while obesity is not itself recognized as a disability by the Secretary of VA, it may be recognized as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a disability claimed as secondary to that service-connected disability, based on the service-connected disability causing or aggravating the obesity. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306-07 (2020).

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. The reasons follow.

The record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. For example, the February 2023 VA examination report shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. The AOJ conceded that there was evidence of a current disability, which finding is binding on the Board. Thus, the facts establish a current disability, and the first element of direct and secondary service connection is met.

As to the evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, the Veteran's service treatment records do not show a disease or injury indicative of obstructive sleep apnea. Neither the Veteran nor his representative have made allegations that sleep apnea had its onset in service, but rather that the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities caused the Veteran to gain weight due to not exercising. The AOJ considered direct service connection, and thus the Board will as well. The December 1974 service enlistment Report of Medical Examination showed that the Veteran was clinically normal in the nose and mouth and throat. In the corresponding Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied a history of frequent trouble sleeping. The January 1979 Report of Medical Examination showed that the Veteran was clinically normal in the nose and mouth and throat. Additionally, the January 1979 Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied a history of frequent trouble sleeping. These facts tend to show that obstructive sleep apnea did not have its onset in service, and service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on a direct basis is not warranted.

As to secondary service connection, the Veteran is service connected for right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; low back condition; cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; tinnitus; erectile dysfunction; and headaches. Thus, to this extent, the second element of a secondary service-connection claim is met.

As to evidence of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea due to or related to service, the Board finds that the facts persuasively weigh against this element of a direct service connection claim. The first noted diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea was in August 2016, which is more than 35 years after the Veteran's separation from service and is evidence that tends to show the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea did not have its onset during service or is otherwise related to service. At the present time, there is no competent evidence of a nexus between the post-service diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea and service. Thus, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on a direct basis.

VA did not provide a VA medical examination or medical opinion in connection with the claim for direct service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. VA must provide a medical examination and/or medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Here, the evidence does not establish an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or that the disability may be related to service. Thus, there is no pre-decisional duty to assist error in the AOJ not providing a VA examination or medical opinion in connection with the direct theory of entitlement.

As to evidence that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was proximately caused or aggravated by the service-connected disabilities, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against this element of secondary service connection. There are limited post-service medical records within the Veteran's claims file. However, as noted above, the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in 2016.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from C. Michael Bucci, PA-C. Mr. Bucci stated that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain was due to and/or related to his service-connected disabilities and that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was secondary to the weight gain from the service-connected disabilities. Mr. Bucci noted that the Veteran reported he weighed 145 pounds upon military entrance, 190 pounds at the time of the sleep study, and had a current weight of 195 pounds. Mr. Bucci said that was evidence of an overall progressive weight gain and current overweight condition, which chronologically developed after the musculoskeletal symptomology related to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. Mr. Bucci cited multiple medical studies that documented evidence to indicate that chronic partial sleep loss, to include insomnia and frequent night-time awakenings, increased the risk of obesity and weight gain. Mr. Bucci also stated that evidence pointed to a possible role of decreased sleep duration in the current epidemic of obesity. 

Moreover, Mr. Bucci stated that obstructive sleep apnea was associated with an increased risk of psychological diagnosis, including major depressive disorder, anxiety, PTSD, and bipolar disorder. Mr. Bucci said this is related to a multitude of complex inter-related pathopsychophysicological mechanisms and processes that occur directly from these mental health disorders and result in weight gain and/or obesity due to and/or are associated with neuro-endocrine dysfunction processes associated with altered consumptive behaviors, sleep disturbances, and treatment medications. The medical literature Mr. Bucci's cited described from a pathophysiological perspective how obstructive sleep apnea is associated with obesity, exacerbated hyperglycemia, and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, and promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome, with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the obstructive sleep apnea. 

The Board finds that Mr. Bucci's opinion that found a positive nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities is of no probative value. First, Mr. Bucci noted that the Veteran's obesity was due to his musculoskeletal disabilities and cited medical literature that showed the Veteran was at a higher risk for obesity, not that the musculoskeletal disabilities caused the Veteran's obesity. Second, Mr. Bucci stated that obstructive sleep apnea was associated with an increased risk of psychological diagnosis, including major depressive disorder, anxiety, PTSD, and bipolar disorder. Mr. Bucci said this is related to a multitude of complex inter-related pathopsychophysicological mechanisms. The Board notes that the Veteran has not been service-connected for a mental disorder nor is there evidence within the Veteran's claim's file that the Veteran has been diagnosed with or treated for a mental disorder. Thus, the Board finds that Mr. Bucci's opinion is based on an inaccurate factual premise and is of no probative value.

In February 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained related to the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. The examiner explained that there was no documentation in the medical literature that shows a direct causative link between the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine disability that would have prevented the Veteran from a calorie restriction diet that would result in weight loss once he had started to gain weight or that would have allowed him to maintain a normal weight once he had reached it. In fact, the VA examiner stated that multiple studies show that caloric restriction for weight loss is just as effective without exercise, and randomized controlled studies showing exactly that are cited below. The examiner stated that overall caloric intake can be reduced to be appropriate to a patient's metabolic output to maintain an appropriate body weight regardless of their joint status.

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from Zeyad Morcos, M.D. Dr. Morcos concluded that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was secondary to and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from the service-connected disabilities. Dr. Morcos stated that due to the chronic pain, the Veteran participated in less physical activities and led a more sedentary lifestyle, which was a contributing factor to his weight gain. Dr. Morcos cited a study that showed adults with chronic widespread pain participated in less moderate to vigorous physical activities than individuals without chronic pain. Furthermore, Dr. Morcos stated that many studies confirmed the relationship between chronic pain and weight gain/obesity. One study cited by Dr. Morcos stated that weight was associated with comorbid disability, depression, and reduced quality of life for physical function in chronic pain patients. Dr. Morcos stated that the medical literature is clear that chronic musculoskeletal pain caused disturbances of both the onset and maintenance of restful sleep. Moreover, Dr. Morcos stated that current medical literature revealed that a sleep disturbance may lead to a multitude of metabolic and neuroendocrinological problems, including insulin insensitivity, glucose intolerance, elevated cortisol secretions, and an imbalance of ghrelin and leptin production, which contributes to lethargy and an increased appetite. Furthermore, Dr. Morcos stated that NSAIDS, the most commonly prescribed and used drug to treat musculoskeletal pain, promote sodium and water retention. He said that research showed that fluid retention, such as that caused by chronic NSAID use, is a cause of obstructive sleep apnea. He cited a study that there was no considerable evidence that fluid retention in the legs during the day contributed to the pathogenesis of obstructive sleep apnea and central sleep apnea. 

The Board finds that Dr. Morcos' opinion that found a positive nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities is of no probative value. First, Dr. Morcos noted that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was diagnosed on August 12, 2018, and documented an AHI of 14.7. However, a review of the medical records within the claims file show that the Veteran was diagnosed on August 27, 2016, with an AHI of 10. Thus, the Board finds that Dr. Morcos did not consider all the relevant evidence of record when formulating his opinion, and his opinion is not adequate. Furthermore, Dr. Morcos' opinion concluded that the Veteran's obesity was due to his musculoskeletal disabilities; however, the cited medical literature showed the Veteran was at a higher risk for obesity, not that the musculoskeletal disabilities caused the Veteran's obesity.

In January 2024, another VA medical opinion was obtained. The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. The examiner stated during obstructive sleep apnea, the soft tissues of the upper airway relax and intermittently occlude the airway during sleep. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not share the same pathophysiology that causes obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner noted that although one risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea was an elevated BMI over 30, the examiner noted that the Veteran's BMI is 27 and less likely than not a significant factor in causing his obstructive sleep apnea. Furthermore, the examiner stated that there was no likely pathophysiologic cause and effect between the Veteran's musculoskeletal conditions and his obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner said that weight gain is a primary effect of increased intake of calories. The examiner stated that excess intake is the primary cause of weight gain, as opposed to decreased physical activity.

The Board finds the February 2023 and January 2024 VA examiners' findings and opinions to be probative evidence against a causal relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and his service-connected disabilities. The examiners provided rationales for the opinions, which were based on a review of evidence, including lay statements from the Veteran, and the application of medical principles and a review of medical literature. The VA examiners' opinions considered an accurate history regarding the Veteran's weight gain and were supported by a detailed rationale that considered the lay and medical evidence. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). These medical opinions are evidence against the Veteran's secondary theory of entitlement using obesity as an intermediate step.

While the examiners did not specifically address "aggravation," the Board finds that the opinion is distinguishable from the holding in El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013). In that case, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims found that the examiner's opinion that it was "more likely than not that the Veteran's alcohol abuse was related to factors other than the veteran's post-traumatic stress disorder" did not rule out the possibility that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD aggravated his alcohol abuse to some degree. Id. 

In contrast, here, the February 2023 and January 2024 VA examiners opined that that there was no etiological relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and his service-connected disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step. Because the examiners clearly opined that there was no medical relationship between the service-connected disabilities and obstructive sleep apnea, the examiners' statements, unlike that of the examiner in El-Amin, rules out the possibility that the service-connected disabilities may aggravate to some degree the non-service-connected disability of obstructive sleep apnea. Thus, the Board finds that the February 2023 and January 2024 VA examiners' opinions addressed both causation and aggravation and is, therefore, probative regarding whether the service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated obstructive sleep apnea. 

On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. Section 303 of this law provides that, if a veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity ("TERA"), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between certain disabilities, including gastrointestinal disorders, and the toxic exposure risk activities during service. 38 U.S.C. § 1168. 

The Regional Office previously determined that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA activity during his period of service. Therefore, VA did not provide the Veteran with a TERA examination and medical opinion, and the Board finds that there is insufficient evidence to determine that the Veteran participated in a TERA to warrant a TERA-specific examination and medical opinion. 

For all the reasons laid out above, the Board finds that the competent, credible, and probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in service or is caused or aggravated by service-connected disability or disabilities, to include as due to obesity or weight gain as an intermediate step. 

While the Veteran is competent to report his obstructive sleep apnea symptoms, he is not competent to directly link the post-service obstructive sleep apnea to service or a service-connected disability or disabilities, as medical expertise is required. In this regard, the question of causation involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship. As such, the question of etiology in this case may not be competently addressed by lay evidence, and the Veteran's own opinion is nonprobative evidence. At the present time, there is no competent and probative evidence to weigh against the February 2023 and January 2024 VA medical opinions regarding secondary service connection. As to direct service connection, there is no competent evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's service and obstructive sleep apnea. The nexus element for both direct and secondary service connections are not met.

For the above reasons, Board concludes the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to the right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy associated with cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; low back condition; cervical spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome; tinnitus; erectile dysfunction; headaches, as due to obesity as an intermediate step, is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the service-connection claim with consideration of the theories of entitlement considered herein. The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.