Citation Nr: A25033874
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 201019-122383
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

A rating greater than 30 percent disabling for major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder (collectively, depression), for the period prior to May 26, 2020, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Prior to May 26, 2020, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric disability did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, or worse.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Prior to May 26, 2020, the criteria for a rating greater than 30 percent disabling for depression have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active military service from October 1994 to July 1996, to include service in the Persian Gulf War.

This case was previously before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board); in a March 2024 decision, the Board granted some and denied other relief sought by the Veteran. 

The Veteran appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) the denial of 1. a rating greater than 30 percent disabling for her depression for the period prior to May 26, 2020 and 2. TDIU status. In October 2024, the Court granted the parties' Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR) which, in pertinent part, vacated the aforementioned rulings in the March 2024 Board decision. In the JMPR, the parties agreed that the Board had provided an inadequate statement of reasons or bases for its decisions, in that it had 1. failed, for the period prior to May 26, 2020, to adequately address the level of occupational and social impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms and to clarify its finding as to the rating assigned and 2. failed to adequately articulate the reasons and bases for its finding that Veteran does not work in a protected environment under the proper standard provided in LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111 (2024).

Increased Rating

Prior to May 26, 2020 

The Veteran contends that, for the period prior to May 26, 2020, her service-connected depression was worse than contemplated by the currently assigned 30 percent disability rating, and that an extraschedular rating is warranted.  See May 2020 Supplemental Claim; October 2020 VA Form 10182. Based on a review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms do not warrant greater than a 30 percent rating prior to May 26, 2020, and that referral for extraschedular rating is similarly unwarranted. 

The Veteran was afforded a May 2019 VA examination, at that time the VA examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder and found occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The Veteran reported that she continued to work full-time as a paralegal, and that she works a second job with the United Parcel Service. Additionally, the Veteran reported that she maintains regular contact with her mother, specifically that they spoke daily. Further, that she maintains regular contact with all of her siblings and that her oldest son lived with her. She denied any significant social interaction other than with immediate family. Upon mental status examination, the examiner described the Veteran's symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment. The examiner described the Veteran's self-reported depression-related symptoms as: lack of motivation, less interest in once preferred activities, self-isolative preferences, crying spells and mood swings. The examiner described the Veteran's self-reported anxiety-related symptoms as experiencing excessive anxiety and worry with difficulty managing the worry, poor sleep, restlessness, irritability, poor concentration/mind going blank and is easily fatigued. 

A review of the record shows that the Veteran receives treatment at the VA Medical Center for his psychiatric disability. However, a review of the treatment notes of record do not show that the Veteran has symptoms of her psychiatric disability that are worse than those noted at her VA examination. The medical records contained in the file for the period prior to May 26, 2020, provide no evidence to support an increase above the previously assigned 30 percent rating. See VA Treatment records May 2019 to April 2020 (received May 2020); May 2019 VA medical examination and opinion. Indeed, the Veteran's April 2020 treatment records indicate that she had worked full-time as a paralegal for over 8 years, has a supportive family and work environment. She further reported that, during this period, her motivation was "low" or "stable" and her mood, "decent." The Board finds this evidence persuasive in showing occupational and social impairment with only occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care and conversation normal.

The Veteran's mental health notes, as discussed above, indicate that in therapy sessions, the Veteran had no signs or symptoms which would support an increased severity or duration of symptoms which might support a level of social and/or occupational function greater than 30 percent. Those records indicate that the Veteran's mood and concentration were stable during this period, and her motivation "low" or "stable." See Mental health notes May 2019 to April 2020. Thus, based on the overall record, the Board finds that the Veteran's level of symptomatology and level of social and occupational functioning was, until May 26, 2020, characterized by occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation, but no worse. 

In addition, the Board has considered whether, as contended by the Veteran, her psychiatric symptoms present an exceptional or unusual disability picture so as to warrant referral to the Director of Compensation Service for consideration of an extraschedular rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.321.

Consideration of an extraschedular rating requires a three-step inquiry. The first question is whether the schedular rating criteria adequately contemplate the Veteran's disability picture. If the schedular evaluation does not contemplate the level of disability and symptomatology shown and is found inadequate, then the second inquiry is whether the exceptional disability picture exhibits other related factors, such as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization. See Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008). If the veteran's disability picture meets the second inquiry, then the third step is to refer the case to the Director of Compensation Service to determine whether an extraschedular rating is warranted. See id.

In regard to the first Thun element, comparison of the Veteran's symptoms and associated functional impairment does not show that the rating criteria are inadequate to describe her disability picture. Based on the medical and lay evidence of record, the rating criteria reasonably describes the Veteran's disability level and symptomatology. Indeed, as addressed above, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms are among those normally seen in acquired psychiatric disorders. Further, the Veteran has contended that her psychiatric symptoms have impacted her ability to work; impairment with employment is inherent to any disability rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Extraschedular consideration is appropriate only after the AOJ has exhausted all other schedular tools for a disability rating. See, e.g., Long v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 167 (2020). Here, the Veteran's disability picture as a whole does not present a level of impairment that is so exceptional that it cannot be contemplated by the schedular criteria. See id. at 174.

As the Board finds that the Veteran's level of disability and symptomatology are adequately contemplated by the rating schedule, and do not suggest marked interference with employment (beyond that contemplated in the assigned rating) or frequent periods of hospitalization, referral for extraschedular consideration is not warranted for the service-connected psychiatric disability. To the extent that the ruling is unclear, the Board finds that the Veteran

The Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is inapplicable, because the evidence of record persuasively weighs against higher ratings.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107 (b);?38?C.F.R. §§?4.3.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that, while she is employed full-time as a paralegal at $70,000 per year plus bonus, she is entitled to TDIU status because that employment is marginal, and her workplace is a protected environment. April 2021 Appellate Brief at 4-9.

The Board notes the recent Court decision issued in LaBruzza v. McDonough. 37 Vet. App. 111 (2024). The Court in LaBruzza held that protective environment would mean a "lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." Id. The Court in LaBruzza rejected VA's argument that employment in a protected environment "requires evidence of an employer's benevolent intent or motivation for hiring, promoting, or continuing to employ a veteran" and agreed "to some extent" with the appellant's argument that employment in a protected environment "takes into account workplace accommodations required by the ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act)." But the Court cautioned that these general principles are neither categorical nor dispositive and while "[t]hey will guide most cases... the Board may consider any individualized factor or evidence that tends to clarify whether a specific position was shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." Significantly, the Court added, "of course, the income that a veteran earns from employment must be relatively low to qualify as 'in a protected environment.'"

Here, the Board finds that the Veteran's income information is incomplete. As in LaBruzza, a remand is required for further development of the record to determine the Veteran's actual earnings during each year during the appeal period, so as to allow the Board to consider these earnings in conducting the fact-based analysis required by LaBruzza. As the record indicates that there is outstanding relevant evidence that may substantiate the Veteran's claim, a remand of this matter is warranted to ensure that the AOJ substantially complies with its duty to assist the appellant with the development of his claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

(Continued on the next page)

?

1. Request that the Veteran to submit information verifying her earned income for the years from 2018 to the present (if any), such as copies of tax returns, W-2 forms, or an earnings statement from her employers.

 

 

I. Cannaday

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carson, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.