Citation Nr: A25033940
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240624-450294
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 70 percent for posttraumatic disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving doubt in favor of the Veteran, during the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms productive of functional impairment comparable to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2006 to January 2012.

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a January 2024 decision. In May 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2024 decision.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board is cognizant of the ruling of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). In Rice, the Court held that a claim for a total rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disability, either expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability and is part of the claim for an increased rating. In this case, the Veteran has not argued, and the record does not otherwise reflect, that the disability at issue renders him unemployable. Accordingly, the Board concludes that a claim for TDIU has not been raised.

In the July 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation, the Veteran's representative asserted they have no additional argument to offer on this issue, and they wished for the matter to be advanced to the Board for appellate review. The Board interprets this statement as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the Veteran's right to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent for post-traumatic disorder (PTSD) is granted

The Veteran assets the severity of his PTSD symptoms approximate the severity as outlined at a 70 percent disability rating.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. See U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran has been rated under DC 9411 for PTSD, which is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

Under the general rating formula, a 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The criteria for a 100 percent rating are total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi,16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and in Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki,713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013), the Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."

The Federal Circuit further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Id. Thus, "although the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Id. at 118. As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment described in the general rating formula to determine whether an increased evaluation is warranted.

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in August 2022. The examiner characterized the Veteran's PTSD disability as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

The Veteran was on time. He was heavy-set and wore casual clothing. Hygiene was fair. Mood was sad and affect was consistent to mood. Speech was clear. He was oriented to date, president, and current events. There was no evidence of psychosis or thought disorder

He is married to his only wife of three years. They have one biological child, and he has two stepchildren. He feels his PTSD affects family relationships in that "they notice when I'm off, if I'm having a bad mental day." He doesn't think his marriage is in trouble. His wife is understanding. He has a couple of friends with whom he talks to on the phone. He belongs to no groups. Aside from work he rarely leaves the house. He goes to the gym two to three times a week and runs errands after work. 

He has worked at a construction company for two and a half years. He is currently in good standing. He gets along with his current coworkers and with his direct boss. He feels his PTSD affects his functioning at work in that he sometimes is    startled by noises or smells. He sometimes has to walk away for a while.

The Veteran's reported symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The August 2022 VA examiner noted his clinical records indicated that the Veteran avoids people and crowds. He has hypervigilance and startles easily. He has nearly been aggressive when startled. He hasn't engaged in risk-taking behavior. He has panic attacks more than once a week. He has noticed problems with memory and concentration. On psychological testing on the PCL-5 he earned a PTSD score of 65 (very severe range). He endorsed 10 of the 20 symptoms in the "extremely" range and another seven symptoms in the "quite a bit" range.

An August 2022 VA PTSD outpatient note shows the Veteran was oriented to person, place and time. He was well groomed, casually dressed in shorts and a t-shirt. Mood is depressed with congruent affect. Tearful at times. Speech is normal for rate, tone and rhythm. Thought processes were logical and goal directed. No indications of perceptual disturbances. Judgment is adequate. Insight is adequate. No indications of mania/hypomania. No psychomotor agitation noted. His PCL-5 score was 51, which amounts to severe symptoms of PTSD. He reported moderate loss of interest in activities, as well as feeling distant or cut off from people. He reported extreme difficulty concentrating and falling asleep. He reported moderate irritable behavior, angry outbursts, or acting aggressively.

In correspondence received in December 2022, E.F., the coordinator of the Trauma Recovery Program at the Veteran's PTSD clinic, stated the Veteran has been suffering from severe PTSD symptoms. E.F. stated the Veteran has repeatedly called her from his work site having panic attacks and difficulty functioning. She stated that he has exhibited severe depression symptoms. She opined that Veterans she has seen with the type and severity of symptoms similar to the Veteran are awarded at least a 70 percent disability rating.

Dr. H.C. submitted a statement date September 2023. H.C. stated that the Veteran's VA records from the PTSD clinic document that the Veteran is suffering from severe PTSD symptoms. His most recent PCL-5 score was 65/80, a high score on this measure.

In considering the evidence of record and resolving all reasonable doubt in the favor of the Veteran, the Board concludes that the Veteran is entitled to a 70 percent evaluation for his service-connected PTSD. The Veteran reported symptoms that included chronic sleep impairment, irritability with angry outbursts, mild memory loss, panic attacks symptoms more than once per week, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, anxiety, and depressed mood. 

Regarding his social and family relationships, the Veteran struggled to maintain personal relationships, noting that his family knows when he is having a bad mental day. Additionally, the Veteran reported he rarely leaves the house other than for work and the gym. He belongs to no groups. Occupationally, the Veteran's therapist reported that the Veteran has repeatedly called her from his work site having panic attacks and difficulty functioning. The Veteran's regular treatment provider has described the Veteran's PTSD symptoms as being "severe" with a demonstrated effect on his occupational and social functioning. While all of his symptoms are not identical to the examples in the 70 percent rating, the severity and frequency of his PTSD symptomatology demonstrated in the medical record supports a finding of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

Although an increased rating of 70 percent is warranted, the evidence of record does not reflect symptoms that rise to the severity of that contemplated by a 100 percent rating. The evidence does not demonstrate total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; or, symptoms of similar severity. 

The Board finds the Veteran does not have total occupational impairment. The Veteran has had difficulty functioning at work, but he gets along with coworkers and boss and is working in good standing. As such, the Board does not find that the Veteran's symptoms are of the frequency, severity, and duration as contemplated for total occupational impairment.

The Board finds the Veteran does not have total social impairment. The Veteran does have days that he is "off" but generally gets along with his immediate family, and he has a couple friends with whom he maintains contact. The Board finds this evidence shows the Veteran does not have total social impairment, but rather has an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Therefore, resolving doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds the Veteran's disability picture most nearly approximates the criteria for a 70 percent rating for the entire period on appeal. Therefore, for the entire period on appeal, a rating of 70 percent, for service-connected PTSD is warranted.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	St. Laurent, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.