Citation Nr: A25033908
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-443603
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable rating for dermatitis is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's dermatitis affected less than five percent of the entire body and required no more than topical therapy during the past twelve-month period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for dermatitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2004 to October 2011, with additional service in the Army Reserve. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an April 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. The Board notes that on the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, that besides the April 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran also attempted to appeal decisions from January 2019 and June 2019. The Board was unable to docket these appeals as the Veteran did not submit a Board appeal within one year of the rating decision letters associated with these decisions, and the Veteran was informed of this in a June 2024 correspondence. Should the Veteran wish to pursue these claims, she may file a Supplemental Claim. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Under certain circumstances, a claim for a total disability rating based on unemployability (TDIU) may be inferred as part of an increased rating claim. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-55 (2009). The facts of this case do not raise the issue. The Veteran has not contended, nor does the record raise, that her service-connected dermatitis prevents her from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment. Thus, there is no inferred TDIU claim.

The Veteran seeks a compensable rating for her service-connected dermatitis. The Veteran's dermatitis is rated at 0 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806, which uses the General Rating Formula For The Skin.

For increased rating appeals within the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, the appeal period is limited up to the date of the AOJ decision. The applicable rating period here is February 26, 2024, the date the Veteran applied for a higher rating for her service-connected dermatitis, through April 4, 2024, the date of the decision on appeal. The Board will generally review evidence from that period and during the one year "look back period" preceding the submission of the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2); Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Different ratings may be assigned for different periods of time for the same disorder if the facts show distinct time periods with different levels of disability. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Under the General Rating Formula for the Skin, a noncompensable rating is warranted where the condition requires no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period and at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of exposed areas affected.

A 10 percent rating is warranted where the condition involves characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA), or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period.

A 30 percent rating is warranted where the condition involves characteristic lesions involving 30 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period.

A 60 percent rating is warranted where the condition involves characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period.

VA regulations clarify that systemic therapy is treatment that is administered through any route other than the skin, and topical therapy is treatment that is administered through the skin. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118 (a).

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's Department of Defense treatment records associated with the claims file show that during the one-year period preceding the period on appeal, she denied having skin problems. At appointments in March 2023 and June 2023, she denied rash and pruritus. On a July 2023 medical questionnaire, she denied skin problems, to include eczema, hives, and infection. 

On the February 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, the Veteran reported that her dermatitis covers a large area of her stomach and chest, that it burns and itches all the time, and that it leaves her skin discolored after it heals, noting that it is very painful. As part of the claim, the Veteran submitted photographs of her dermatitis in February 2024. These photographs show that the Veteran has dermatitis on her abdominal area and on her upper breast area bilaterally. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2024. The examiner noted a diagnosis of eczema and stated that the Veteran's atopic dermatitis is the same diagnosis. The Veteran reported that her eczema comes and goes in flares but stated that her flares had been more frequent and severe and that they last over one month at a time. The Veteran treated her eczema with corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medications, with the examiner noting the use of a topical cream and an ointment. She also treated her eczema with oral antihistamines and a topical hydrocream. She did not use retinoids, sympathomimetics, biologics, or any other medication. She had no other treatments or procedures in the past twelve months. On examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's characteristic lesions due to her eczema covered less than five percent of her total body area, and less than five percent of her total exposed body area. The examiner wrote that on examination, the Veteran's epigastric area and lower abdominal area had dry and flaking skin. She did not have scarring due to her eczema. The examiner noted no functional impact due to the Veteran's eczema. 

The Board finds that a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected dermatitis is not warranted. The evidence of record shows that the Veteran's dermatitis does not meet the requisite coverage area or use of intermittent systemic therapy required for a compensable rating under the General Rating Formula For the Skin. During the rating period, the Veteran's eczema manifested as dry and flaking skin that covered less than five percent of her total body area and less than five percent of her total exposed body area. She reported additional symptoms of pain, itching, burning, and skin discoloration. She treated her symptoms with topical medications and oral antihistamines. During the appeal period, her dermatitis did not meet any of the criteria for the next highest rating. Her dermatitis did not manifest as characteristic lesions involving at least five percent, but less than twenty percent, of the entire body, or at least five percent, but less than twenty percent, of exposed areas. Additionally, she did not require intermittent systemic therapy for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period.

When considering a claim for an increased disability rating, the Board must not consider the ameliorative effects of medication unless those effects are explicitly contemplated by the relevant rating criteria. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012). Here, however, there is no competent medical opinion, or other competent evidence, demonstrating that the Veteran would have met the criteria for a compensable rating but for the use of such medication.

The Board has considered whether the Veteran may be entitled to a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 7804, which compensates for unstable or painful scars, but the March 2024 VA examiner noted that the Veteran did not have any scars related to the condition on appeal. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's representative submitted an Appellate Brief in February 2025, which argued that the photographs submitted by the Veteran in February 2024 appear to show that the Veteran has characteristic lesions that cover five percent but less than twenty percent of her entire body, thus entitling her to a 10 percent disability rating. However, a review of the February 2024 photographs does not plainly reveal that the Veteran's dermatitis covers five percent but less than twenty percent of her entire body. Additionally, the Board notes that measuring and estimating the total body area of a skin disorder is a medical determination, and the Veteran's representative has not been shown to possess the requisite medical training, expertise, or credentials to make this finding. Accordingly, this argument is afforded no probative weight. The Board assigns greater probative weight to the March 2024 VA examiner's finding that the Veteran's dermatitis covers less than five percent of her total body area.  

The evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable rating during the period on appeal. As the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). For these reasons, the claim is denied.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dorsey, J.T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.