Citation Nr: A25033083
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-430751
DATE:  April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran had a back disability that clearly and unmistakably existed prior to his active service and was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by such service, and he does not have another back disability that had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a back disability have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1112, 1111, 1153, 5107 (2018);?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.303, 3.306, 3.307, 3.309 (2023).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps from December 1996 to September 2000.? 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2023 higher level review (HLR) rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Initially, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disability was denied in a February 2023 rating decision. In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, in which he requested review of the February 2023 rating decision. The April 2023 HLR rating decision on appeal was issued in response to that request. ?????????? 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.?Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 rating decision, which was subject to HLR. 38?C.F.R. §?20.301. Any evidence submitted after the February 2023 AOJ decision, which was subject to HLR, cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801.?? 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.?

Service Connection - Back Disability

The Veteran asserts that their back disability was caused by active service.

Prior to entering service, the Veteran was under the care of a chiropractor from August 1995 to December 1995, during that time they were treated for back pain and strain.

Service treatment records (STRs) show that the Veteran was afforded an enlistment examination in September 1996. At that time, the Veteran denied experiencing recurrent back pain, but did report that he had seen a chiropractor prior to entrance for minor back pains and strains. Treatment records were obtain documenting the Veteran's pre-service back complaints. A review of the pre-service treatment records show that the Veteran was involved in a motor vehicle accident in August 1995. The patient was seen for complaints of, in pertinent part, thoracolumbar spine pain. X-rays of the lumbar spine at that time revealed no fractures or dislocations; however, there was right lateral flexion malposition of L3 and a left lateral flexion malposition at L1. The lumbosacral angle was excessive, but disc spaces and bone quality were adequate. The Veteran's treatment provider at that time diagnosed thoracolumbar acceleration/deceleration subluxation strain/sprain with associated myalgia and myospasm. It was noted that the Veteran was seen on a regular basis of decreasing frequency based on re-examination findings and subjective complaints; and that treatment consisted of conservative chiropractic adjustive procedures and supportive physical therapy designed to restore and maintain biomechanical integrity, reduce nerve root irritation and myospasm, and re-establish musculo-ligamentous integrity. It was noted that the Veteran was seen in January 1996 for re-evaluation, at which time he was experiencing mild residual back discomfort, and was released from further care at that time. The Veteran's treatment provider noted that the Veteran's prognosis was excellent, but may be subject to periods of exacerbation, especially at times of stress, fatigue, or emotional upset. At the time of the enlistment examination, the Veteran's spine was noted to be clinically normal on physical examination. Ultimately, the Veteran was deemed qualified for active service and was enlisted.

Further review of the STRs shows that the Veteran was afforded lumbar spine X-rays in September 1996. At that time, the Veteran's spine was noted to be normal. There is no other indication from the STRs that the Veteran complained of, received treatment for, or was diagnosed with a back disability while he was in active service. In September 2000, the Veteran was afforded a separation examination. At that time, the Veteran specifically denied experiencing recurrent back pain or any back injury during service. Further, the Veteran's spine was clinically normal on physical examination, and there is no indication from the examination report that the Veteran has back complaints at the time of his separation from service. Moreover, the Veteran has not presented any evidence regarding symptoms of or treatment for back disability during service.

Post-service evidence shows that in November 2015, the Veteran established care at the VA medical center and reported having chronic low back pain that had existed for the past 3-4 years, circa 2011. The Veteran underwent physical therapy for their back pain in November 2016 and continued this treatment until February 2017. There is no indication from the post-service treatment records that the Veteran reported an in-service injury to his back, or that he has experience back pain since service.

At an October 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had started to experience intense back pain in 2016, with multiple physical therapy visits and traction. He denied a direct injury to his back, to include one that occurred during service. The examiner diagnosed lumbosacral strain. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's back disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. However, the Board finds that the rationale is inadequate to support the conclusion reached as it lacks a sufficient level of detail. 

An addendum medical opinion was obtained in January 2023. At that time, the examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability clearly and unmistakably existed prior to his active service, and was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service. In so finding, the examiner noted that the Veteran was seen for lumbar pain prior to service, per available records, and was released from carte with an excellent prognosis. The examiner noted that the pre-service treatment records did note the probability of recurrent flare-ups that could be mitigated with a proper home exercise program. The examiner noted that imaging was grossly negative for acute or chronic injury, and that there was no evidence of further injury or complaints during service that would indicate an aggravation in the Veteran's disability. As such, the examiner determined that the disability was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated during service. 

The Board finds the January 2023 VA medical opinion highly probative. In this regard, the examiner demonstrated a thorough knowledge of the Veteran's medical history, considered the contentions of the Veteran, and provided a supporting rationale for the conclusions reached. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Moreover, there is no medical evidence of record to the contrary. For these reasons, the January 2023 VA medical opinion is the most probative evidence of record. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay statements regarding his belief that his current back disability is in some way related to his active service. However, while laypersons are competent to report observable symptoms of back disability, they are not competent to provide an opinion linking a disability to active service or an opinion that a pre-service disability was aggravated by service. An opinion of that nature is beyond a simple cause and effect relationship and would require medical expertise that is simply outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. Further, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran has the medical knowledge or expertise to provide such an opinion. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24?Vet. App.?428 (2011); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Veteran is not competent to provide an etiology opinion in this case.?? 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for a back disability is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	UmezEronini, Ikechukwu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.