Citation Nr: A25033813
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240909-472029
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his currently diagnosed OSA is proximately due to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1984 to June 1988 and February 1991 to August 1994. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in January 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In September 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. . However, based on the evidence the Board may consider, service connection for OSA is awarded herein, which is a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran contends his OSA is caused or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities as such kept him from exercising and being able to sleep, which caused him to gain weight, which, in turn, led to his OSA. The Board notes that, during his June 2023 VA examination, the Veteran also reported that his sleep apnea onset in 1984. However, as the Board herein awards service connection on a secondary basis, the Veteran's alternative theory need not be addressed. 

In this regard, service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Further, service connection may not be awarded on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

In January 2017, VA's Office of General Counsel issued a precedential opinion finding that obesity may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be connected on a secondary basis. In order to meet these criteria, the veteran must show (1) that his service-connected disability caused or aggravated his obesity; and, if so, (2) whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his claimed condition; and (3) whether the claimed condition would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017; Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of OSA, to include as noted at a June 2023 VA examination, and is service-connected for bilateral knee patellofemoral syndrome. The Board is bound by such favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the remaining inquiry is whether the Veteran's current OSA is caused or aggravated by such service-connected disabilities, to include via obesity as an intermediate step.

In this regard, in February 2023, C.M.B., a private PA-C, completed a sleep apnea medical assessment and noted a diagnosis of OSA. He opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and obesity was due to and/or related to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities; it was least as likely as not that his OSA was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities; and it was at least as likely as not that, without the Veteran's weight gain and obesity, his OSA would not have occurred. 

In support thereof, C.M.B. noted that the Veteran's reported weight upon military entrance was 155 pounds and his current weight was 275 pounds with a body mass index (BMI) of 38.4, which met the national standard by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for obesity. He explained that such demonstrated the Veteran's overall progressive weight gain and current obesity, which chronologically developed after his musculoskeletal symptomatology related to his service-connected disabilities. C.M.B. indicated that his bilateral knee disabilities resulted in symptoms of pain and painful motion with sleep disturbances with insomnia and frequent awakenings. He also reported that, due to the persistent pain from the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, he was unable to be as active as he was before such disabilities and subsequently began to progressively gain weight

In this regard, C.M.B. noted that multiple laboratory and epidemiological studies within the medical literature reflected that chronic partial sleep loss increases the risk of obesity and weight gain. He also explained that sleep loss results in metabolic and endocrine alterations, and the adverse impact of sleep deprivation and dysregulation of the neuroendocrine appetite regulation was likely to be driven by increased activity in neuronal populations expressing the excitatory peptides orexins that promote hunger signals. He explained that these effects led to an increased BMI and obesity. C.M.B. cited to medical studies that suggested weight gain has been established as secondary sequelae of a more sedentary lifestyle related to joint pain, knee stiffness, and muscle weakness.

C.M.B. further cited to medical studies that documented the pathophysiology of OSA related to obesity in that obesity has been found to be associated with passive pharyngeal critical closing pressure and the deposition of fat around the pharyngeal airway was likely to increase the collapsibility of the pharyngeal airway. He noted that the fat deposition around the abdomen led to reductions in functional residual capacity, which would be predicted to reduce lung volume tethering effects on the upper airway. C.M.B. further indicated that the medical literature reflected that chronic musculoskeletal pain caused sleep disturbances and such impaired a person's daily function and decrease of quality of life. He also noted that there was rapidly accumulating evidence from both laboratory and epidemiological studies to indicate that chronic partial sleep loss may increase the risk of obesity and weight gain. C.M.B. also cited to multiple medical studies that documented that obesity was known to predispose patients to OSA. Thus, he concluded that the Veteran's OSA was at least as likely as not secondary to the weight gain from his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities. 

Conversely, in June 2023, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected disability. As rationale, he noted that the Veteran's medical records indicated a weight gain resulting from his inactivity due to his bilateral knee disabilities and a nexus letter opining that his OSA was secondary to the obesity and weight gain. Nonetheless, he noted that the sleep apnea was secondary to obesity and not secondary to the bilateral knee disabilities. However, he did not address whether such obesity was due to the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities that, in turn, caused his sleep apnea. 

In January 2024, another VA opinion was obtained and such examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities. As rationale, she noted that there was no accepted evidence based medical studies that currently linked the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities to OSA as the pathophysiology of both conditions did not have intersection. However, such examiner also did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities caused him to gain weight that, in turn, led to his OSA.

Nonetheless, as C.M.B. and the VA examiners are all medical professionals with the appropriate expertise to address the etiology of OSA, considered all relevant facts and applicable medical principles, and provided a rationale for their conclusions, their opinions are entitled to equal probative weight. Thus, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that, based on the nexus opinion of C.M.B., his OSA is proximately due to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities. Therefore, service connection for such disorder on a secondary basis is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Clark

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.