Citation Nr: A25033946
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-465470
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2005 to December 2009.    

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, entitlement to service connection for right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis, and entitlement to service connection for left shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has the right to select a different Board review option by submitting a new VA Form 10182 within one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date the Board received his VA Form 10182, whichever date is later, unless the Veteran has requested to waive that right. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2); Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (June 21, 2024).  Although the Veteran has not requested to waive this right, the Board finds the Veteran is not prejudiced as a remand is necessary to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. Cooper v. McDonough, 38 Vet. App. 1 (2024) (holding that a Board remand is not considered a final appealable decision of the issue on appeal).

Legal Criteria

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. ?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a).? Having reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors is required.

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent competent medical and lay evidence.  Competent lay evidence is any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2).  

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that her tinnitus disability developed due to operating rifles in training and deployment, loud jets and airfield noises, and sirens while on active duty. See April 2022 Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ).  

The Veteran was diagnosed with recurrent tinnitus at an April 2022 VA.  The Veteran reported onset of tinnitus in 2012-2013.  The Veteran reported that the ringing sensation in both ears occurs intermittently, every other day, a few times per day, and is increasing in occurrence.  However, the examiner opined that the tinnitus is less likely than not (less than 50% probability) a symptom associated with the Veterans hearing loss.  The examiner reasoned that the May 2004 entrance exam, December 2005, and February 2008 audiograms indicated hearing within normal limits. There is no diagnosis of clinical hearing loss present on the day of exam, therefore a nexus cannot be established between hearing loss and tinnitus.

The examiner also opined that the tinnitus is less likely than not (less than 50% probability) caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  The examiner reasoned that onset of tinnitus is reported by the Veteran to be post-separation 2012/2013.  There is no report of tinnitus in service treatment records (STRs), at separation or in the medical records until the time of the claim.  In addition, the Veteran reports transient ear noise that occurs in the general population without auditory damage or pathology.  The Veteran describes random noise that occurs weekly, lasting several seconds.  This transient ear noise is not consistent with noise-induced tinnitus and is less likely than not related to military noise exposure and the current literature does not support late onset noise-induced tinnitus.  

Despite providing two negative opinions, the examiner then concluded they could not provide a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus without resorting to speculation.  The examiner reasoned that taking into consideration the Veteran's medical history, clinical findings, onset and duration of tinnitus, the examiner was unable to determine the etiology of tinnitus without resorting to mere speculation.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2024, where a different examiner confirmed a diagnosis of recurrent tinnitus.  The Veteran reported onset of tinnitus in 2012-2013.  The Veteran reported that the ringing sensation in both ears occurs intermittently, every other day, 3-5 times per day, and is increasing in occurrence.  The examiner opined that the tinnitus is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) a symptom associated with the Veteran's hearing loss.  The examine reasoned that there is no diagnosis of clinical hearing loss present on the day of exam, therefore a nexus cannot be established between hearing loss and tinnitus.

The July 2024 examiner also opined that the tinnitus is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by or a result of military noise exposure or caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiner reasoned that the onset of tinnitus is reported by the Veteran to be post-separation, in 2012-2013, per the 2022 disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ).  There is no report of tinnitus in STRs, at separation or in the medical records until the time of the claim.  The current literature does not support late onset noise-induced tinnitus.

Like the prior examiner, the July 2022 examiner then concluded that they could not provide a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus without resorting to speculation.  The examiner reasoned that taking into consideration the Veteran's medical history, clinical findings, onset and duration of tinnitus, the examiner was unable to determine the etiology of tinnitus without resorting to mere speculation.

The Board finds that a remand for a new VA medical opinion is warranted as the April 2022 and July 2024 VA examination opinions were conclusory and did not provide adequate rationale for the opinions, only relying on the lack of evidence to support the conclusion.  To be adequate, a medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 256 (2019).  Further, the examiners did not take into consideration the Veteran's lay statements that she developed tinnitus due to operating rifles in training and deployment, loud jets and airfield noises, and sirens.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 262 (2020) (holding that where the examiner failed to address the veteran's lay evidence and the Board fails to find the veteran not credible or not competent to offer that lay evidence, the proper remedy is for VA to obtain a new examination).  Additionally, the examiners did not take into consideration the Veteran's military occupational specialist (MOS) of Field Wireman or that she was deployed in Iraq.  Furthermore, both examiners noted that they could not opine without resorting to speculation, but did not explain whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  In addition, both examiners  did opine that the Veteran's tinnitus was not related to service or her TERAs.  

Given the foregoing, a remand is warranted to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's tinnitus.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  The failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, thus a remand is appropriate.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

2. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends that the tendonitis began while she was in bootcamp, climbing ropes in 2005-2006.  See April 2022 Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ).  The strain comes and goes in both shoulders, and she can feel the strain while doing certain workouts, even with a minimal amount of weight.  Id.  She ignored the strains for a long time.  Id.  

Two months prior to her separation from service in December 2009, the Veteran denied she had ever had or currently had a painful shoulder and indicated she was in good health. See October 2009 Report of Medical History.  In November 2009, she again denied any changes in her health and was medically assessed for separation without being referral for further evaluation. See November 2009 Report of Medical Assessment. 

The Veteran was diagnosed with right and left should rotator cuff tendinitis at a May 2022 VA examination.  The Veteran reported that her bilateral shoulder condition began in 2006 while in boot camp.  She recalled climbing rope and feeling instability in both shoulders.  She was not evaluated by a medical provider as she felt it would delay training.  The only symptoms were bilateral shoulder instability, which has become more constant since its onset.  She was unable to lift any weight above her head, as her shoulders give out.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that during service, there are no STRs that shows evidence of bilateral rotator cuff tendonitis.  In addition, there is no evidence of chronicity of care.  No chronic diagnosis is made for bilateral rotator cuff tendonitis.  The bilateral rotator cuff tendonitis is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  

After another VA examination in April 2024, a different examiner opined that the right and left tendonitis was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  Based on review of the available evidence, the examiner concluded there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of right and left shoulder tendonitis and military service.  Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.  The file does not endorse any reports of shoulder conditions while the Veteran was in service.  The Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral tendonitis in shoulders in May 2022.  

The Board finds that a remand for a new VA medical opinion is warranted as the May 2022 and April 2024 VA opinions were conclusory and did not provide adequate rationale for the opinions, only relying on the lack of evidence to support the conclusion.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 256 (2019) (To be adequate, a medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two).  In this regard, the May 2022 examiner relied on lack of chronicity of care in forming the opinion.  The Board notes that chronicity of symptoms, not care is required. Further, the examiners did not take into consideration the Veteran's lay statements that she felt bilateral shoulder instability while climbing ropes in boot camp in 2006 but did not report to a medical provider as she believed it would have delayed her training.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 262 (2020) (holding that where the examiner failed to address the veteran's lay evidence and the Board fails to find the veteran not credible or not competent to offer that lay evidence, the proper remedy is for VA to obtain a new examination).  

Given the foregoing, a remand is warranted to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's left and right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  The failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, thus a remand is appropriate.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand and any evidence obtained by this remand, must be reviewed by the clinician and such review should be noted in the examination report. Schedule the Veteran for an examination if deemed necessary by the clinician.  The clinician is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service, within a year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to service.  

The clinician should address the Veteran's statements that she developed tinnitus due to operating rifles in training and deployment, loud jets and airfield noises, and sirens; her MOS of Field Wireman; and her deployment in Iraq.

The clinician is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that such reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. If the clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide a rationale for doing so.

2. Obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right and left shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand and any evidence obtained by this remand, must be reviewed by the clinician and such review should be noted in the examination report. Schedule the Veteran for an examination if deemed necessary by the clinician.  The clinician is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's right and left shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis had its onset in or is related to service.  

The clinician should address the Veteran's statements that she felt bilateral shoulder instability while climbing ropes in boot camp in 2006 but did not report to a medical provider as she believed it would have delayed her training.  

The clinician is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that such reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. If the clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide a rationale for doing so.

The medical opinions must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate for the Board to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Molitoris, Lee A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.