Citation Nr: A25033959
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240102-406601
DATE: April 11, 2025 

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for dermatitis of bilateral shoulders is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for actinic keratosis (claimed as psoriasis) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for multiple lipomas, to specifically include left hip lipoma (claimed as cyst), is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for fibrous papule of the right thigh is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity scar secondary to lipomas is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bruise is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for human papilloma virus (HPV) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for rectal bleeding is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left arm muscle spasms is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right arm muscle spasms is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left elbow condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right elbow condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left leg varicose veins is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right leg varicose veins is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left wrist condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lumps on right side of neck and left abdomen is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lung condition with shortness of breath is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for penile condition with trouble maintaining an erection is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right second toe callous is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for throat condition, to include clearing of throat, strep throat, and phlegm, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for condition affecting the mouth, to include growths on tonsils and lesions on the roof of mouth, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for dry tongue with thickened saliva is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In a January 2024 rating decision, the regional office (RO) found that the Veteran's tinnitus was directly related to service.

2. Due to the RO's favorable finding that the Veteran's tinnitus is directly related to service, the Board resolves the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.

3. As the evidence showing the Veteran's dermatitis of bilateral shoulders is related to active service is in approximate balance, the Board resolves the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.

4. As the evidence showing the Veteran's actinic keratosis (claimed as psoriasis) is related to active service is in approximate balance, the Board resolves the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.

5. As the evidence showing the Veteran's multiple lipomas, to specifically include left hip lipoma (claimed as cyst), is related to active service is in approximate balance, the Board resolves the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.

6. As the evidence showing the Veteran's fibrous papule of the right thigh is related to active service is in approximate balance, the Board resolves the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.

7.  The evidence is in approximate balance demonstrating the Veteran's left upper extremity scar is secondary to lipomas, and therefore, the Board resolves the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§?1101, 1131; 5107 38 C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for dermatitis of bilateral shoulders have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for service connection for actinic keratosis (claimed as psoriasis) have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

4. The criteria for service connection for multiple lipomas, to specifically include left hip lipoma (claimed as cyst), have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

5. The criteria for service connection for fibrous papule of the right thigh have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

6. The criteria for service connection for left upper extremity scar secondary to lipomas have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army on active duty from November 1990 to June 1991 and November 1993 to November 1996, with additional service in the Reserve.

The issues come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2023, September 2023, and November 2023 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) RO.

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims listed above, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be warranted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

As a general matter, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Additionally, certain chronic diseases, including tinnitus, may be presumed to have been incurred during service if the disorder becomes manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation from active duty.  38?U.S.C. §§?1101, 1112, 1113; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.307, 3.309(a).  Alternatively, for chronic diseases shown in service, the third element of service connection may be established through demonstrating chronicity or continuity of symptomatology in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Service connection for chronic, undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) arising from service in Southwest Asia during the Gulf War era may be established under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Service connection may be established for objective indications of a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness or a MUCMI, provided that such disability (1) became manifest in service on active duty in the Armed Forces in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, or to a degree not later than December 31, 2026; and (2) by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  The Board notes recent enactment of the PACT Act of 2022, which expanded VA health care and benefits for veterans exposed to burn pits or other toxic substances during military service.  As it pertains to this case, language of the PACT Act eliminates the manifestation period and the degree to which a qualifying chronic disability must manifest to be presumed as due to service in the Persian Gulf.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1117.  Thus, undiagnosed illness and MUCMI, may now manifest at any time and to any degree (including noncompensable), and presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 no longer requires a chronic disability to manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more (not later than December 31, 2026) as stated in the regulation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a).

Service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists; and (2) that the current disability was either caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus 

The Veteran contends that his tinnitus is related to his active-duty service.

As an initial matter, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's May 2023 VA audiology record reveals a diagnosis of tinnitus.  Further, in a December 2019 lay statement, the Veteran reported that he experienced ringing in his ears after hearing missile explosions during active service.  The Veteran reported continued ringing in his ears since service.  Thus, the issue turns upon whether there is evidence of a nexus between the in-service injury and the present diagnosed disability.  See Shedden, 381 F.3d at 1167.  Here, the evidence of record supports such a finding.

In the present case, in a January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for tinnitus while the issue of service connection awaited review by the Board.  The RO specifically found that the condition was directly related to the Veteran's military service, concluding that the probative evidence weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during active service.

The Board is bound by any favorable findings made by the RO.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Accordingly, as the RO found that the Veteran's tinnitus is directly related to his military service, and the Veteran has been diagnosed with tinnitus during the period on review, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for dermatitis of bilateral shoulders

3. Entitlement to service connection for actinic keratosis (claimed as psoriasis)

4. Entitlement to service connection for multiple lipomas, to specifically include left hip lipoma (claimed as cyst)

5. Entitlement to service connection for fibrous papule of the right thigh

6. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity scar secondary to lipomas

The Veteran contends that he suffers from multiple skin conditions, including dermatitis, lipomas, psoriasis, and bumps covering the Veteran's body, caused by the Veteran's exposure to environmental hazards during his active service in Southwest Asia.

The record contains the Veteran's September 2019 private dermatology treatment note.  The Veteran's chief complaint included a growth located on the right anterior shoulder.  The Veteran also complained of bumps located on the right upper back, left forearm, right thigh, nose, and abdomen.  The private treating dermatologist noted multiple lipomas.  The private dermatologist noted seborrheic keratosis, fibrous papule, and benign nevi.  The treating dermatologist noted counseling the Veteran on the dermatological conditions, and reported no treatment was necessary.

In August 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA scars and skin conditions examination.  The VA examiner provided the diagnoses of fibrous papule, lipoma, and actinic keratosis.  The VA examiner noted one lipoma on the left anterior hip.  The examiner also noted actinic keratosis status post cryotherapy on the front left side of the Veteran's scalp.  Additionally, the examiner identified one scar on the Veteran's right inner thigh, noted as caused by three small fibrous papules.  The VA examiner provided a medical opinion that the Veteran's scars and actinic keratosis were at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed inservice injury, event, or illness.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran's exposure to chemical agents during the Gulf War.  The examiner noted the Veteran had no issues related to the claimed skin conditions prior to military service.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnoses of actinic keratosis and benign fibrous papules are related to the Gulf war exposure to chemical agents.  The examiner stated that the Veteran had a documented skin condition in 1993 after the Veteran's service in the Gulf War.  Further, the examiner reported that the record contains several recent treatment notes from 2018 addressing skin conditions including actinic keratosis and other benign conditions (fibrous papules and lipomas).  The examiner concluded that there is evidence of chronicity of symptomatology, and a nexus was established.

In April 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA skin diseases examination.  The VA examiner provided the diagnoses of dermatitis secondary to anthrax injection sites in bilateral shoulders, lipomas, and actinic keratosis of the scalp.  During the examination, the Veteran reported exposure to chemical weapons and oil well fires in Iraq.  The Veteran also reported recurrent flares of dermatitis to both shoulders and lipomas found on multiple sites of his body.  The Veteran reported a history of treatment for lipomas, noted to occur throughout his body.  

Upon examination, the VA examiner identified lipomas dispersed on his body and three areas of actinic keratosis on the Veteran's scalp.

The VA examiner provided the medical opinion that the Veteran's claimed skin conditions, noted on the examination as dermatitis secondary to anthrax injection sites in bilateral shoulders, lipomas, and actinic keratosis of the scalp, at least as likely as not incurred in or were caused by the Veteran's service.

In April 2023, the RO provided a VA scar examination.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of scarring secondary to lipoma self-removal, left upper extremity.

Resolving the evidence in a light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds the probative medical evidence of record, including the Veteran's August 2022 and April 2023 VA examinations, demonstrated the Veteran's diagnosed skin conditions were incurred in or caused by the Veteran's active service, to include as due to harmful environmental exposures during his service in the Gulf War.  The Board assigns probative value to the reviewing medical professionals' opinions, as the examiners demonstrated knowledge and skill in their analysis and application of medical literature in their review of the Veteran's observed conditions and the lay and medical evidence of record.  See Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993); Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444 (2000).  Further, complete, and thorough rationales were given for the opinions provided, consistent with the medical evidence of record.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 299-304 (2008); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) (noting in weighing credibility, VA may consider inconsistent statements and consistency with other evidence of record). 

The Board recognizes the negative nexus opinions regarding the Veteran's skin conditions provided in the May 2022 VA examination.  However, the Board finds that, given the Veteran's August 2022 and April 2023 VA examinations establishing the Veteran's multiple skin conditions were related to the Veteran's active service, the evidence is at least in approximate balance on these issues.  

The Board must consider all the evidence of record and make appropriate competence, credibility, and weight determinations.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 367-68 (2005).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Thus, in the present case, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran.

The Board notes the Veteran's multiple claims for service connection for skin conditions affecting multiple parts of his body.  The Veteran's December 2019 claim included service connection claims for specific skin conditions, including multiple lipomas, dermatitis, psoriasis, and cysts; as well as a general claim for signs or symptoms involving the skin related to Gulf War hazardous exposures.

VA must consider all theories of entitlement either expressly raised by the claimant or which are reasonably raised by the record.  See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  VA's duty to assist applies to the entire claim, which includes assistance in developing more than one theory in support of that claim.  See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).  Further, based on a sympathetic assessment of the veteran's claim, the Board may recharacterize an issue on appeal, or expand or restrict the scope of a particular claim to ensure the veteran is compensated for the full benefit sought.  DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 53 (2011); see Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009); see also Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79 (2009).  

In the present case, the Veteran was diagnosed with dermatitis secondary to anthrax injection sites in bilateral shoulders, actinic keratosis of the scalp, fibrous papules of the right thigh, and multiple lipomas (with one specifically identified by the August 2022 VA examiner on the Veteran's left hip).  Accordingly, the Board recharacterizes the Veteran's skin condition claims as entitlement to service connection for dermatitis of the bilateral shoulders; entitlement to service connection for actinic keratosis of the scalp (claimed as psoriasis); entitlement to service connection for fibrous papules of the right thigh; and entitlement to service connection for multiple lipomas, specifically to include left hip lipoma (claimed as cyst).

Accordingly, resolving all evidence in a light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds the evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran's current diagnosed skin conditions are related to the Veteran's active service, and the Veteran's claims of service connection for dermatitis of the bilateral shoulder; actinic keratosis of the scalp; fibrous papules of the right thigh; and multiple lipomas are granted.  38. C.F.R. § 3.303; see Shedden, supra.

Further, as the April 2023 VA examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of scarring secondary to self-removal of lipoma of the left upper extremity, the Board finds the evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran's left extremity scar was proximately due to or caused by service-connected lipomas.  Thus, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's left upper extremity scar as secondary to lipomas, have been met; and to this extent the Veteran's claim is granted 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for bruise is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for human papilloma virus (HPV) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for rectal bleeding is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for left arm muscle spasms is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for right arm muscle spasms is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for left elbow condition is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for right elbow condition is remanded.

10. Entitlement to service connection for left leg varicose veins is remanded.

11. Entitlement to service connection for right leg varicose veins is remanded.

12. Entitlement to service connection for left wrist condition is remanded.

13. Entitlement to service connection for right wrist condition is remanded.

14. Entitlement to service connection for lumps on right side of neck and left abdomen is remanded.

15. Entitlement to service connection for lung condition with shortness of breath is remanded.

16. Entitlement to service connection for penile condition with trouble maintaining an erection is remanded.

17. Entitlement to service connection for right second toe callous is remanded.

18. Entitlement to service connection for throat condition, to include clearing of throat, strep throat, and phlegm, is remanded.

19. Entitlement to service connection for condition affecting the mouth, to include growths on tonsils and lesions on the roof of mouth, is remanded.

VA's duty to assist includes providing an examination and obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  VA has a duty to provide the veteran a thorough medical examination, one which considers the veteran's prior medical history and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability is fully informed.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Absent a reasoned medical explanation and without supporting data, a medical opinion is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22?Vet. App. at 304.  Additionally, an examination must consider lay persons' competent opinions on certain subjective medical issues and of observable symptomatology and medical history.  Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020).

In May 2022, VA provided VA examinations addressing the Veteran's claimed conditions.  Notably, these examinations failed to address the Veteran's reported medical history or document current symptoms for the Veteran's claimed conditions and were inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claims.

The RO scheduled VA examinations for September 2023 to determine the current levels of the Veteran's disabilities and provide medical opinions regarding the etiology of each condition.  However, the Veteran did not attend his VA examinations. 

When entitlement benefits cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

In the present case, the claims file contains the Veteran's September 2023 report of general information noting the Veteran called the RO to reschedule his VA examination appointment.  The Veteran reported that he was unable to travel for an examination or attend appointments within a specific timeframe, as he was the sole care provider for his children.

Here, as the May 2022 VA examination is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claims, and the Veteran demonstrated good cause for missing his examinations, remand is required to provide the Veteran examinations addressing his claimed conditions, to include undiagnosed illness or MUCMI, due to environmental exposure during the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia.  Accordingly, the claims for service connection for bruise; fibromyalgia; HPV; IBS; rectal bleeding; bilateral arm muscle spasms; bilateral elbow condition; bilateral leg varicose veins; bilateral wrist condition; lumps on right side of neck and left abdomen; lung condition with shortness of breath; penile condition with trouble maintaining an erection; right second toe callous; throat condition, to include clearing of throat, strep throat, and phlegm; and claimed condition affecting the mouth, to include growths on tonsils and lesions on the roof of mouth are remanded to address VA's pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

20. Entitlement to service connection for dry tongue with thickened saliva is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from a condition that involves chronic dryness of his tongue and excess thickness of saliva caused by environmental exposures during his active service in Southwest Asia.

In September 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA oral and dental conditions examination.  The Veteran reported that his tongue is always dry and that his saliva felt thick.  He noted the onset of his condition was June 1991, when he was exposed to chemical weapons during his service in Iraq.  The Veteran indicated dry mouth, and the examiner noted the quality of saliva as thickened.  The examiner stated the Veteran's dry tongue and thickened saliva most likely as not related to the use of allergy medications.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported history of chronic rhinitis that required the use of daily medication.  The VA examination reported the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of an oral or dental condition.  However, the VA examiner provided the opinion that the Veteran's dry mouth and tongue with thick saliva is most likely as not related to over-the-counter medications used to treat allergies and rhinitis.

While VA has provided a positive medical opinion tying the Veteran's dry mouth conditions and thick saliva to the treatment for service-connected rhinitis, the VA examiner reported the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of an oral or dental condition.  However, as the Veteran contends that he suffers from multiple conditions related to environmental exposures during his service in Iraq, the Veteran's symptoms considered separately or as a whole may meet the criteria for compensation for disability due to undiagnosed illness and MUCMI.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  The term medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii).  Thus, as the evidence of record does not show a conclusive pathophysiology or etiology of the Veteran's claimed dry tongue and thick saliva; and, as the evidence of record is absent of an adequate medical examination addressing the Veteran's undiagnosed conditions and multisymptom illnesses associated with the Veteran's service in the Gulf War, remand is necessary to address VA's pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed disorders.  Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to:

a)	Whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of:

i.	bruise 

ii.	fibromyalgia 

iii.	human papilloma virus (HPV) 

iv.	irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 

v.	rectal bleeding 

vi.	bilateral arm muscle spasms 

vii.	bilateral elbow condition 

viii.	bilateral leg varicose veins 

ix.	bilateral wrist condition 

x.	lumps on right side of neck and left abdomen 

xi.	lung condition with shortness of breath 

xii.	penile condition with trouble maintaining an erection 

xiii.	right second toe callous 

xiv.	throat condition, to include clearing of throat, strep throat, and phlegm 

xv.	condition affecting the mouth, to include growths on tonsils and lesions on the roof of mouth 

xvi.	dry tongue with thickened saliva

b)	If no diagnosis is found, for each appropriate condition, please provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's symptoms represent: 1) a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness; 2) an undiagnosed illness; or, 3) is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's reported symptoms represent a cluster of signs or symptoms typically seen in Gulf War veterans?

For purposes of this examination, the term medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.

c)	If the Veteran is found to have a diagnosis associated with the Veteran's claimed conditions: 

i.	human papilloma virus (HPV) 

ii.	rectal bleeding 

iii.	bilateral arm muscle spasms 

iv.	bilateral elbow condition 

v.	bilateral leg varicose veins 

vi.	bilateral wrist condition 

vii.	lumps on right side of neck and left abdomen 

viii.	lung condition with shortness of breath 

ix.	penile condition with trouble maintaining an erection 

x.	right second toe callous 

xi.	throat condition, to include clearing of throat, strep throat, and phlegm, 

xii.	condition affecting the mouth, to include growths on tonsils and lesions on the roof of mouth 

xiii.	dry tongue with thickened saliva, please 

For the appropriate conditions, provide an opinion as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed disability had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

d)	Additionally, if direct service connection is not found, where appropriate, provide the Veteran an examination addressing the Veteran's presumed environmental toxin exposures with a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's diagnosed conditions.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed conditions are due to in-service associated toxic exposure.

Under the PACT Act, as stated above, the Veteran has established a TERA, and the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service and conduct a synergistic and combined effect analysis of all toxic exposure risk activities that may provide a basis to service connect the claimed disability.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached-citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.  Conclusions must not be based solely on the lack of records.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability.  If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. V. Bona

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.