Citation Nr: A25033678
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-454514
DATE: April 10, 2025

 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left upper extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right upper extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from January 2007 to January 2011.  

In December 2023, the Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision denying service connection for the Veteran's OSA and granted service connection for radiculopathy of the right and left upper extremities with ratings of 20 percent in both arms.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) in a July 2024 Notice of Disagreement and selected the Direct Review Lane.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the RO for correction of an error on the part of the RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the RO decision on appeal.  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.

OSA

The Veteran contends that her sleep apnea is related to her service in the military, to include exposures to environmental hazards in Iraq.  Specifically, she stated that her symptoms, to include snoring, first occurred in 2009 while she was on active duty.  See August 2023 VA OSA examination.  

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran was originally diagnosed with OSA in a May 2021 sleep study.  The Veteran underwent a second sleep study in November 2021, where the diagnosis was confirmed.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA medical examination and opinion in August 2023.  The examiner only addressed whether the Veteran's OSA was caused by Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERAs).  The examiner stated it was less likely than not the Veteran's OSA was due to the toxic exposures she encountered during service because OSA is not caused by or due to environmental factors.  The examiner did not discuss the Veteran's lay statement regarding the onset of snoring during active-duty service as early as 2009.  Notably, Veteran was not afforded a direct service connection examination to determine if the Veteran's OSA originated during her period of active service.  

As the Veteran specifically stated her symptoms began in service, a direct service connection examination must be obtained.  Therefore, the Board finds the issue must be remanded to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error that occurred when the RO failed to afford the Veteran a direct service connection examination.   

Radiculopathy 

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to a rating in excess of 20 percent for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy because she has severe pain and cannot control her arms at times.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA neck conditions examination in August 2023.  At this time, she was diagnosed with radiculopathy of the lower radicular group (involvement of C8/T1).  The examiner noted she had "moderate" constant pain and "moderate" numbness in both arms.  He also noted she did not have any intermittent pain or paresthesias in either arm.  The examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate mild, moderate, or severe radiculopathy pursuant to the appropriate diagnostic code.  The Board notes the RO based the Veteran's rating for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy based on the neck conditions examination and not a separate, peripheral nerve examination, which may provide a more accurate assessment of the Veteran's disabilities.   

The Board notes 38 C.F.R. ยง 4.124(a), DC 8512 requires the VA to rate incomplete paralysis of the lower radicular group by "mild," "moderate," or "severe."  The Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred because the examiner did not provide a medical opinion on the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy and the RO did not obtain a peripheral nerve examination to fully assess the Veteran's radiculopathy picture.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate examiner regarding the Veteran's sleep apnea.  The examiner must review the entire record. All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  

Following a review of the records and lay statements, the examiner should opine as to it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA originated during her period of active service or is otherwise etiologically related to her active service.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all proffered opinions.

2. Obtain a VA peripheral nerves examination and opinion from an appropriate examiner for the right and left upper extremities.  The examiner must review the entire record.  

The examiner is asked to document all signs and/or symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's radiculopathy, including whether such neurologic manifestation results in complete or incomplete paralysis of the affected nerve.  If incomplete paralysis is identified, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe.

 

 

R. Casadei

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Bennett

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.