Citation Nr: A25033558
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231119-393724
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

More than a 10 percent rating for service-connected right lower extremity varicose veins is denied.

More than a 10 percent rating for service-connected left lower extremity varicose veins is denied.

REMANDED

Higher initial ratings for service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease (DDD), intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), and herniated disc (low back disability) are remanded.

Higher initial ratings for service-connected right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy are remanded.

Higher initial ratings for service-connected left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy are remanded.

Service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The persuasive evidence of record is against finding the Veteran's service-connected right lower extremity varicose veins have involved symptoms like persistent edema, stasis pigmentation, eczema, ulceration, subcutaneous induration, or massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest as required by the criteria for higher ratings under the applicable rating criteria.

2. The persuasive evidence of record is against finding the Veteran's service-connected left lower extremity varicose veins have involved symptoms like persistent edema, stasis pigmentation, eczema, ulceration, subcutaneous induration, or massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest as required by the criteria for higher ratings under the applicable rating criteria.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are not met for more than a 10 percent rating for service-connected right lower extremity varicose veins. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b) (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code (Code) 7120 (2025).

2. The criteria are not met for more than a 10 percent rating for service-connected left lower extremity varicose veins. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b) (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Code 7120 (2025).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from August 1977 to August 1980. These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision reviewing an April 2023 rating decision and appealed by a timely November 2023 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) electing the Direct Review docket. Given the Veteran's docket election, the Board will consider the evidence of record as of the April 19, 2023 decision under review.

The Veteran's NOD identifies several rating decisions that have adjudicated these matters, including a prior December 2022 decision and the April 2023 decision under review in the November 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, the December 2022 decision has a less favorable appeal period than the more recent April and November 2023 decisions given its timing. Moreover, the most recent two decisions have the same appeal period, as the November 2023 decision is reviewing the April 2023 decision for error. Under the circumstances, the Board's decision to address the November 2023 decision here instead of the April 2023 decision does not prejudice his claims, as the period under review would not change, and in either case the appeal period affords the Veteran a broader and larger evidentiary record than the earlier December 2022 decision.

The Board also notes that the April 2023 decision under review appears to include boilerplate language for cases involving allegations of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) while the November 2023 HLR does not. Notably, the Veteran's filings do not appear to raise an explicit or implicit motion to revise a prior decision based on CUE. Although the Veteran does make broad allusions to errors committed by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), an assertion of CUE is not a theory of entitlement that can be considered part of another claim, but a specific motion or request that is completely separate from other issues. See, e.g., Jarrell v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 326 (2006); Hillyard v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 343, 355 (2011). Notably, the record shows the Veteran has previously filed a claim seeking revision of a prior decision based on CUE, so presumably he is familiar with the specific phrasing and allegations needed to raise such a motion, further supporting the notion that he did not intent to make such a claim here.

Finally, the Board has recharacterized the back and radiculopathy rating issues on appeal to reflect the fact that a review of the procedural histories in those claims shows they should be considered initial rating appeals stemming from an earlier date of claim than the immediate January 2023 Supplemental Claim that began the most recent adjudications in those matters. Specifically, the Board notes that the Veteran filed a March 10, 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ (Fully Developed Claim) seeking service connection for back disability that was granted in April 2021. He then filed another such form seeking a higher rating for the back disability and service connection for sciatic radiculopathy. The AOJ denied a higher rating for the back disability but did grant separate compensable ratings for right and left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy in September 2021. The Veteran then filed a July 2022 Fully Developed Claim form seeking still higher ratings for the back disability and the sciatic radiculopathies, which the AOJ adjudicated in December 2022. From there, the Veteran filed a timely January 2023 VA Form 20-0995 (Supplemental Claim) seeking still higher ratings and, following the April 2023 decision denying higher ratings in these claims, the Veteran filed a timely July 2023 VA Form 20-0996 (Request for Higher-Level Review) contesting those denials before appealing the subsequent November 2023 HLR decision to the Board. 

Notably, a recent precedential decision in Chisholm v. Collins, No. 22-7028, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336, at 16-17 (Vet. App. Mar. 13, 2025) holds that VA has not limited supplemental claims to a specific form. In that case, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that VA's regulatory framework only requires that a supplemental claim be filed on "a form prescribed by the Secretary" and not specifically on a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Form. There, the Court reasoned that a request for total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) filed on the appropriate form (VA Form 21-8940) constituted a supplemental claim seeking a higher rating for a service-connected disability because the Veteran alleged that disability contributes to unemployability. 

Here, the Veteran quite clearly contests the initial ratings assigned with the award of service connection for low back disability, specifically including the decision not to assign separate, compensable ratings for sciatic radiculopathies in timely VA Forms 21-526EZ following the initial rating assignment with service connection. He also continued to file similar timely VA Forms 21-526EZ pursuing higher ratings for these disabilities within a year of each subsequent rating decision described in the procedural history above. Considering the ruling in Chisholm, the Board finds that the Veteran has continuously pursued this claim by filing timely supplemental claims on a form prescribed by the Secretary. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(p)(2), 3.2500. Therefore, those issues have been recharacterized accordingly.

1. More than a 10 percent rating for service-connected right lower extremity varicose veins

2. More than a 10 percent rating for service-connected left lower extremity varicose veins

Disability ratings are assigned in accordance with VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a disability. See 38 U.S.C.A. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1. When a question arises as to which of two ratings shall be applied under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings."

In a claim for increase the present level of disability is the primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). The relevant temporal focus for adjudicating the level of disability of an increased rating claim begins one year before the claim was filed. 

Here, the Board notes that the Veteran has alleged that this claim dates back to July 2022. A review of the record does show that the Veteran's July 2022 VA Form 21-8940 seeking TDIU does mention that varicose veins contribute to his alleged unemployability at that time. Under Chisholm, discussed further above, that should also have raised a supplemental claim seeking a higher rating for varicose veins given that benefit has been previously denied by VA (albeit several years prior). However, he then withdrew his TDIU claim by August 2022 correspondence directly with the AOJ and an October 2022 correspondence with the AOJ shows the Veteran said "when he [withdrew] the unemployability claim...bilateral varicose veins should have also been withdrawn from his exam[inations]." Therefore, contrary to his later claims that the withdrawal in question was limited to TDIU, the Board finds there was a clear expression of an intention to also withdraw any implicit claim for higher ratings for service-connected varicose veins at that time. Therefore, the Board cannot consider this matter on appeal from the July 2022 TDIU application date. The next most recent claim involving the disabilities being adjudicated here was received on January 19, 2023 and, therefore, the period on appeal here begins on January 19, 2022.

Varicose veins are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Code 7120 which, in turn, directs that such conditions are to be evaluated under Code 7121 (for post-phlebitic syndrome of any etiology). Under that Code, a higher 20 percent rating requires "[p]ersistent edema, incompletely relieved by elevation of extremity, with or without beginning stasis pigmentation or eczema." A 40 percent rating requires "[p]ersistent edema and stasis pigmentation or eczema, with or without intermittent ulceration." A 60 percent rating requires "[p]ersistent edema or subcutaneous induration, stasis pigmentation or eczema, and persistent ulceration" (emphasis added). A maximum 100 percent rating requires "[m]assive board-like edema with constant pain at rest." Id.

Treatment records during the appeal period are silent for any clinical notations or subjective reports describing any such symptoms associated with the Veteran's varicose veins. The only comprehensive evaluation of the disability is from an October 2022 VA examination report. At that time, the Veteran reported his current symptoms included pain with discomfort, cramp, and swelling. However, he does not describe the frequency or duration of these symptoms and, more specifically, does not specifically characterize it as "persistent." On examination, the examiner noted aching and fatigue in the legs after prolonged standing and walking, constant pain at rest in both legs, as well as edema of both legs. Crucially, however, the examiner indicates the edema noted was "intermittent" and alleviated by elevation. The examiner quite explicitly does not check a box marked "[p]ersistent edema that is incompletely relieved by elevation of extremity." Similarly, the examiner also does not mark boxes associated with the other symptoms noted in the criteria for still higher 40, 60, or 100 percent ratings under Code 7121.

Under the circumstances, the Board can simply find no affirmative evidence indicating the Veteran's varicose veins in either leg involve the frequency, type, or duration of symptoms contemplated by the criteria for higher ratings. Accordingly, the persuasive evidence of record is against the Veteran's claim here, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply, and the appeal in this matter must be denied at this time.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Higher ratings for service-connected low back disability are remanded.

2. Higher ratings for service-connected right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy are remanded.

3. Higher ratings for service-connected left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy are remanded.

4. Service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

A review of the record shows the Veteran appears to have received significant private medical treatment for his back and neck disabilities, including associated neurological symptoms (like radiculopathy). Most notably, private records that have been partially redacted include legible portions that note he was rear-ended while driving to work in May 2005 and, as a result, sustained "significant injury to his neck and back." He apparently then filed a claim for worker's compensation on May 19, 2005 for his "work-related injuries." That record also notes that his symptoms persisted for several years and required continued treatment since the initial injury. The provider at the time specifically noted his "back and neck symptoms have worsened since his work-related injury on May 13, 2005." Crucially, he was employed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) at the time of the injury in question, which suggests that any work-related compensation claim, and records of subsequent treatment and evaluation associated with that claim, should be federal records that were constructively before VA prior to the decisions on appeal, and likely contain information relevant to the initial severity and etiology of these disabilities remaining on appeal. However, it is unclear whether the AOJ actually sought out or obtained all such relevant records. 

Moreover, a report regarding his Social Security status appears to show that he has Title II status and a disability entitlement date, suggesting there may be relevant Social Security Administration (SSA) records that are also outstanding. Nothing of record suggests they were sought out or otherwise describes them as unavailable. These records are, like any worker's compensation records from his time at the FAA, constructively of record as well and may well contain relevant information shining further light on the initial severity of his back and radiculopathy disabilities on appeal as well as the cause of his neck disability. Under the circumstances, the Board finds the AOJ erred by failing to seek out these records or confirming they are unavailable before adjudicating these matters.

Finally, the Board notes that the VA back examination reports of record are incomplete or inadequate for purposes of ensuring compliance with the ruling in Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016) (holding that VA joint examinations must, where possible, include results of range of motion testing on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, and with the range of the opposite undamaged joint). The reports of record include varying findings regarding the presence of pain with or without weight-bearing, but none indicate whether range of motion was tested under both circumstances (or whether such testing was feasible) and, if so, whether those figures were the same or different from other range of motion data documented at the time of examination. Notably, the reports do include such findings for passive and active motion, drawing a sharp contrast between the degree of certainty as to whether such testing occurred in these varied circumstances. Consequently, further clarification of this is also required.

In light of the above, the Board finds the AOJ erred by not ordering additional evidentiary development before adjudicating the matters on appeal in April 2023 and a remand to correct pre-decisional developmental errors is unavoidable.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Conduct exhaustive development to search for and obtain copies of administrative or medical records related to a May 2005 work injury and ensuing worker's compensation claim while the Veteran was employed at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The AOJ should search all available sources within the federal government as well as reach out to the Veteran to submit copies of any such records in his possession. If any records sought are not available, the AOJ must document the steps taken to secure them and the reason for their unavailability for the record, notifying the Veteran in kind.

2. Conduct exhaustive development to obtain copies of any relevant administrative and medical SSA records associated with the Veteran. If any records sought are not available, the AOJ must document the steps taken to secure them and the reason for their unavailability for the record, notifying the Veteran in kind.

3. Forward the record to the March 2021, June 2021, and/or October 2022 VA examiners who assessed the Veteran's back disability for clarifying information regarding the range of motion figures at the time. Based on the examination reports and any retained notes or information from those evaluations (if they exist), the examiner(s) should respond to the following:

(a.) Was range of motion tested under weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing conditions? If not, please explain why (e.g., a clinical oversight, medical infeasibility, etc.) in detail.

(b.) If range of motion was tested with and without weight-bearing and the results of such testing are still available, please report the relevant range of motion figures. If such data was identical to the other range of motion data documented in the relevant VA examination reports, the examiner should specifically say so, identifying the specific range of motion data that matches those in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing.

All findings and opinions must be supported by a complete rationale citing to supporting medical evidence, data, or other evidence as appropriate. Failure to do so may further delay this claim and require additional clarification.

4. OTHERWISE, arrange for re-examination of the Veteran's back disability to determine its current severity. Any such examination MUST INCLUDE a complete subjective report describing how functioning and motion varies with repeated use over time or flare-ups and be based on a review of the record, the interview with the Veteran, and any tests or studies deemed necessary. The examiner should describe all pathology, symptoms (frequency and severity), and functional impairment associated with such disabilities in enough detail to allow for application of the pertinent rating criteria.  

Range of motion test results must be recorded in ACTIVE MOTION, PASSIVE MOTION, WEIGHT-BEARING, and NON-WEIGHT-BEARING, including in the opposite, undamaged joint.  

If it is not feasible to perform range of motion testing in any of these circumstances, the examiner MUST EXPLAIN WHY. 

If range of motion under any of these circumstances is identical to other range of motion data, the examiner should specifically say so. 

The examiner should also note any further functional limitations due to pain, weakness, fatigue, incoordination, or any other such factors.

The examiner MUST ALSO comment on or describe, to the extent possible, functioning during flare-ups or with repeated use over a period of time, including estimating range of motion under such circumstances where possible. In doing so, the examiner MUST elicit and consider subjective reports of such functioning and cite the relevant evidence, statements, or other records considered in forming any estimates. If the examiner is still unable to provide such an opinion, he or she MUST explain why that is so in specificity. The examiner should note that the inability to directly observe functioning under such conditions IS NOT a valid reason to avoid providing an opinion in this matter per se.

All opinions must include a detailed rationale. Providing an opinion without one will delay processing of the claim and may require clarification.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yuan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.