Citation Nr: A25033189
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241121-492591
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's OSA is due to his deviated nasal septum.

2. The Veteran has one small hemorrhoidal tag; his hemorrhoids are not large or thrombotic, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, nor do they manifest with persistent bleeding, secondary anemia, or fissures.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b) (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310 (2024).

2. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code (Code) 7336 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1965 to December 1970.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from October 2024 and November 2024 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

The rating decisions on appeal constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  The Veteran timely appealed these AMA rating decisions to the Board in a November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, and requested Direct Review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Accordingly, the Board may only consider evidence that was before the AOJ at the time of issuance of the rating decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §20.301.  That is to say, with regard to the issue of entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids, the Board may only consider evidence that was before the AOJ at the time of issuance of the October 2024 rating decision, and with regard to the issue of entitlement to service connection for OSA, the Board may only consider evidence that was before the AOJ at the time of issuance of the November 2024 rating decision.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new VA 10182 within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the VA 10182, whichever is later.  Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).  Here, although more than 60 days have passed since the receipt of the November 2024 VA 10182, one year has not elapsed since the date of issuance of notice of either rating decision on appeal.  However, because the Veteran submitted a January 2025 waiver of his right to switch AMA dockets, Board will proceed with adjudication of both issues on appeal.

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA.

Service connection can be established as secondary to a service-connected disability.  Establishing secondary service connection requires evidence: (1) of a current disability (for which secondary service connection is sought); (2) of another currently service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either caused or aggravated by the currently service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 444 (1995).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  When the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

Favorable findings from the November 2024 rating decision on appeal include that the Veteran has a currently diagnosed OSA condition and that his claimed primary disability is service connected in that he has a service-connected deviated nasal septum disability.  These favorable findings have not been rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error, thus they are binding on the Board.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In a May 2015 statement, the Veteran contended that his OSA is due to his deviated septum.  He stated he cannot breathe out of the right side of his nose, and thus he cannot lay on his left side, because when he does so his left nostril is closed off as well and he cannot breathe.  The Veteran is competent to attest to the symptoms and events he personally observed.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  The Board has no reason to doubt his credibility.

A June 2015 VA OSA examiner found the Veteran had "approximately 80 [percent] blockage of the left nasal passage".  The examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not due to his deviated septum because his nasal passages were not completely blocked and imaging did not show "significant deviation of the[] septum."  This opinion is inadequate for Board review because despite the examiner's finding that the Veteran has an 80 percent blockage of his left nasal passage, the examiner did not consider or specifically comment on the Veteran's competent May 2015 lay statement in which he stated he cannot breathe out of the right side of his nose.  See, generally, Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007).  Further, the June 2015 VA examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's deviated septum had aggravated his OSA.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).  Thus, the examination is inadequate for Board review and except as noted below the Board affords it no probative weight.

A January 2024 private medical record contains an opinion from the Veteran's treating physician that the Veteran has "severe [OSA] that is likely exacerbated by [his] severely deviated septum."  The Veteran's physician further explained that while the Veteran's OSA is multifactorial, his "deviated septum is likely contributing to his" OSA.  This opinion is adequate for appellate review.  There is no evidence the examiner was not competent or credible, and as the report is based on the Veteran's statements, treatment of the Veteran and the examiner's observations, the Board finds it entitled to significant probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-05 (2008).

An April 2024 VA OSA examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by his deviated septum.  The examiner stated that when a deviated septum is "severe", it can block one side of nose and reduce airflow, causing difficulty breathing and leading to OSA.  However, the examiner found that neither of the Veteran's nasal passages had blockages of 50 percent or more, and thus his deviated septum was not "severe."   The examiner also noted that the Veteran's body mass index (BMI) at the time of his sleep study was 50.1, and stated that obesity is a primary risk factor for OSA.  This examination is inadequate for Board review because it fails to consider or specifically comment on conflicting medical and lay evidence of record.  Specially, it does not consider: i) the Veteran's competent May 2015 lay statement that his right nasal passage was completely blocked; ii) the June 2015 VA OSA examiner's finding that the Veteran's left nasal passage was 80 percent blocked; or iii) the January 2024 private medical record stating the Veteran's deviated septum is "severe" and stating that the deviated septum contributes to the Veteran's OSA.  For these reasons, except as noted below, the Board finds the examination inadequate for Board review and affords it no probative weight.

A September 2024 VA OSA examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not due to his deviated septum, instead stating that his OSA is more likely due to his obesity.  The VA examiner discussed the January 2024 private medical record's conclusions that the Veteran's OSA is likely exacerbated by his severely deviated septum and that his deviated septum is likely contributing to his OSA.  The VA examiner noted the January 2024 private medical record further states the Veteran has a thick neck and narrow pharyngeal inlet, which correlate with obesity and that his OSA is "multifactorial."  The September 2024 VA examiner moved on to opine that it is more likely that the Veteran's OSA is due to his obesity.  This opinion is adequate for appellate review.  There is no evidence the examiner was not competent or credible, and as the report is based on the Veteran's statements, treatment of the Veteran and the examiner's observations, the Board finds it entitled to significant probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302-05.     

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's service-connected deviated septum caused or aggravated his OSA.  Therefore, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for OSA as secondary to the service connected deviated septum is warranted.  The Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA, and he is presently service connected for a deviated septum disability.  The April 2024 VA OSA examiner opined that a "severe" deviated septum can lead to OSA.  Consistent with this opinion, the January 2024 private medical record states the Veteran has a "severely deviated septum" which has exacerbated his "severe" OSA and that the Veteran's "deviated septum is likely contributing to his" OSA.  The Board acknowledges that the September 2024 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA was due to his obesity rather than his deviated septum after considering the evidence of record to include the January 2024 private provider's opinion.  Given the above, the board finds that the evidence is in relative equipoise both in favor and against the claim.  Therefore, granting the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and resolving reasonable doubt in his favor, the Board finds that the current OSA disability was, at least in part, caused by the service-connected deviated septum disability.  Accordingly, service connection for OSA as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected deviated septum disability is warranted and granted.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  This practice is known as staged ratings.  Id.

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's hemorrhoids disability has been rated under Code 7336.  Under that Code, a noncompensable rating is assigned for mild or moderate hemorrhoids.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for hemorrhoids that are large or thrombotic, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences.  A maximum 20 percent rating is warranted for hemorrhoids with persistent bleeding and with secondary anemia, or with fissures. 

The Veteran's private and VA treatment records during the period on appeal do not note treatment for hemorrhoids.  

A July 2024 VA hemorrhoids examiner noted the Veteran had surgeries for hemorrhoids in 1970 and 1972, and has had intermittent symptoms since that time.  The Veteran's symptoms are occasional rectal pain, pruritis (itching) and bleeding.  The examiner noted the Veteran uses over the counter Preparation H as needed.  The Veteran reported no current issues and that his condition has improved since its onset.  The Veteran does not use continuous medication for his hemorrhoids.  A physical examination revealed one small hemorrhoidal tag.  The examiner did not observe, or the Veteran did not report: Persistent bleeding, anemia, or three or more episodes of thrombosis per year; anorectal or perianal fistula; rectal or anal stricture; impairment of sphincter control, incontinence or physician-prescribed bowel program; rectal prolapse; pruritus ani; benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases; or other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to hemorrhoids.  This examination is adequate for appellate review.  There is no evidence the examiner was not competent or credible, and as the report is based on the Veteran's statements, an in-person examination and the examiner's observations, the Board finds it entitled to significant probative weight.  22 Vet. App. at 302-05.     

Again, to warrant a 10 percent rating, the evidence would need to show that the Veteran's hemorrhoids were large or thrombotic, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences.  To warrant a 20 percent rating, the evidence would need to show either persistent bleeding with secondary anemia, or fissures.  The Board finds the competent evidence of record does not support the conclusion that the Veteran's hemorrhoids were large, thrombotic, irreducible or had excessive redundant tissue during the period on appeal.  The July 2024 VA hemorrhoids examiner did not find any of these symptoms.  The physical examination revealed the Veteran had one small hemorrhoidal tag.  Further, neither persistent bleeding, anemia, nor fissures were noted on examination.  While the examiner did not specifically state the Veteran's hemorrhoids are "mild or moderate" in severity, the examination does not show any of the symptomatology contemplated by a compensable (neither 10 or 20 percent) rating.  Thus, the Board finds the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates mild or moderate hemorrhoids.  The Board acknowledges the holdings of Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) and Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (2025), which hold that the Board must discount the ameliorative effects of medication when rating a disability under a Code which does not specifically contemplate medication use.  The Board further acknowledges the Veteran's over the counter medication use and that Code 7336 does not specifically contemplate medication use.  However, the Board notes the Veteran's symptoms are "intermittent" and "occasional," and his medication use is as needed, implying that even when he does have symptoms, those symptoms do not always require him to use medication.  Thus, even reading the evidence in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds his disability picture does not more nearly approximate that contemplated by a compensable rating, and remand for a medical opinion which does not consider the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's as needed medication use is not necessary.

Because hemorrhoids are specifically listed in the rating schedule, the disability may not be rated by analogy under a different Code.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015).  Further, the Veteran's only diagnosed rectal condition is hemorrhoids.  Therefore, no other Codes are potentially applicable which might afford a higher rating on an alternative basis.

Thus, the evidence of record is persuasively against a compensable rating for hemorrhoids.  As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  For these reasons, a compensable rating for hemorrhoids is denied.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dvorak, James T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.