Citation Nr: A25033511
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 190718-475980
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a skin condition, other than intertrigo of the crural area.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1969 to April 1972.

The case is on appeal from a March 2019 rating decision.

In a July 2019 notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.

On November 29, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for a skin condition, other than intertrigo of the crural area.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for "jungle rot" which he asserts is related to his service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Although the term "jungle rot" typically refers to conditions like trench foot (immersion foot syndrome) and athlete's foot, the Veteran's representative clarified the Veteran is seeking service connection for a skin condition.  The Board notes the Veteran is already service connected for intertrigo of the crural area and is assigned a noncompensable rating.  The representative stated further the Veteran does not know if his service-connected skin condition is worsening or if a different skin condition has developed.  See February 2025 Brief.  

In this case, remand is necessary as there are pre-decisional duty to assist errors for this claim prior to the March 2019 rating decision.  Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  VA has a duty to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion on an issue of service connection when the record, (1) contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or signs and symptoms of a current disability, (2) indicates that the disability or signs and symptoms of a disability may be associated with active service, and (3) the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the issue.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event is low.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

The Board notes the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination for this condition.  Given the Veteran's assertions concerning a current disability and an association with his service in the Republic of Vietnam, this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the evidence currently meets the low threshold for obtaining a VA examination as to this claim.  Accordingly, remand is warranted for an examination and opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's skin condition.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's skin condition.  The entire claims file must be reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.

The examiner must identify any current skin condition(s), other than intertrigo of the crural area.

For any identified skin condition(s), other than intertrigo of the crural area, the examiner is to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any skin condition, other than the service-connected intertrigo of the crural area, had its onset during service or is otherwise causally related to service.

The examiner should consider the Veteran's statement that he does not know if his service-connected skin condition of intertrigo of the crural area is worsening or if a different skin condition has developed.  If a new skin condition has developed the examiner should consider whether it is related to the Veteran's service in the Republic of Vietnam.  

The examiner should provide rationale for all opinions expressed, including by citing to the record.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gray, Elissa A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.