Citation Nr: A25033010
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240321-427889
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1972 to October 1974.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veteran Affairs (VA), Regional Office (RO) determined new and relevant evidence had been received to reconsider the previously denied claims and then denied the respective claims on the merits.  In March 2024, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (notice of disagreement) electing the Direct Review docket.  Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the RO decision on appeal, (which is March 22, 2024).  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal and before the VA Form 10182 was received.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1.  Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability.

2.  Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability.

3.  Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability.

4.  Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability.

5.  Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability.

6.  Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disability.

7.  Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disability.

Remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, a new exam and opinion is needed for these conditions.

The Veteran contends that he has developed right knee, left and right hip, left and right shoulder, and left and right wrist disabilities that are manifested as a result of his period of active service.  Specifically, he has asserted that each disability is due to the rigors associated with parachute jumping during Airborne training.

In a Veteran's Supplemental Claim For Compensation (VA Form 21-526b) received in January 2019, the Veteran indicated that his asserted respective joint disabilities were the result of pounding impact in service from his role as a parachutist wherein he had 25 to 30 jumps while in the Army.  In a Statement In Support Of Claim (VA Form 21-4138) received in January 2020, he indicated that he had served as a parachutist and had been required to jump from aircraft.  In a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) received in February 2020, he reiterated that hard impact landings in service as a paratrooper had affected his joints.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records shows a report of medical examination dated in January 1973 indicating that the Veteran was examined and deemed qualified for Air Borne.

Service personnel records reveal that the Veteran had been awarded the Parachute Badge under the authority of the United States Army Cadet Command 672-5-1.  The same service personnel record shows that the Veteran had Basic Airborne Specialized Training of three weeks that was completed on March 23, 1973.  His Record of Assignments shows that he was assigned to Basic Airborne from February 25, 1973, to March 29, 1973, with 48th Company, 4th Student Battalion (Cadre) Airborne Department TSB, U.S. Army Infantry School, Fort Benning, Georgia.

A VA medical opinion dated in January 2020 shows that F. I., M.D., the Veteran's VA primary care physician, indicated that the Veteran had reported shoulder, wrist, hip, and knee pain that had become progressively worse.  Dr. I. opined that the Veteran's degenerative joint disease was worsening and most probably related to his service as a paratrooper.  It was also noted that during service, the Veteran had minimized his symptoms as he was in fear of being discharged.  This opinion was deemed to be of limited probative value as it was not supported by a reasoned analysis. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). 

A VA medical opinion dated in November 2023 shows that the respective left and right shoulder, wrist, and hip disabilities were less likely than not related to active service because the service treatment records were silent for any related condition; and that there were no records of the Veteran having a Parachutist Badge or orders for Airborne school at Fort Benning, only that he received medical clearance for Airborne.  The VA examiner also attributed the asserted right knee disability to a post-service 1989 basketball injury.  This medical opinion, however, is also of limited probative value as it is based upon an inaccurate factual premise as there are service personnel records that do corroborate that the Veteran had completed three weeks of Basic Airborne Specialized Training and had qualified for the Parachutist Badge.  

Accordingly, remand is required for a new medical examination that considers whether the Veteran's conditions are related to his active service, to include parachuting. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

[

1.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the asserted right knee, left and right hip, left and right shoulder, and left and right wrist disabilities.  The examiner must review the claims file.

The examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran has right knee, left and right hip, left and right shoulder, and/or left and right wrist disabilities had onset in service; were manifested by arthritis to a compensable degree within the first post-service year; or are otherwise the result of a disease or injury in service?

In doing so, the examiner is directed to refer to the service personnel records that confirm the Veteran had been awarded the Parachute Badge, and that he completed three weeks of Basic Airborne Specialized Training from February 25, 1973, to March 29, 1973, with that 48th Company, 4th Student Battalion (Cadre) Airborne Department TSB, at the U.S. Army Infantry School, Fort Benning, Georgia.

The examiner is also directed to refer to the January 2020 medical opinion from F. I., M.D., the Veteran's VA primary care physician, that suggested the Veteran had shoulder, wrist, hip, and knee pain, and that his degenerative joint disease was worsening and most probably related to his service as a paratrooper.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner is also requested to refer to the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.

If any requested opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner is requested to explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  A complete rationale is required for all conclusions reached.

 

 

Mike Sobiecki

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Orfanoudis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.