Citation Nr: A25033156
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-441818
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for evaluation of left rhomboid muscle strain, (also claimed as instability, SLAP tear, proximal biceps tendinosis/tenosynovitis, subacromial impingement and bursitis for the left shoulder), (left shoulder condition) is denied.

Entitlement to a temporary 100 percent rating for surgery for the left shoulder is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a neck and upper back (cervical spine) condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability, to include as secondary to a cervical spine condition, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his acquired psychiatric disorder is at least as likely as not related to a traumatic event experienced during active military service.

2. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's left shoulder disability involving Muscle Group II, resulted in no more than slight impairment. 

3. The Veteran's VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement was received in November 2023, more than one year after the July 2022 rating decision deciding the left ankle disability claim, and good cause to extend the period of time to file the notice of disagreement is not shown.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

2. The criteria for a compensable rating for a left shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.56, 4.73, Diagnostic Code 5302.

3. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to a temporary 100 percent rating for left shoulder surgery have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.202, 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Army from April 1994 to April 1998. These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from May 2023 and March 2020 rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in May 2023 and March 2020 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 and March 2020 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to a compensable rating for a left shoulder disability and service connection for cervical spine and right hip disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. §3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

TERA Examinations

The Board acknowledges that in a June 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative stated that the Veteran was not given a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) examination. The Board notes that the representative did not specifically argue that the Veteran was entitled to a TERA examination.

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022) (PACT Act) established a lower threshold to obtain examinations or medical opinions for veterans with presumed toxic exposures or who participated in a TERA. See also 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Here, the record shows that the Veteran has not submitted evidence that he was exposed to any toxic materials during active service and there is no evidence of record that the Veteran has any presumed toxic exposures that would entitle him to receive a TERA examination under 38 U.S.C. § 1168. Specifically, after reviewing the evidence of record, including the Veteran's military personnel records (MPRs) and service treatment records (STRs), the AOJ did not find evidence that the Veteran's military service included any presumed exposure to or participation in a TERA. See VBMS document titled, "VA Memo," receipt date 02/08/2023. Accordingly, the requirements for entitlement to a TERA examination have not been met and a TERA examination is not warranted at this time. 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Scope of Claim

In determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

In light of the decision in Clemons and the diagnoses of record, the Board has expanded the Veteran's claim to include all acquired psychiatric disorders raised by the relevant evidence of record, and the issue has been recharacterized as stated on the title page. This will provide the most favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the holding in Clemons. 

Service Connection

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Typically, this requires (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service event, incurrence, or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. See Shedden v. Principi,381 F.3d 1163, 1167(Fed. Cir. 2004).

Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of the facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. In order to be competent, an individual must have personal knowledge, derived from his/her own senses, of what is being attested; "[c]ompetent testimony is thus limited to that which the witness has actually observed, and is within the realm of his personal knowledge." See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).

The lack of treatment or corroborating medical evidence for many years may be considered as one of several factors in determining whether a disability was incurred during service. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1289 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

While the lack of contemporaneous medical records may be a fact that the Board can consider and weigh against a veteran's lay evidence, the lack of such records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence not credible. If the Board concludes that the lay evidence presented by a veteran is credible and ultimately competent, the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence should not be an absolute bar to the veteran's ability to prove his claim of entitlement to disability benefits based on that competent lay evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (2006).

The Board notes that a negative nexus opinion based solely on a lack of documented treatment during service is inadequate and lacks probative value. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007); see also Smith v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 137, 140 (1992).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. §5107; 38 C.F.R. §3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski,1 Vet. App. 49(1990). 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

If an increase in disability level was "factually ascertainable" within one year prior to receipt of a complete increased rating claim or intent to file a claim, then the effective date will be the date on which that increase is shown to have occurred; otherwise, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2). The purpose of this provision is to provide a one-year grace period for filing a claim following any increase in severity of a service-connected disability. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 983-84 (Fed. Cir. 2010). VA must look to all the evidence including testimonial evidence and expert medical opinions as to when the increase took place. VAOPGCPREC 12-98. See also Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 223-24 (2015) (the Board must review all relevant evidence of record to determine when the increase in the disability can be ascertained); Tatum v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 139, 145 (2010) (holding that "it is the information in a medical opinion, and not the date the medical opinion was provided that is relevant when assigning an effective date").

Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the evaluations may be staged. Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The Board has considered the record and has found that staged ratings are not warranted in this claim; as the degree of disability has remained approximately the same throughout the period on appeal. 

When a diagnostic code contains undefined subjective terms of degree, the Board must disclose the standard under which it is defining these terms. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018). Both the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) and the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) have held that in discussing the meaning of the above terms, the Board is permitted to consult with a dictionary. Nielson v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 56, 59 (2009) ("It is commonplace to consult dictionaries to ascertain a term's ordinary meaning."); Hime v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 1, 7 (2016) (using a law dictionary to define "decision"); Prokarym v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 307, 310 (2015) (defining diagnostic code term "severe" using the New Oxford American Dictionary and online Merriam-Webster Dictionary). According to MERRIAM WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "slight" means small in amount. "Moderate" means limited in scope or effect. "Severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree. However, what is classified as "severe" can be dependent on the diagnostic code used. See Breniser v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 64, 76-77 (2011).

All reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. The Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise. Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the Veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), affirmed en banc 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (exact equipoise is not required for benefit of the doubt to be applied); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

The Veteran contends that his current acquired psychiatric disorders are related to a traumatic stressor event that occurred during his active military service. 

The Board concludes that the Veteran has a current acquired psychiatric disability that is related to military sexual trauma (MST) that the Veteran experienced during active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Evidence

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2023. The March 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran began experiencing trust issues, issues with self-worth, "toxic relationships and an inability to have a 'good' marriage, "not able to feel a sense of value," passive episodes of homicidal ideation "without intent or plan during service towards a figure of authority that was mistreating him while verbally abusing and taking advantage of him," but that the Veteran denied any hospitalizations, medications, therapy services, suicide attempts or ideation during service. Following service, the Veteran reported continued issues of self-worth, an inability to sleep even with medication, "active episodes of [suicidal ideation] 'invariably' that come and go," and nightmares about the in-service assault and other stressful life events. The VA examiner identified only two stressors, both during service. The first being mistreatment by a noncommissioned officer (NCO); and the second being the in-service MST event. The examiner did not identify any other stressor events prior to or following military service. Although the examiner found that the Veteran did not meet the DSM-V criteria for a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the examiner indicated that the Veteran experiences some symptoms that are attributed to the identified stressors including "recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories," "recurrent distressing dreams," "feelings of detachment or estrangement from others," and "sleep disturbance." The examiner was prompted to note in section 7, any "overlapping symptoms clearly attributable to other things;" however, the examiner indicated "no" in section 7 and did not note any symptoms attributable to "other things." See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 03/03/2023, 9 pages (DBQ - PTSD). 

The March 2023 VA examiner then opined that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder disability is "less likely than not related to the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness of MST stressor event during service." The rationale was that the etiology is not able to be determined without resorting to speculation because "the evidence is silent for any report of or treatment for [mental health] concerns during service." The examiner then noted that "behavioral markers to include visits to the medical clinic for urological issues during service concedes his reported MST event...however, [the Veteran] does not meet diagnostic criteria for PTSD at the current time." See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 03/03/2023, 4 pages (opinion - PTSD).  

The Veteran's VA treatment records reveal mental health treatment beginning in November 2019. At that time, the Veteran reported that he had seen therapists and counselors, "for life issues," in the past, but that he had never sought mental health care from the VA or been seen by a psychiatrist. A November 2020 VA emergency department record shows that the Veteran arrived complaining of chest pain and/or angina, but was ultimately diagnosed with a panic attack and generalized anxiety disorder. The Veteran first disclosed the MST event to his VA psychologist in December 2020 saying that "I was depressed," and that "even today it is difficult for men to reveal these kinds of things." The VA psychologist noted that the Veteran "did not say anything [previously] and now in retrospect he realizes that he reverted to the reaction he received as a child," when he reported abuse, and no one believed him. "He now realizes that it caused issues in his marriages, in part contributed to his first divorce and now his current separation from second wife due to bouts of anger and irritabilities. Vet reports that he has discussed his [MST] with private counselor, but to no one at VA." Beginning in September 2020, VA treatment records reveal that the Veteran has been diagnosed pursuant to the DSM-V with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, generalized anxiety disorder with panic attacks; and with insomnia that is chronic in nature, pursuant to a July 2022 clinical sleep study. VA treatment records reveal that the Veteran continued to seek and attend mental health therapy throughout the appeal period. See VBMS document titled, "CAPRI," receipt date 02/08/2023, pages 38, 46, 63, 65, 83, 290, 415, 427, 456, 462, 463, 473, 475, 521, 523, 553, 563 of 1108. 

The Veteran's private treatment records include an August 2020 private emergency department record when the Veteran complained of dizziness and fear of stroke. The private hospital noted the "chief complaint," as "anxiety," and the Veteran was ultimately diagnosed with anxiety and vertigo. See VBMS document titled, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," receipt date 04/02/2025, pages 3, 5 of 17.

The Veteran submitted his own lay statement as well as lay statements from his son and ex-wife. In a September 2022 statement, the Veteran described the MST event during service in details consistent with the December 2020 VA treatment record and the March 2023 VA examination report. He also described his feelings and disbelief towards what had happened to him, "a seemingly physically strong and mature young man," and lamented the "counterculture perception that sexual assaults were perpetrated against men or even reported by them." He stated that in the 28 years since this happened, he has suffered "incalculable emotional and psychological turmoil," and that he has "carried this emotional baggage for years," that he "told no one of these sordid details for a very long time and suffered in silence." The Veteran said he relies on daily medication to function normally, maintain his mood, and reinforce his self-worth. The Veteran stated that the MST event caused him to be distrustful of women, two failed marriages, and a nervous breakdown, but that he continues to seek counseling through VA mental health services so that he can care for his young children. See VBMS document titled, "Buddy/Lay Statement," receipt date 09/23/2022, 3 pages.

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted his ex-wife's lay statement wherein she stated that they were together during his time in the military and at first their relationship was "full of love," but as his time in the military progressed, their relationship deteriorated to the point that they were arguing and fighting. She reported that at times, the Veteran would get so angry he could not speak, "nights where he couldn't sleep, would jump out of his sleep in sweats, as if he was paranoid." She said that was over 20 years ago and "it is as if [the Veteran] hasn't made any improvements for the better." See VBMS document titled, "Buddy/Lay Statement," receipt date 10/14/2022.

In October 2022, the Veteran also submitted his son's lay statement wherein he stated that "the military really changed my father and not for the better, but for the worse. My dad's mental state, physical well-being and overall health was drastically changed due to him being in the Army. My mom always talked about how charming and sweet my dad was when they first met in the military. I know that after he got out, he wasn't the same. Growing up I could see that myself. There would be times where my dad mentally, just wasn't there. I see that now today. There are nights where my dad can't sleep, days where my [dad] mentally just doesn't feel like existing... There was one time that I really saw how mentally my dad had changed. In August 2020, I went to visit my dad...we went to the library, my father, my 4 younger siblings (at the time aged 12, 10, 9, and 7) and myself...My dad complained of his chest hurting and he couldn't breathe so I ran all of the kids to the van and got my dad in and started driving to the emergency room...I had to drive really fast to the hospital cause he literally thought he was having a heart attack... [but it] was a severe panic attack...My dad has had many more experiences like this, many where I am not there to help him...It's robbed me and my siblings of a genuine relationship with my dad. My grandmother tells me stories all the time of how my dad was before the military and I truly wish I could've experienced the kind of man he was then." See VBMS document titled, "Buddy/Lay Statement," receipt date 10/14/2022. 

Analysis

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorder is related to the traumatic events he experienced during service.

First, the Board finds that throughout the appeal period, the Veteran has had current diagnoses including adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, generalized anxiety disorder with panic attacks; and insomnia that is chronic in nature. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's medical treatment records and March 2023 VA examination constitute persuasive evidence of a current acquired psychiatric disorder disability and the first element of Shedden is met. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 4.125; Shedden, 381 F.3d at 1167.

Second, the Board finds that the Veteran experienced MST during active service. In the May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ conceded the Veteran's in-service stressor of military sexual trauma (MST). Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran experienced an in-service MST event and the second element of Shedden is met. 

Third, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that his current acquired psychiatric disorder disability is related to the in-service MST event. 

The Board finds that the March 2023 VA opinion is inadequate. Other than referring to a lack of in-service mental health treatment, the examiner did not provide any explanation as to why it would be "mere speculation" to opine on the etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder disability. Thus, the Board finds that the March 2023 VA opinion is expressly based on a lack of "any report of or treatment for [mental health] concerns during service," and a negative nexus opinion based solely on the lack of documented treatment during service is inadequate and lacks probative value. See Dalton, 21 Vet. App. at 40; see also Smith, 2 Vet. App. at 140. Accordingly, the Board finds that the March 2023 VA opinion as to etiology is inadequate and assigns it no probative value because it is solely based on the lack of in-service mental health treatment. 

In addition, the Board finds that the Veteran, his son, and his ex-wife are competent to report their experiences and observations as to the observable symptoms of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder disability. See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469. Statements made for the purpose of medical diagnosis or treatment are exceptionally trustworthy because the declarant has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive a proper diagnosis and/or treatment. The Veteran's reports regarding the MST event and symptoms experienced even many years after service, are highly probative because the Veteran had an incentive to give an accurate history as to the nature and timing of his symptoms and exposures to receive proper care. The Board also finds that many of the mental health treatment visits were years prior to his VA claim or denial, after which he had an incentive to link the claimed current disability to service. 

Similarly, the Board finds that the September 2023 Veteran lay statement and October 2023 buddy statements from the Veteran's son and ex-wife constitute credible evidence of the Veteran's observable symptoms and change in behaviors during and since his military service. The statements are internally consistent and consistent with the other relevant evidence of record, to include the Veteran's documented history of his symptoms in his VA and private treatment records and repeated and consistent reports of MST since he first reported it to his VA psychologist in December 2020. Moreover, the Board finds that the lay statements are corroborated by the stressors identified in the March 2023 VA examination, and VA mental health treatment and sleep study records. 

Additionally, despite the more than 20 year gap in post-service treatment records, the Board finds that there is no affirmative evidence that is clearly contrary to the lay statements and therefore no reason to doubt the credibility of these statements. Further, there are no probative conflicting statements in the record and there is no evidence suggesting the Veteran, his ex-wife, or son were untruthful or mistaken in their accounts of the Veteran's MST event and subsequent struggles in life. As such, the Board finds the Veteran's, his wife's, and his co-worker's statements credible. See Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1336-1337. 

Finally, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that the March 2023 VA examination report is probative as to medical nexus between the Veteran's in-service MST stressor and the symptoms identified by the VA examiner because the examiner did not indicate that any of the identified symptoms are either overlapping or attributable to other things. The Board also finds that the March 2023 VA examination report diagnosed the Veteran with the acquired psychiatric disorder disability in issue based on the same identified symptoms unattributable to any other event, injury, or incurrence. Therefore, the Board finds that the March 2023 VA examination report constitutes medical evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's currently diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder disability and the in-service MST event.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorder disability is related to the MST event during active military service. Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder disability is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The appeal is granted.

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for evaluation of left rhomboid muscle strain, (also claimed as instability, SLAP tear, proximal biceps tendinosis/tenosynovitis, subacromial impingement and bursitis for the left shoulder) (left shoulder condition), is denied.

The Veteran generally contends that he is entitled to a compensable rating for his service-connected left shoulder condition (non-dominant). However, the Veteran has not made any specific assertions or statements as to why he believes he is entitled to a compensable rating.

By way of history, the Veteran submitted a claim for a compensable rating for his left rhomboid muscle strain disability in September 2022, which the AOJ again denied in the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. Prior to the September 2022 claim, the Board notes that the AOJ most recently addressed the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for his left rhomboid muscle strain disability in a March 2020 rating decision. The Veteran did not seek review of that decision within one year, and it became final one year after notice of the decision as mailed to the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 20.203. Accordingly, the Board's review of the severity of the Veteran's symptoms is from the date of the September 2022 claim for an increased rating, to the date of the May 2023 rating decision, with consideration for the one-year "look back" period. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o); Gaston, 605 F.3d at 983-84. 

Muscle injuries of the shoulder girdle and arm are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.73. The Veteran's left shoulder condition is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5302. 38 C.F.R. § 4.73. Under DC 5302, muscle group II affects functions of depression of the arm from vertical overhead to hanging at the side (1, 2); downward rotation of the scapula (3, 4); and 1 and 2 act with Group III in forward and backward swinging of the arm. Muscle group II involves the extrinsic muscles of the shoulder girdle: (1) pectoralis major II (costosternal); (2) latissimus dorsi and teres major (teres major, although technically an intrinsic muscle, is included with latissimus dorsi); (3) pectoralis minor; and (4) rhomboid. Slight impairment of either side is assigned a noncompensable rating, and moderate impairment of either side is assigned a 20 percent rating. Moderately severe impairment is assigned a 30 percent rating for the dominant side and a 20 percent rating for the non-dominant side. Severe impairment is assigned the maximum rating of 40 percent for the dominant side and 30 percent for the non-dominant side. 38 C.F.R. § 4.73.

For these purposes, the terms slight, moderate, moderately severe, and severe are defined in 38 C.F.R. § 4.56. The cardinal signs and symptoms of muscle disability are loss of power, weakness, lowered threshold of fatigue, fatigue-pain, impairment of coordination, and uncertainty of movement. 38 C.F.R. § 4.56(c).

A "slight" disability is characterized by an injury of a simple wound of muscle without debridement or infection. History and complaint are a superficial wound with brief treatment and return to duty, healing with good functional results, and no cardinal signs or symptoms of muscle disability. Objective findings are minimal scar; no evidence of fascial defect, atrophy, or impaired tonus; and no impairment of function or metallic fragments retained in muscle tissue. 38 C.F.R. § 4.56 (d)(1).

A "moderate" disability is characterized by an injury of a through and through or deep penetrating wound of a short track from a single bullet, small shell or shrapnel fragment, without explosive effect of high velocity missile, with residuals of debridement, or prolonged infection. History and complaint are treatment for the wound and consistent complaints of one or more of the cardinal signs and symptoms of muscle disability, particularly lowered threshold of fatigue after average use, affecting the particular functions controlled by the injured muscles. Objective findings are entrance and (if present) exit scars that are small or linear, indicating a short track of missile through muscle tissue, some loss of deep fascia or muscle substance or impairment of muscle tonus, and loss of power or lowered threshold of fatigue when compared to the sound side. 38 C.F.R. § 4.56(d)(2).

A "moderately severe" disability is characterized by an injury of a through and through or deep penetrating wound by a small high velocity missile or large low-velocity missile, with debridement, prolonged infection, or sloughing of soft parts, and intermuscular scarring. History and complaint are hospitalization for a prolonged period for treatment of the wound; along with consistent complaints of cardinal signs and symptoms of muscle disability as defined in paragraph (c) of this section and, if present, inability to keep up with work requirements. Objective findings are entrance and (if present) exit scars indicating a track of missile through one or more muscle groups; indications on palpation of loss of deep fascia, muscle substance, or normal firm resistance of muscles compared with the sound side; and tests of strength and endurance compared with the sound side demonstrate positive evidence of impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.56(d)(3).

A "severe" disability is characterized by an injury of a through and through or deep penetrating wound due to high-velocity missile, or large or multiple low velocity missiles, or with a shattering bone fracture or open comminuted fracture with extensive debridement, prolonged infection, or sloughing of soft parts, intermuscular binding and scarring. History and complaint are hospitalization for a prolonged period for treatment of wound; along with consistent complaints of cardinal signs and symptoms of muscle disability as defined in paragraph (c) of this section, worse than those shown for moderately severe muscle injuries, and, if present, inability to keep up with work requirements. Objective findings are ragged, depressed, and adherent scars indicating wide damage to muscle groups in the missile track. Palpation shows loss of deep fascia or muscle substance, or soft flabby muscles in wound area. Muscles swell and harden abnormally in contraction. Tests of strength, endurance, or coordinated movements compared with the corresponding muscles of the uninjured side indicate severe impairment of function. If present, the following are also signs of severe muscle disability: (a) X-ray evidence of minute multiple scattered foreign bodies indicating intermuscular trauma and explosive effect of the missile; (b) adhesion of scar to one of the long bones, scapula, pelvic bones, sacrum or vertebrae, with epithelial sealing over the bone rather than true skin covering in an area where bone is normally protected by muscle; (c) diminished muscle excitability to pulsed electrical current in electrodiagnostic tests; (d) visible or measurable atrophy; (e) adaptive contraction of an opposing group of muscles; (f) atrophy of muscle groups not in the track of the missile, particularly of the trapezius and serratus in wounds of the shoulder girdle; and (g) induration or atrophy of an entire muscle following simple piercing by a projectile. 38 C.F.R. § 4.56(d)(4).

Evidence relevant to the current level of severity of the Veteran's left shoulder disability during the period on appeal, includes a February 2023 VA examination for muscle injures and VA treatment records. The February 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran "reports no current complaints for his [service connected] condition of left rhomboid muscle strain." The examination report reveals no scars, facial defects or evidence of facial defects, loss of power, weakness, lowered threshold of fatigue, fatigue and/or pain, impairment of coordination, uncertainty of movement, and/or muscle atrophy associated with the left shoulder muscle injury. The Veteran's muscle strength testing revealed all "normal strength" results, the Veteran did not report use of any assistive devices, and the examination found no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms. Moreover, the examination revealed no functional impact related to the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder condition. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 02/22/2023. 

The Veteran's VA treatment reveal only one complaint in the applicable review period. A March 2022 neurology consult note states that "in November 2021 [the Veteran] was cleared by neurosurgery to return to be able to work out and continue therapy at home. He has had [right] arm weakness which has continued to improve. He still has some pain which goes across both shoulders. Ordinarily this might be after working out." However, the physical exam did not reveal any clinical findings related to the Veterans left shoulder. See VBMS document titled, "CAPRI," receipt date 02/08/2023, pages 191, 192 of 1108. 

The Veteran submitted private treatment records in December 2022. However, the medical records document surgical intervention in January 2020 and none are dated later than January 2020, or within the period under review. Accordingly, the Board finds that these records are informative of his history, but are not otherwise relevant to the increased rating claim filed in September 2022. 

The Veteran's file is silent for any other complaints, symptoms or treatment relevant to the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for his service-connected left shoulder condition throughout the period on appeal, including any applicable look back period.  

After considering the relevant evidence, the Board finds that the February 2023 VA examination is the most probative evidence of record as to the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder condition. The Board finds that the March 2022 neurosurgery record is also probative. Statements made for the purpose of medical diagnosis or treatment are exceptionally trustworthy because the declarant has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive a proper diagnosis and/or treatment. In this instance, the March 2022 report of shoulder pain is related to working out, the Veteran was provided a physical examination that included his shoulders, and there were no clinical findings as a result. Moreover, the Veteran attended numerous medical treatment visits throughout the period under review and there are no other complaints or symptoms noted at any other time during the relevant period, to include applicable look-back period. Because the February 2023 VA examination is the only medical evidence that directly addresses the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder condition, the record is silent for and the Veteran has not submitted any evidence contrary to the February 2023 examination findings despite opportunity to do so, the Board finds that the February 2023 VA examination is highly probative and persuasive evidence as to the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder condition.

Based on the persuasive evidence of record, a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder condition is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal.

3. Entitlement to a temporary 100 percent rating for surgery for the left shoulder is dismissed.

The Veteran submitted a May 2024 notice of disagreement for a March 2020 rating decision that denied entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's left should disability. Unfortunately, the appeal of the March 2020 rating decision is untimely and must be dismissed for the following reasons. 

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(a)(1)(ii) and 20.202, a veteran may appeal a rating decision to the Board on the form prescribed by the Secretary (here, VA Form 10182 Decision Review request: Board Appeal, Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) within one year after the date of the mailing of the letter notifying the Veteran of the decision. However, a veteran may request an extension of the period in which to file a timely NOD on a showing of good cause. 38 C.F.R. § 2.203(c). These regulations are mandatory claims-processing rules. Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333 (2021).

In a March 2020 rating decision, notification of which was furnished to the Veteran's address of record on March 4, 2020, the AOJ denied entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's left should disability. Thus, for the Veteran to file a timely VA Form 10182, the Veteran was required to file his NOD by March 4, 2021. However, VA first received the Veteran's NOD on May 15, 2024, more than three years after the one-year appeal period to appeal his denial of a compensable rating for the left should disability had expired. Thus, his appeal was untimely. 

In addition, the Board finds that the Veteran has not submitted any request seeking an extension of time based on good cause to submit his NOD. The Veteran's file is silent for any statement or request for an extension of time to file a notice of disagreement. Nor has the Veteran submitted any statement of an implicit request for an extension of time or explanation for the untimely filing. The Board finds that under the applicable claims-processing rules, the present appeal of the March 2020 rating decision should be dismissed in its entirety.

The Board acknowledges that it informed the Veteran of receipt of his VA Form 10182 in the correspondence mailed to him on June 4, 2024. But the letter was merely a notice to the Veteran of receipt and docketing of his appeal. The Board did not provide any indication that the Veteran's appeal was proper in all respects. And no subsequent action taken by the Board provided the Veteran a reasonable belief that his appeal was timely. Thus, the letter, in this instance, was an administrative notification to the Veteran that his appeal request was received and nothing else. Compare Cardoza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 407 (2024) (refusal of the Board to docket an appeal is a decision subject to appeal) with Hall, 34 Vet. App. at 333 (Falvey, J., dissenting) (the Board's docketing letter, denying docketing of an appeal, is an administrative function and not a decision). 

Therefore, the Board finds that good cause has not been shown to extend the period to file the VA Form 10182 in this case, and because the Veteran's VA Form 10182 was not timely filed as to the March 2020 rating decision, the appeal is dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a neck and upper back (cervical spine) condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his cervical spine disability is related to active military service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his military occupational specialty (MOS) duties as a supply clerk involved regular and routine heavy lifting that caused a flattening and degeneration of the spinal discs in C3, C4, and C5 of his spinal column and that his condition has worsened over the years. See VBMS document titled, "VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim" receipt date 09/23/2022.

The AOJ made favorable findings in that 1.) the Veteran has an in-service event, injury or disease, noting an April 1995 STR complaint for upper back pain after a push-up exercise injury; and 2.) the Veteran has a current cervical spine disability.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2023. The February 2023 examiner indicated that the date of onset was 2001 with diagnosis of cervical stenosis treated with physical therapy. The examiner then noted that the Veteran experienced a bicycle accident in 2021 which resulted in concussion and right side paralysis and subsequent surgery with cervical fusion. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 02/22/2023, 23 pages. In the corresponding February 2023 VA opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's cervical spine disability is less likely than not due incurred in or due to an injury, event, or illness during the Veteran's military service. The rationale is that the Veteran experienced a traumatic brain injury in May 2021, after a fall from a bike with loss of consciousness, he was hospitalized and underwent surgery for cervical fusion of the C3 and C4 vertebrae. The examiner then concluded that, "therefore the Veteran [has] a diagnosis of Musculoskeletal - Neck/Upper Back (Cervical Spine) that is less likely as not... incurred in or caused by (the) Upper Back Pain during service." See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 02/22/2023, 3 pages.

The Veteran's file includes extensive objective medical records indicating that the Veteran had significant cervical spine disabilities dating prior to the May 2021 bicycle accident. These records include referral and scheduling of cervical spine surgery. See VBMS document titled, "CAPRI," receipt date 02/08/2023, pages 266, 639, 662, 774, 775, 804, 811, 814, 851, 1078 (multiple diagnoses of cervical spine, results of diagnostic imaging studies between 2008 and 2021). 

Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that the February 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate because the examination did not incorporate, cite, or otherwise indicate that they weighed evidence of the Veteran's multiple documented cervical spine diagnoses and scheduled surgical intervention which predate the May 2021 bicycle accident. In addition, the February 2023 VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's express contention that his cervical spine disabilities are related to his in-service MOS duties as a supply clerk and/or push-up injury. The Board notes that the Veteran's file includes objective medical evidence that he was injured in a bicycle accident many years after separating from active service, but the VA examiner did not find or otherwise opine that the bicycle accident demonstrates a superseding cause of the Veteran's current cervical spine disabilities. Accordingly, the Board finds that the February 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate because the examiner did not explain why the bicycle accident was relevant and did not incorporate the relevant medical evidence of the Veteran's cervical spine disabilities prior to the bicycle accident. When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). The AOJ's failure to ensure that the VA examination is adequate constitutes a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

Accordingly, the Board finds that remand is warranted to correct the duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).

2. Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition, to include as due to the Veteran's cervical spine disability, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a right hip condition that is etiologically related to his cervical spine condition which he claims is related to service.

Secondary service connection will be granted if a current disability is due to or the result of, or is aggravated beyond its natural progression, by a service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 ; see also Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4 th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (the Federal Circuit Court vacated a United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims affirmance of a Board decision that rejected the argument that his service-connected leukemia prevented his ability from getting an arthroplasty and, therefore, prevented a surgery that would have relieved some of his bilateral knee pain. The Federal Circuit Court held that "the but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction.").

Given that the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for a cervical spine condition, the Board must remand the claim for service connection for a right hip condition as intertwined with the claim of service connection for a cervical spine condition. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991); Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 177 (2009) (en banc) (explaining that claims are inextricably intertwined where the adjudication of one claim could have a significant impact on the adjudication of another claim).

However, as the AOJ committed no predecisional duty to assist error (because the Veteran was not service-connected for a cervical spine condition), the Board may not order any development on the claim for service connection for a right hip condition. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his current cervical spine disabilities. All appropriate testing must be conducted during the examination. The examiner should review the claims file, including a copy of this Remand. 

The examiner should address the following: 

(a.) Is Veteran's cervical spine disability at least as likely as not related to service, including his regular and routine MOS duties as a supply clerk which involved heavy lifting, or to an in-service complaint of upper back pain after a push-up exercise injury?  

(b.) The examiner's attention is directed to the following evidence:

i.	VBMS document titled, "CAPRI," receipt date 02/08/2023, pages 639, 774, 775, 804, 814, 851, 1078, 1080 of 1108 (VA treatment records indicating complaints, treatment, and diagnoses of cervical spine disabilities between 2008 and 2021 - prior to the bicycle accident relied upon in the last opinion obtained). 

ii.	VBMS document titled, "Military Personnel Record," receipt date 01/10/2023, page 8 of 41 (DD-214 indicating MOS).

iii.	VBMS document titled, "STR - Medical," receipt date 09/28/1998, pages 48, 49, 85 of 103 (enlistment examination and in-service complaint of push-up exercise injury). 

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting reasons explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. 

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webb, Katherine S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.