Citation Nr: A25033431
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240311-424886
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by gastrointestinal signs and symptoms is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical disc disease is granted.

3. Entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, and no higher, for bilateral pes planus is granted. 

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability limitation of flexion is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left knee disability limitation of extension is remanded.

3. Entitlement to a temporary total rating for the service-connected left knee disability for post-surgical convalescence is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran reports having had gastrointestinal signs and symptoms since 2006 which are not attributable to a known clinical diagnosis by history, physical examination, or laboratory testing.

2. The appellant's current cervical spine disability, diagnosed as cervical disc disease, was incurred in active service.  

3. The appellant's bilateral pes planus more nearly approximates severe flatfoot.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by gastrointestinal signs and symptoms have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317.

2. The criteria for service connection for a cervical spine disability, diagnosed as herniated disc C6-C7, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, and no higher, for bilateral pes planus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5276. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant was a member of the Army National Guard, during which he had an initial period of active duty for training from July to November 2000, and periods of active duty from August 2002 to July 2003, March 2005 to July 2006, June 2007 to August 2008, June 2011 to January 2012, December 2012 to September 2013, and January 2017 to May 2020, including service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  He is the recipient of the Combat Action Badge.  The record also reflects multiple periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA), including a period of ACDUTRA from June 1, 2022, to June 10, 2022.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from January 2024 and February 2014 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the January 2024 rating decision, the RO, in pertinent part, denied service connection for a cervical spine disability and awarded service connection for (1) bilateral pes planus and assigned an initial 10 percent rating; (2) left knee disability limitation of flexion and assigned an initial 10 percent rating; and (3) left knee disability limitation of extension and assigned an initial noncompensable rating, each effective February 14, 2022.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on January 26, 2024.

In the February 2024 rating decision, the RO, in pertinent part, denied service connection for "gastrointestinal problems."  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on February 8, 2024.

Received on March 11, 2024, was a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), upon which the appellant identified the January and February 2024 rating decisions, the issues set forth above, and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal for the claim of service connection for a gastrointestinal disability and the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal for the remaining claims.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  Because the Board is remanding the claims for higher initial ratings for the left knee disability, however, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, air, or space service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The term active military, naval, air or space service means active duty, any period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated in the line of duty, or any period of inactive duty training (INACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty.  38?U.S.C. §?101(21-24); 38?C.F.R. §?3.6(a).  

VA will pay compensation to a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that manifest "during service on active duty in the Armed Forces in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War" or to a degree of 10 percent or more before December 31, 2026.? 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a).  A qualifying chronic disability is as a chronic disability that results from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, or a functional gastrointestinal disorder (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases).? 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i).? 

Along with the three examples of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness provided by section 1117(a)(2)(B), Congress has provided a list of signs or symptoms that may be a manifestation of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that includes: skin symptoms, headaches, muscle pain, joint pain, neurologic symptoms, neuropsychological symptoms, respiratory system symptoms, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal symptoms, cardiovascular symptoms, abnormal weight loss, and menstrual disorders.? 38 U.S.C. § 1117(g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).? 

1. Entitlement to service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by gastrointestinal signs and symptoms.

The Veteran contends that he developed gastrointestinal problems as a result of his exposure to smoke from burn pits during his service in the Persian Gulf theater of operations.  

In connection with his claim, the Veteran was afforded a medical examination in April 2023.  He reported that sometime in 2006, during his first tour of duty in the Persian Gulf theater of operations, he developed soft stools.  He indicated that he had not had a solid stool since that time.  He also reported frequent bloating and passing of gas.  He reported that he had liquid stools once per month on average.  The examiner determined that there was no pathology upon which to render a diagnosis.  

In December 2023, a different examiner provided a clarifying opinion as to the existence of a current disability, stating that "In review of the veteran's service treatment records and relevant evidence file it appears a diagnosis is warranted based on the Veteran's GI [gastrointestinal] symptoms."  However, the examiner failed to indicate what diagnosis would be warranted.

In January 2024, another clinician completed an intestinal conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) based on a records review.  No diagnosis was rendered.  The examiner stated that, although the appellant had gastrointestinal symptoms noted in the record, "Upon medical record review, there is no definitive diagnosis of Gastrointestinal condition from a medical professional or record of any treatment for the claimed condition found."  

The clinician also provided a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) opinion.  The clinician opined in the negative on the basis that:

according to recent medical literature, the veteran's claimed condition of GI conditions is not a known presumptive condition linked to Persian gulf war service and non deployment related exposure.  There is no evidence in the medical records provided establishing a nexus between the veteran's claimed condition of GI conditions and toxic exposure during military service or any related presumptive condition from a toxic exposure resulting in the GI conditions condition.

After considering the evidence of record, including that discussed above, the Board finds that service connection for a gastrointestinal disability is warranted.

As set forth above, service connection may be granted for a Persian Gulf veteran with objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that manifested either during active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026.  38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).  A qualifying chronic disability is a chronic disability that may result from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI).  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i). 

An undiagnosed illness requires that the illness, by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(4).  There is no burden on a veteran to demonstrate that a medical professional has eliminated all possible diagnoses before the veteran can be compensated for a disability stemming from an undiagnosed illness.  Joyner v. McDonald, 766 F.3d 1393, 1395 (Fed. Cir. 2014).

The RO has made a favorable finding that the Veteran's multiple tours of duty in Kuwait and Iraq between 2005 and 2011 qualify him as a Persian Gulf veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e).  See January 2023 VA Memorandum.  

The Veteran reports having experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms of soft stools, frequent bloating and flatulence, and liquid stools once per month on average since 2006.  As set forth above, the multiple clinicians who reviewed the record on appeal were unable to attribute the signs and symptoms to a known clinical diagnosis.  The evidence does not otherwise show that the Veteran's signs and symptoms are attributable to a known clinical diagnosis by history, physical examination, or laboratory testing.

The Veteran's signs and symptoms have existed from 2006, a period of 6 months or more.  Thus, they are considered chronic under the regulatory definition. Moreover, the signs and symptoms have manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more.  See e.g. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, 7319 (2023) (providing a 10 percent rating for mild irritable colon syndrome manifested by disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress), and as amended (providing a 10 percent rating for irritable bowel syndrome manifested by abdominal pain related to defecation at least once during the previous three months; and two or more of the following:  (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension).  

As there is no affirmative evidence to the contrary, see 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(7)(i)-(iii), the Veteran's signs and symptoms are considered an undiagnosed illness and presumptive service connection is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability.

The appellant contends that his current cervical spine disability was incurred in service.   

As noted, the three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

With respect to the first element needed to establish an award of service connection, a current disability, at an April 2023 VA examination, the appellant was diagnosed as having a herniated disc at C6-C7, which the examiner noted had been diagnosed in October 2018.  Such was noted as a favorable finding in the January 2024 rating decision on appeal.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding of a current disability absent clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Finding no such error, the Board finds that the first element of a service connection claim has been met.

With respect to the second element, an in-service disease or injury, the appellant's service treatment records show that he sought treatment for chronic radiating neck pain since sustaining injury performing box jumps in August 2018.  In October 2018, the appellant underwent MRI examination which showed multi-level cervical degenerative disc disease with mild to moderate canal stenosis and a disc herniation at C6-7.  

The record further reflects that this injury, and diagnosed disease, occurred during a period of active service.  The record contains a DD Form 214 for the period from January 2017 to May 2020 which characterizes such service as active duty.  Additionally, the record contains an Army National Guard Current Annual Statement, dated in April 2023, which characterizes this period of service as ARNG Active Guard Reserve under Title 32 USC, State Controlled and ARNG Active duty Operational Support under Title 32 USC, and shows the appellant received full-time active duty points for such service.  Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58 (2007) (holding that "[t]o have basic eligibility for veterans benefits based on a period of duty as a member of a state Army National Guard, a National Guardsman must have been ordered into Federal service by the President of the United States, see 10 U.S.C. § 12401, or must have performed "full-time duty" under the provisions of 32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505") (citing 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(21), (22)(C); 32 U.S.C. §§ 316; 502(a)(2); 503; 504; 505).  Thus, the second element of service connection, a disease or injury during active service, is met.  

With respect to the third element needed to establish service connection, a nexus, the clinician who performed the April 2023 examination offered a positive etiological opinion in December 2023, attributing the appellant's current cervical spine disability to the August 2018 injury documented in his service treatment records.  The clinician also noted that the appellant's current cervical disc herniation had had its inception in 2018.  

The Board finds the examiner's opinion highly probative because it was based on a clinical examination of the appellant, a review of the claims file, consideration of the relevant medical history, and the opinion was accompanied by a detailed rationale and is consistent with the competent and credible evidence of record.  There is no competent opinion to the contrary.

Under the benefit-of-the-doubt rule, for the appellant to prevail, there need not be a preponderance of the evidence in his favor, but only an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence.  In other words, the evidence must be persuasively against the claim for the benefit to be denied.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 54 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Given the evidence set forth above, such a conclusion certainly cannot be made in this case.  Under these circumstances, the record is sufficient to award service connection for a cervical spine disability, diagnosed as herniated disc C6-C7.

Initial Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations should be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if that disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).

Where a claimant appeals the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an [initial] rating on appeal was erroneous. . . ."  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, "staged" ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found.  Id.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral pes planus.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that an initial rating of 30 percent, and no higher, is warranted for bilateral pes planus.

The appellant was afforded a contracted foot conditions examination in April 2023.  The claims file was reviewed.  Following examination of the appellant and review of the claims file, bilateral flat foot (pes planus) was diagnosed.  The appellant reported that, when he stands or walks, he experiences "a ton of soreness" on the balls of his feet.  The pain makes him want to put his weight on the sides of his feet.  Flare-ups were denied.  Functional loss or impairment was denied.  Examination revealed pain on the use of the bilateral feet.  The pain was accentuated on use.  There was no pain on manipulation of either foot.  There was no indication of swelling on use and there were no characteristic calluses.  There was not extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces on either foot.  There was no decreased longitudinal arch height on weight-bearing.  There was no objective evidence of marked deformity or marked pronation.  The weight-bearing line was not over or medial to the great toe for either foot.  There was no inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon.  There was not marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon on manipulation.  There had not been any foot surgery.  Functional loss was present bilateral, due to pain.  The appellant stated that, although he could run seven to nine miles, five days per week, during active service, he now cannot stay on his feet for as long.  He must sit down more often due to intense foot aches.  Foot soreness and fatigue limits his ability to exercise as much, or as long, as he wants.  With repeated use over time, the appellant experienced increased soreness when standing, walking, or running for greater than one hour.  This requires him to sit down and relax his feet.  There was pain on passive motion, active motion, and weight-bearing bilaterally, but not with nonweight-bearing or at rest/non-movement.  The appellant was observed to grimace and he showed aversion to placing his feet flat on the ground when standing or walking.  He also expressed discomfort when dorsiflexing the feet.  No assistive devices were used.  Regarding functional impact, the appellant is not able to stand for as long as he used to.  His feet become increasingly sore as the day progresses, which makes him less mobile toward the latter end of a workday.  Soreness was present on the balls of the feet.  The appellant self-treats with ibuprofen and rest as needed.

The appellant's bilateral pes planus is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5276.

Under DC 5276, a zero percent rating is warranted for mild unilateral or bilateral flatfoot, symptoms relieved by built-up shoe or arch support.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate unilateral or bilateral flatfoot, weight-bearing line over or medial to great toe, inward bowing of the tendo achillis, pain on manipulation and use of the feet.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe bilateral acquired flat foot (or 20 percent for unilateral flat foot); objective evidence of marked deformity (pronation, abduction, etc.), pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, characteristic callosities.  A maximum 50 percent rating is warranted for bilateral acquired flatfoot (or 30 percent for unilateral flat foot); marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation, not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5276.

Descriptive words such as "moderate," "severe," and "pronounced" are not defined in the VA rating schedule.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  Considering the dictionary definitions of these terms, "moderate" is generally defined as "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension;" "severe" means "of a great degree;" "pronounced" means "strongly marked;" and "marked" means "having a distinctive or emphasized character."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary (last accessed 17 March 2025).  Also, the use of descriptive terminology by medical examiners, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  Indeed, all evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision.  38 U.S.C. § 7104(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

Applying the facts to the criteria set forth above, the Board finds that an initial rating of 30 percent, and no higher, for bilateral pes planus is warranted.

As delineated above, the appellant's bilateral pes planus has been manifested by pain and soreness which results in increased symptoms and limitations with standing, walking, or running for long periods.  Given the evidence of accentuated pain on use, and affording the appellant the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that his symptoms more nearly approximate severe flatfoot.

The appellant does not use orthopedic shoes or appliances.  Indeed, no assistive devices are used.  Although the appellant does not have all the symptoms which are contemplated by the 30 percent rating criteria, he has competently and credibly described limitations in function, including an inability to run long distances multiple times per week as he previously did due to pain and fatigability.

The evidence of record shows he did not have other symptoms associated with the 50 percent rating criteria for bilateral, pronounced acquired flatfoot such as marked pronation or marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation.  As such, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral pes planus.  

The Board notes that it has expressly considered Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  Here, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5276, under which the appellant's service-connected bilateral pes planus is rated, specifically references the use of built-up shoes, arch support, orthopedic shoes, and appliances, but not pain medication.  Even assuming the Board is required to discount any ameliorative effects of other treatment not specifically referenced in DC 5276 when evaluating the appellant's bilateral pes planus disability, such as medications, it finds that the record contains no indication, nor has the appellant contended, that his use of over-the-counter medications ameliorates his bilateral pes planus to the extent that a higher rating would otherwise be warranted.  For example, the record contains no indication, nor has the appellant contended, that he would experience marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation without the use of pain medications.  See also Ingram v. Collins, ___ Vet. App. ___ , No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (March 12, 2025).

As set forth above, under the benefit-of-the-doubt rule, for the appellant to prevail, there need not be a preponderance of the evidence in his favor, but only an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence.  In other words, the evidence must be persuasively against the claim for the benefit to be denied.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 54 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Given the evidence set forth above, such a conclusion cannot be made in this case.  Under these circumstances, the record is sufficient to award an initial rating of 30 percent, and no higher, for bilateral pes planus.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability limitation of flexion.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left knee disability limitation of extension.

3. Entitlement to a temporary total rating for the service-connected left knee disability for post-surgical convalescence.

The Board finds that the AOJ committed pre-decisional duty to assist errors in (1) not obtaining the appellant's private records regarding follow-up and physical therapy following his December 27, 2022, left knee meniscectomy, and (2) not addressing the reasonably raised claim for a temporary total rating for post-surgical convalescence under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30.

On December 27, 2022, the appellant underwent a left knee arthroscopy with partial medial meniscectomy and chondroplasty of medial femoral condyle (cartilage repair) and partial synovectomy (joint lining removal) and removal of plica (removal of painful fold of tissue).  The surgical procedure was performed at Central Utah Surgical Center.  Records of the meniscectomy have been associated with the claims file.  Service treatment records, including those from Utah National Guard service, indicate that the appellant was treated by a civilian provider at Canyon View Medical Group after his June 2022 left meniscal tear, leading up to the December 2022 surgery.  He was placed on temporary profiles for his left knee, which were extended into at least April 2023.  Notes in the appellant's service records from this time period indicate that the profile extensions were based on private physical therapy records but such records themselves have not been associated with the claims file, despite the many hundreds of service treatment and personnel records currently in the file.

The private physical therapy and other post-surgical treatment records are relevant to the initial increased rating claims for the appellant's left knee disability.  These records were reasonably identified prior to the January 2024 rating decision currently on appeal.

As such, remand is warranted in order to obtain these relevant, reasonably-identified medical records.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After obtaining any necessary information and authorization from the appellant, undertake appropriate efforts to obtain records of the appellant's private left knee treatment, including physical therapy, following his December 27, 2022, left knee meniscectomy.   

?

2. When readjudicating the claims for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability limitation of flexion and an initial compensable rating for left knee disability limitation of extension, the AOJ should also address the reasonably-raised claim of entitlement to a temporary total rating for post-surgical convalescence following the December 27, 2022, left knee meniscectomy, in addition to consideration of any and all applicable diagnostic codes for rating the left knee.

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Behlen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.