Citation Nr: A25033691
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231106-392514
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for headaches from December 15, 2020, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has continuously pursued his claim for a higher rating for his service-connected headaches since the grant of service connection (December 15, 2020). 

2. Throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's headache disability has manifested with very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for headaches December 15, 2020, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, DC 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1986 to April 1988. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision. In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the March 2023 rating decision.  In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Earlier Effective Date

As will be discussed in more detail below, the Veteran has asserted that earlier effective dates are warranted for the staged ratings that the Regional Office set for his headaches since the grant of service connection (that is, noncompensable from December 15, 2020, 10 percent from December 16, 2021, and 30 percent from March 7, 2023). The Board finds that the doctrine of continuous pursuit is applicable here. Specifically, the Veteran first brought his service connection claim in December 2020 and it was granted in a March 2021 rating decision.  Since that decision, the Veteran has subsequently sought review of his disability rating through submission of either a supplemental claim or higher level review within one year of each determination.  Thus, the appeal period stems from his initial grant of service connection, that is, December 15, 2020.  38 C.F.R. § 5110 (b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2).  Accordingly, the Board will consider the increased rating claim under the standard provisions of increased ratings rather than the provisions for earlier effective dates. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1.

VA should interpret reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability shall be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations apply, the higher of the two should be assigned where the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In disability rating cases, VA assesses the level of disability from the initial grant of service connection or a year prior to the date of application for an increased rating and determines whether the level of disability warrants the assignment of different disability ratings at different times over the course of the claim, a practice known as "staged ratings." See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007) (holding that staged ratings may be warranted in increased rating claims).

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for headaches from December 15, 2020, is granted. 

By way of procedural history, the Veteran initially filed a claim for service connection for headaches on December 15, 2020. The RO granted service connection for headaches in a March 2021 rating decision, assigning a noncompensable disability rating, effective December 15, 2020. The Veteran subsequently filed a Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) in July 2021, disagreeing with the assigned initial disability rating for his service-connected headaches. A Higher-Level Review rating decision was issued in August 2021, continuing the noncompensable disability rating. The Veteran then filed a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) in December 2021, asserting he was entitled to a higher rating. The RO issued a rating decision in May 2022, which increased the Veteran's disability rating for his headaches to 10 percent, effective December 16, 2021, the date of the Supplemental Claim. The Veteran filed an additional Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) in response to the May 2022 rating decision, arguing he is entitled to a higher disability rating. As a result, in March 2023, the RO issued a rating decision which continued the 10 percent disability rating prior to March 7, 2023, but also increased the disability rating for the Veteran's headaches to 30 percent effective March 7, 2023. 

The Veteran filed an additional Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) request to the March 2023 rating decision in May 2023, disputing both the disability ratings (the 10 percent and 30 percent) and effective date (of the 30 percent disability rating) for his headaches. The RO issued the August 2023 Higher-Level Review decision on appeal in August 2023. As a result, the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim for a higher rating for his service-connected headaches since the grant of service connection.   

Headaches will be assigned a 10 percent rating when there are characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months; with less frequent attacks a noncompensable rating is assigned. A 30 percent rating is assigned with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A 50 percent rating is assigned with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.

All criteria of the lower level in DC 8100 must be satisfied, in addition to the criteria for the next higher level, to warrant the higher rating. Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (assign higher rating where the disability more nearly approximates the criteria for next higher rating) and § 4.21 (all elements of a specified rating need not necessarily be found) need not be discussed with this code, but resolution of reasonable doubt (§ 4.3) applies. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018).

Neither VA nor the Court has defined the terms used in this code. The Court previously discussed the meaning of "productive" and noted that "inadaptability" is not defined for the 50 percent criteria. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440 (2004). In Johnson, the Court declined to adopt definitions but pointed to non-medical dictionary definitions from Webster's Third New International Dictionary of The English Language Unabridged (1966). The Court noted that "characteristic" was defined as "a trait, quality, or property or a group of them distinguishing an individual, group, or type"; and "prostrating" was defined as "lacking in vitality or will: powerless to rise: laid low." Id. at 252. The term "completely" is defined as "to complete degree: entirely" and, therefore, "completely prostrating" under DC 8100 must render the Veteran "entirely powerless." Id. at 253. Finally, "prolong" is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Id.

Similar to these non-medical definitions cited by the Court, the Board observes that a medical dictionary defines prostration as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1554 (31st Ed. 2007). 

The criteria for headaches under DC 8100 contemplate all manifestations of that condition, including non-headache symptoms such as dizziness, mood swings, sleep impairment, and nausea. Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 73 (2020). 

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for his headaches in February 2021. He described both sharp and dull pains associated with his headaches, usually at a pain level of 6 of 10, that occur six days a week.  In addition to the headache pain, he also experienced nausea and sensitivity to light and sound.

The Veteran submitted a private opinion addressing the severity of his headaches in December 2021. Dr. W. B., submitted a statement wherein he indicated he reviewed the Veteran's claims file, including his medical records. Dr. W. B. noted that the Veteran "has a documented history of headaches that are listed as a level of six to 10 out of 10 and have increased from three to four times a week to a rate of six days a week. He treats his headaches with over-the-counter Ibuprofen and describes his symptoms as constant pulsating or throbbing, bilaterally, and associated with nausea, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. They profoundly affect his ability to focus and concentrate. This affects his ability to perform in a job-related function." 

Dr. W. B. also submitted a headaches disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ). During the examination, the Veteran described his headaches as "originally sharp, on both sides, and rated as an eight out of 10." The Veteran indicated his headache frequency has progressed to daily, affecting his concentration. The Veteran also reported that his headaches are made worse by his anxiety. The private examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking medication, including over-the-counter Ibuprofen as needed. The private examiner noted that the Veteran experiences headache pain, noted as constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, and pain on both sides of the head. The private examiner noted that the Veteran experiences non-headache symptoms associated with headaches, including nausea, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. The private examiner indicated that the head pain typically lasted less than one day. The private examiner stated that the Veteran does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain, nor does the Veteran have very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine headache pain. However, the private examiner found that the Veteran did have prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain, more frequently than once per month. The private examiner also indicated the Veteran had very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine headache pain. The private examiner noted that the Veteran's headache condition impacts his ability to work, stating he has headaches nearly every day that affect his ability to concentrate and focus. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination for headaches in April 2022. During the examination, the Veteran reported that his headaches occur three to four days a week, and last from four hours to an entire day, stating "some of those days puts [me] out of commission." The Veteran denied previous neurology consults or any medical treatment for his headaches. The Veteran stated that he takes over-the-counter medication with minimal relief. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking medication, specifically, over-the-counter Motrin. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran experiences headache pain, described as a constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, and pain on both sides of the head. The VA examiner noted non-headache symptoms associated with the Veteran's headaches include nausea, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran's head pain typically lasts one to two days and is located on the front of his head. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain, indicating these attacks occur once in two months. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The VA examiner also indicated that the Veteran's headaches impact his ability to work, stating that his headaches cause mood changes, and he has difficulty concentrating during his headache episodes. 

The Veteran underwent an additional VA headaches examination in March 2023. During the examination, the Veteran reported that his current symptoms included near constant headaches, mainly frontal, that radiates to the back with pain on both sides of the head. The Veteran indicated that his pain was rated at around an eight or nine out of 10 in severity, occurring three to four days a week, and lasting for four hours or more. The provider noted the headaches were "mostly putting the servicemember out of commission." The Veteran also endorsed sensitivity to light and sound with nausea. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking over-the-counter medication, specifically 800 mg of Ibuprofen. Regarding symptoms, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran experiences headache pain, including pulsating or throbbing head pain, as well as pulsating pain that originates in the front of the headache and radiates to the back. The VA examiner also indicated that the Veteran experiences non-headache symptoms, including nausea, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. Regarding prostrating attacks of headache pain, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks once every month but noted that the Veteran does not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's headache condition impacts his ability to work, stating that he has difficulty concentrating at work during headache episodes. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's headaches warrant an increased 50 percent disability rating throughout the period on appeal (that is, since the December 15, 2020, grant of service connection). Here, the evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's headaches manifest with daily, near-constant head pain that can be throbbing in nature, as well as with associated symptoms of nausea, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran has reported that his headaches occur anywhere from four to six days per week and can last from four hours to an entire day, stating "some of those days puts [me] out of commission." All examiners of record, including the private provider, indicated that the Veteran experiences prostrating attacks of headache pain. The Board finds that the evidence of record supports that the Veteran's headaches are indeed prostrating as consistent with the definition of prostration noted above. While the April 2022 and March 2023 VA examiners have found that the Veteran does not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, the Board further finds that the other evidence of record supports that the Veteran has frequent, completely prostrating and prolonged attacks that have caused severe economic inadaptability. Specifically, the Veteran reports that his headaches sometimes occur at a rate of six days per week and can last up to a day each time; additionally, the Veteran reported that his more severe headaches put him out of commission (confirmed by the April 2022 and March 2023 VA examiners). All examiners of record also indicated that the Veteran's headaches impact his ability to perform job-related functions and tasks, because they greatly impact his ability to focus and concentrate. Such symptoms are more nearly approximated by a 50 percent rating under DC 8100. 

In so finding, the Board finds that the Veteran's testimony and lay statements of record are credible as to the severity of his headaches, as well as their effects on his ability to perform his work activities. The Board further finds that the evidence of record supports that the Veteran has frequent, completely prostrating and prolonged attacks that have caused severe economic inadaptability. As such, a 50 percent disability rating, but no higher, is warranted for the period on appeal and the Veteran's claim is granted. 

(CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE)

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

The Board notes that the Veteran has raised the issue of entitlement to a TDIU as part and parcel of his request for an increased rating for his headache disability. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009). Specifically, the medical evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's headaches cause him difficulty with his ability to focus and concentrate. Further, the December 2021 private provider, Dr. W. B., found that his headaches "affect his ability to perform in job-related functions." 

A request for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU), whether expressly raised by a veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate claim for benefits, but rather involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability as part of a claim for increased compensation. Id. In other words, if the claimant or the evidence of record reasonably raises the question of whether a veteran is unemployable due to a disability for which an increased rating is sought, then part and parcel with the increased rating claim is the issue of whether a TDIU is warranted as a result of that disability. Id.

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU was reasonably raised by the record prior to the August 2023 rating decision on appeal, as evidenced by the December 2021 private DBQ and accompany report submitted by the Veteran. The AOJ did not address the issue of entitlement to a TDIU prior to the August 2023 higher-level review rating decision on appeal.

In sum, prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran raised the issue of TDIU as part and parcel of his increased rating claims for his headache disability; however, the AOJ has failed to adjudicate this issue, which is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, a remand is necessary, to allow the AOJ to adjudicate the issue of a TDIU.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Adjudicate the raised issue of entitlement to a TDIU. 

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. M. Lowman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.