Citation Nr: A25033950
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-459336
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastrointestinal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial, compensable disability rating for hemorrhoids is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial, compensable disability rating for headaches, unspecified is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 50 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with depressive disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty from November 1985 to December 1997.

For the claims for a higher rating for hypertension (following a grant of service connection) and the service connection claim for GERD, the rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

For the higher rating claims for hemorrhoids, headaches, and PTSD the rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 (which granted service connection for hemorrhoids and headaches); therefore, AMA applies.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement/NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

The Board notes that the February 2024 decision also denied a higher rating for PTSD, after the December 2023 rating decision had granted service connection with a 50 percent disability rating.  In the NOD the Veteran appealed both the December 2023 and February 2024 decisions for a higher rating.  As the February 2024 rating decision supersedes the December 2023 rating decision, the Board finds that the February 2024 rating decision is the one on appeal, as noted above.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran listed rating decisions dated in September 2022 and April 2023 on the NOD received in August 2024.  As this NOD was not filed within one year of the notification of these rating decisions, these issues are not on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.  The Veteran was notified that the Board did not accept the NOD as to the issues of chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, rhinitis with allergies, stomach condition, anxiety condition, depression, and sinusitis in a letter sent in August 2024.  

1.  Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

2.  Entitlement to an initial, compensable disability rating for hemorrhoids is remanded.

3.  Entitlement to an initial, compensable disability rating for headaches, unspecified is remanded.

4.  Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for hypertension is remanded.

5.  Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 50 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD with depressive disorder, is remanded.

Prior to the December 2023 and February 2024 rating decisions, in a June 2018 VA medical record, the Veteran indicated that he received treatment from a non-VA primary care provider.  Also, the VA medical records, such as one from August 2019, indicate that private medical records were scanned into the Veteran's medical file, but were not associated with claims file.  Relevant outstanding private treatment records are thus identified in the claims file.  A remand is required to allow VA to obtain authorization and request these records.

Regarding the GERD claim, the Board further notes that although a VA examination was obtained in February 2023, with medical opinions obtained in September 2023 and November 2023, none of the VA medical opinions appear to consider the Veteran's December 1997 separation report of medical history noting frequent indigestion.  A new VA medical opinion is thus necessary to fully consider the Veteran's claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1.   Associate unassociated scanned documents from the Veteran's VA medical records with the Veteran's claims file.  If such records cannot be obtained, contact the Veteran to request such records.

2.  Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his primary care provider and any other pertinent private medical provider(s).  Make two requests for the authorized records from identified provider(s), unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3.  Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the Veteran's GERD claim.  

The examiner must review the claims file.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is GERD at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including in-service complaints of indigestion?  

Please provide a medical statement stating whether the Veteran's disability pattern is: (1) An undiagnosed illness (2) A diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology (3) A diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or (4) A disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis?

Does the Veteran have a diagnosis of (a) GERD that is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by exposure based on Southwest Asia service after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran?

A fully articulated medical rationale for any opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report.  The VA medical opinion provider should discuss the particulars of this Veteran's medical history (including service treatment records such as the December 1997 separation report of medical history report of frequent indigestion) and relevant medical science as applicable to this case.

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.

 

 

 

S. Merrick

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Lindio

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.