Citation Nr: A25033248
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240611-450868
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for deep vein thrombosis, to include as due to toxic exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for pulmonary embolism, to include as due to toxic exposure, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1985 to June 1991.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The January 2024 rating decision was issued in response to a request for Higher Level Review (HLR) of the August 2023 rating decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the appellant elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

1. Entitlement to service connection for deep vein thrombosis, to include as due to toxic exposure.

The Veteran seeks service connection for deep vein thrombosis.  See September 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application.  The Veteran described driving through sandstorms, direct windfalls of residues from oil, and experiencing cold and heat.  He reported that he wore ponchos and a gas mask to reduce the oil and soot exposure.  See September 2023 Lay Statement.

Initially, the Board notes the AOJ, in the January 2024 rating decision, made the following favorable findings: 1) the Veteran has a diagnosis of left leg deep vein thrombosis (based on a May 2023 diagnosis), 2) participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) has been conceded based on your service in Saudi Arabia from December 30, 1990, to February 28, 1991, 3) the Veteran was exposed to toxic materials during military service in Saudi Arabia from December 30,1990 to February 28, 1991, and 4) Veteran performed service in Saudi Arabia from December 30, 1990 to February 28, 1991.

The Veteran was afforded a VA TERA examination and opinion in June 2023.  Based on the results of the examination, the examiner opined that the condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.    

Under the AMA, the Board has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).  The failure of VA to provide an adequate medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  Thus, a remand is required for an addendum opinion.  The examiner reasoned that there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition(s) at issue and the TERA.

The Board finds the examiner's opinion inadequate because it is conclusory. It failed to properly address and discuss the evidence of record.  When VA undertakes to provide a Veteran with an examination, that examination must be adequate for VA purposes.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Thus, a remand is warranted for a new secondary service connection opinion that properly addresses and discusses the relevant evidence of record.

2. Entitlement to service connection for pulmonary embolism, to include as due to toxic exposure.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a pulmonary embolism.  See September 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application.  The Veteran described driving through sandstorms, direct windfalls of residues from oil, and experiencing cold, and heat.  He reported that he wore ponchos and gas mask to reduce the oil and soot from getting on them.  See September 2023 Lay Statement.

Initially, the Board notes the AOJ, in the January 2024 rating decision, made the following favorable findings: 1) the Veteran has a diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (based on a June 2023 diagnosis), 2) participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) has been conceded based on your service in Saudi Arabia from December 30, 1990, to February 28, 1991, 3) the Veteran was exposed to toxic materials during military service in Saudi Arabia from December 30,1990 to February 28, 1991, and 4) Veteran performed service in Saudi Arabia from December 30, 1990 to February 28, 1991.

The Veteran was afforded a VA TERA examination and opinion in June 2023.  Based on the results of the examination, the examiner opined that the condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.    

Under the AMA, the Board has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).  The failure of VA to provide an adequate medical opinion amounts to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  Thus, a remand is required for an addendum opinion.  The examiner reasoned that there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition(s) at issue and the TERA.

The Board finds the examiner's opinion inadequate, because it is conclusory. It failed to properly address and discuss the evidence of record.  When VA undertakes to provide a Veteran with an examination, that examination must be adequate for VA purposes.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Thus, a remand is warranted for a new secondary service connection opinion that properly addresses and discusses the relevant evidence of record]

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's deep vein thrombosis.  The claims file must be made available to an examiner other than the June 2023 examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed. If an examination is deemed necessary, it shall be provided.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's deep vein thrombosis had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise due to his service.

The Board highlights that a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not take into account and discuss the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination).

The examiner should consider all evidence, including: 

"	The positive TERA memoranda from March 2023.

"	The Veteran's diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis.

"	The January 2024 rating decision conceding participation in TERA. 

"	Lay statements, including the February 2023 buddy/lay statements from his spouse and himself.

"	Medical records, including September 2022 record noting Veteran's history of deep vein thrombosis, left leg.

"	The June 2023 VA medical examination and opinion,

"	The July 2024 Appellate Brief.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's pulmonary embolism.  The claims file must be made available to an examiner other than the June 2023 examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed.  If an examination is deemed necessary, it shall be provided.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's pulmonary had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise due to his service.

The Board highlights that a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not take into account and discuss the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination.

The examiner should consider all evidence, including: 

"	The positive TERA memoranda from March 2023.

"	The Veteran's diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.

"	The January 2024 rating decision conceding participation in TERA. 

"	Lay statements, including the February 2023 buddy/lay statements from his spouse and himself.

"	The June 2023 VA medical examination and opinion,

"	The July 2024 Appellate Brief.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

David Gratz

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jordan, Jacquelynn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.