Citation Nr: A25033442
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241216-497729
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a fatigue condition is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychological disorder (including depression and sleep issues) is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Army National Guard to include periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA) from June 17, 1952 to June 16, 1955; from June 17, 1955 to June 16, 1958, and from June 17, 1958 to June 16, 1961.  The Veteran's Army National Guard records reflect federal service from July 5, 1952 to July 19, 1952 and from July 4, 1953 to July 18, 1953 and Armory drill pay from June 1, 1952 to August 31, 1952.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In December 2024, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), selecting Direct Review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  Thus, the Board will review evidence as of the date of the October 2024 rating decision.   

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, is remanded.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.  

4. Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.  

5. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.  

6. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.  

7. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.  

8. Entitlement to service connection for a fatigue condition is remanded.  

9. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychological disorder (including depression and sleep issues) is remanded.  

Here, although the October 2024 rating decision notes that new and relevant evidence has not been received with respect to these claims, in the rating decision, the issues were adjudicated on the merits.  If the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) addressed the merits of the claim, in the decision on appeal, thereby implicitly finding that new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the previously denied claim, the Board will not disturb such favorable finding and therefore may address the merits of the claims.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine condition, bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, bilateral knee condition, prostate cancer, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, asthma, fatigue condition and an acquired psychological disorder.  The Veteran contends that his conditions are related to service, including as related to exposure to toxic chemicals such as mustard gas, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), burn pits and contaminated water.  

Here, as a preliminary matter, the record reflects that VA has been unable to obtain the complete personnel records and the complete service treatment records (STRs) that might confirm or rule out the Veteran's reports of ACDUTRA, INACDUTRA and being exposed to mustard gas and DDT.  

Accordingly, VA has a heightened obligation to consider the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365 (1991).  

Generally, a "Veteran" for VA benefits purposes is "a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  38 U.S.C. § 101(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(d).  "Active military, naval, or air service" is defined by VA law and regulations.  Active military, naval, or air service includes active duty and any period of ACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled from a disease or injury incurred in the line of duty.  See 38 U.S.C. § 101(21), (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a).  Active military, naval, or air service also includes any period of inactive duty training INACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled from an injury incurred in the line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident which occurred during such training.  Accordingly, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in, or aggravated, while performing ACDUTRA, from injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA, or from myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest while performing INACDUTRA.  Id.  

The Board notes that when a claim for service connection is based only on a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, there must be evidence that the appellant became disabled as a result of a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during that period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA for service connection to be granted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101(2), (22), (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a). In the absence of such evidence, the period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA would not qualify as "active military, naval, or air service," and the appellant would not qualify as a "veteran" for that period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA service alone.  38 U.S.C. § 101(2), (24).  Generally, no presumptions (including the presumptions of soundness, aggravation, or for presumptive diseases) apply to periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA unless "veteran" status is attained during those periods.  The evidence does not support any incident or illness during a specific period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA resulting in disability, and therefore, presumptions are not for application to any period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA in this matter.  

National Guard duty is distinguishable from other Reserve service in that a member of the National Guard may be called to duty by the governor of his or her state.  Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 57 (2007).  A person serving in the state National Guard can be a "veteran" in three ways.  First, when called into active service by the President of the United States.  Id. (citing 38 U.S.C. § 101(29) and 10 U.S.C. § 10106).  Second, service in a state National Guard can qualify as ACDUTRA if it includes full-time duty under the provisions of 32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505 or under the prior corresponding provisions of law. 38 U.S.C. § 101(22); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(c)(3).  Basically, this refers to the two weeks of annual training, which each Reservist or National Guardsman must perform each year. It can also refer to the Reservist's or Guardsman's initial period of training.  Third, service in a state National Guard can qualify as INACDUTRA if it includes duty (other than full-time duty) under the provisions of 32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505 or under the prior corresponding provisions of law.  38 U.S.C. § 101(23); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(d)(4).  

In regard to the Veteran's service, the Veteran has achieved "Veteran" status by virtue of a May 2023 Board decision, effectuated by way of a subsequent May 2023 rating decision.  The Board acts in consistency with its prior favorable finding.  See Medrano v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 165, 170 (2007); See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  However, while in the May 2023 Board decision the Board found that the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus are related to periods of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA as part of his Reserve service, the periods of ACDUTRA and INADUCTRA were not specified, rather conceded.  

Thus, while the Veteran qualifies as a "Veteran," with active military, naval, or air service for disability benefits for a disability resulting from injury or disease incurred during service, it must be shown that the claimed disability first manifested during periods of ACDUTRA for a disease or injury or during periods of INACDUTRA for an injury or is related to a service connected disability.  

Further, in regard to the Veteran's argument that he was exposed to toxic chemicals in service, an April 2016 statement from the Veteran reflects that he said that his unit was sprayed with DDT for lice and crabs outside the barracks naked and the barracks and bedding were sprayed as well.  A March 2023 toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) memorandum concedes the Veteran's presumed exposure to toxic chemicals, but does not specify which exact chemicals, due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) of heavy weapons infantryman, transportation and gunner.  A June 2023 development memorandum notes that the exact chemical used during ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA pertaining to the Veteran's MOS are unable to be determined.  

In a September 2023 Board decision, the Board found that after resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the unknown chemicals referenced in the June 2023 TERA Memorandum were mustard gas and DDT.  Again, the Board acts in consistency with the Boards prior favorable finding.  See Medrano, 21 Vet. App. at 170; 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Thus, the Board finds that while the Veteran's periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA have not been specified, the Veteran's TERA exposure, to include DDT and mustard gas has been conceded.  The Veteran also has submitted literature regarding contaminated water and burn pits exposure.  

Further, a September 2024 private treatment letter notes the Veteran's history of prostate cancer, persistent fatigue, hypertension and erectile dysfunction.  

Accordingly, a review of the evidence received since the July 2023 Board decision reveals new theories of entitlement concerning the Veteran's claims.  Here, the Veteran contends that his conditions are related to exposure to toxic chemicals in service, burn pits and contaminated water.  

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted literature regarding chemical, toxic exposure and water quality.  In a September 2023 letter, the Veteran explained that during training exercises, he had to go into the building and remove his gas mask while mustard gas was released into the building.  The Veteran also stated that he was exposed to burn pits, as there were no garbage trucks on base and he was responsible for disposing of medical and kitchen waste and old motor oil.  The Veteran explained that the waste was picked up, taken to the burn pit, doused with kerosene and he watched until it was completely burned.  

The Veteran also submitted a US Armed Forces Desegregation article.  

Turning to the medical evidence of record, an October 2023 VA medical center treatment record (VATR) notes the Veteran's report of some knee pain and right knee pain.  A January 2024 VATR notes abscesses in the back.  A February 2024 VATR notes problems of hypertension, asthma, low testosterone and prostate cancer.  A September 2024 VATR notes mood and affect disturbances upon psychological evaluation.  

The record reflects that the Veteran has not been afforded VA examinations nor have opinions been gathered for the Veteran's claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, bilateral knee condition, prostate cancer, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, asthma, fatigue condition nor acquired psychological disorder.  

However, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, remand is required only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  As part of its duty to assist, the assistance provided shall include providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d).  

The Board finds that such is the case with the current appeal.  Specifically, while the Veteran has not been afforded VA examinations for his claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, bilateral knee condition, prostate cancer, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, asthma, fatigue condition nor acquired psychological disorder prior to the adjudication of his claims, the evidence above is sufficient to establish competent evidence of a disabilities or recurrent symptoms, evidence of an in-service event, and evidence of an indication of a nexus.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).  The pre-decisional duty to assist error requires remand for correction.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for the appropriate VA examinations, by properly qualified examiners, and obtain opinions to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, bilateral knee condition, prostate cancer, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, asthma and fatigue condition.  The examiners should review the record prior to examination.  

The examiner(s) is asked to:  

A.	Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, bilateral knee condition, prostate cancer, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, asthma and fatigue condition are related to the Veteran's service, including his conceded exposure to mustard gas, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and claimed burn pits exposure and contaminated water?  In so doing, the examiners are asked to directly address the Veteran's service, including the service treatment records (STRs) and the lay evidence of record.  

B.	The selected examiner must provide an opinion addressing whether the claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral neuropathy, upper and lower extremities, bilateral knee condition, prostate cancer, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, asthma and fatigue condition are at least as likely as not etiologically related to the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) in service.  

The examiners must consider and reconcile any conflicting medical evidence of record.  

A complete rationale for all opinions provided is required.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for the appropriate VA examinations and opinions to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed acquired psychological disorder (including depression and sleep issues).  The examiner should review the record prior to examination.  

The examiner is asked to:  	

A.	Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's claimed acquired psychological disorder (including depression and sleep issues) is related to the Veteran's service, including his contentions of segregation?  In so doing, the examiner is asked to directly address the Veteran's service, including the service treatment records (STRs) and the lay evidence of record.  

A complete rationale for all opinions provided is required.  

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.