Citation Nr: A25033225
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240721-456039
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 70 percent initial disability rating, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated the criteria for a 70 percent rating, causing occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not total social and occupational impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial disability rating of 70 percent for PTSD, but no higher, have been met. 38?U.S.C. §?1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service in the U.S. Army from February 2006 to June 2012.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) decision on their claim to seek review.? The AMA applies to all?initial?decisions issued after February 19, 2019.?? 

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).? The Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board in a July 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  The Veteran requested the direct review docket, which limits the Board's review to evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal.

The Board interprets the Veteran's selection of the Direct Review option with an indication of a decision being rendered within 365 days as well as statements of record as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claim finding that the Veteran does not wish to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?589 (1991).  The medical, as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required.  38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38?C.F.R. §?4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38?C.F.R. §?4.3.  Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505. 

Pyramiding, which is the evaluation of the same disability or the same manifestation of a disability under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when evaluating a Veteran's service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a Veteran prevailing in either event, or the evidence is persuasively against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied. 38?U.S.C. §?5107 (b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.102. 

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for PTSD

In April 2021, the AOJ granted service connection for the Veteran's PTSD and awarded a 50 percent rating effective February 14, 2023.  Accordingly, the appeal period begins on February 14, 2023.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under Diagnostic Code 9411.  Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is assigned when a veteran's psychiatric disability causes occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-term and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.?38?C.F.R. §?4.130.? 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse?control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.?38?C.F.R. §?4.130.? 

The maximum schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.?38?C.F.R. §?4.130.? 

In addition, when evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the lengths of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  38?C.F.R. §?4.126 (a).? The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id.?However, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation on the basis of social impairment.  38?C.F.R. §?4.126 (b).? 

Symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects,?which?would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan?v.?Principi, 16?Vet. App.?436, 442 (2002).? Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under?38?C.F.R. §?4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code.? Id.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment. ?Id.

Factual Background

In June 2023, the Veteran underwent a mental health consultation at VA.  He reported occasional depressive episodes lasting for several hours.  During these episodes, he becomes tearful, focuses on negative thoughts, and has occasional fleeting thoughts of suicide.  

With respect to his functioning, the Veteran reported that he was working fulltime at a power plant.  He indicated that he had been married for five years and has three children.  He reported that he hangs out with his family and plays video games.  

With respect to the Veteran's mental status, he was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation.  He exhibited good eye contact and normal psychomotor activity.  He exhibited normal speech, and logical, goal directed thoughts.  His mood was dysthymic, and his insight/judgment was fair to good.  He denied hallucinations and he exhibited intact memory and cognition.  

In January 2024, a treating therapist submitted a disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) in support of the Veteran's claim.  Symptoms noted in the DBQ include the following: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur monthly or less often, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, difficulty in understanding complex commands, gross impairment in thought processes or communication, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

With respect to the Veteran's functioning, the therapist noted that he is clear of any social, marital, or family issues.  She elaborated that the Veteran is married.  However, she also noted that the Veteran socially isolates from others.  She further noted that the Veteran is easily startled by individuals approaching unexpectedly and he is hypervigilant.  Additionally, she noted that the Veteran's sleep is frequently disrupted due to disturbing dreams.  

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a letter from a treating therapist detailing his mental health treatment.  The therapist noted that the Veteran has been in treatment since May 2022 and has made very little progress.  The therapist further expressed his opinion that the Veteran's symptoms and limitations most closely aligned with a 50 percent disability rating.  Symptoms documented by the therapist included family relation issues and unprovoked irritability.  The therapist concluded that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a buddy statement from a coworker, who detailed his observations of the Veteran at work.  The coworker indicated that he has known the Veteran for six years and he has witnessed the Veteran struggle with mental health daily.  He elaborated that the Veteran is hypervigilant and always on guard, fearing that the worst is going to happen.  He further reported that the Veteran is constantly scanning the room, and he must sit facing a doorway.  He reported that the Veteran's symptoms affect his work, as he is very anxious and skittish around loud noises, which are present in and outside of the workplace.  Finally, he reported that the Veteran has suicidal thoughts sometimes, and they have a buddy plan in place when he feels this way. 

In addition to this evidence, the Veteran was provided a VA examination in April 2024.  Symptoms noted in this examination included the following:  depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner concluded that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability.  

With respect to his social functioning, the Veteran reported that irritability, anger episodes, and paranoid.  However, he indicated that he dets along with others.  With respect to his occupational functioning, the Veteran reported currently working at a power plant.  He indicated that his employer allows him to go home early if he is irritated, and will allow him to work inside when being outside is triggering.  

With respect to his mental status, the Veteran presented as alert and oriented.  He exhibited intermittent eye contact and appeared mildly anxious, shifting in his seat and looking around the room.  His thoughts were logical, and goal directed, and his behavior was cooperative.  He did not endorse hallucinations, psychosis, suicidal ideation, or homicidal ideation.   

Analysis

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the entire appeal period.  

In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the private therapists and VA examiner concluded that the Veteran was less limited.  To recap, they concluded that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which corresponds to a 50 percent disability rating.  

However, the symptoms identified by the January 2024 therapist, included gross impairment in thought processes or communication and inability to establish and maintain effective relationship.  These symptoms are contemplated in the higher ratings and are indicative of additional impairment.  Furthermore, another therapist concluded in February 2024 that the Veteran has made very little progress in treatment since 2022.  Thus, the Board finds that the private therapist and VA examiner conclusions about the level of the Veteran's occupational and social impairment are not probative. 

Additionally, the Board notes that suicidal ideation was documented by a clinician in June 2023 and a coworker in March 2024.  The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone is sufficient to cause occupational and social impairment in most areas. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 18 (2017).  Given this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran experiences occupational and social impairment in most areas, and a 70 percent disability rating is warranted.  

However, the Board also finds that a rating greater than 70 percent is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the private therapist concluded in January 2024 that the Veteran has gross impairment in thought process or communication.  However, there is no indication that the Veteran presented with impaired thought process or communication in any other treating or examining visit. 

There is also no evidence on record that the Veteran experiences persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the Veteran was consistently alert and oriented in treating visits, with adequate behavior, and no hallucinations or psychosis.  

Furthermore, the Veteran's symptoms do not equate in severity, frequency, and duration to cause total social and occupational impairment.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the Veteran reported maintaining a job at a power plant during the appeal period, which suggest that he does not have total occupational and social impairment. Thus, the Board finds that a rating higher than 70 percent is not warranted.

In sum, the Board concludes that a 70 percent rating is warranted for the entire appeal period.  However, the evidence is persuasively against a finding that a rating greater than 70 percent is warranted at any time during the appeal period.  

Furthermore, the Board finds that entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) has not been raised by the record or the Veteran. In fact, the Veteran reported on numerous occasions that he was currently working fulltime at a power plant.  Thus, the Board finds no need to adjudicate a claim for TDIU.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Beech, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.