Citation Nr: A25033504
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434061
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as adjustment disorder with anxiety, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a disorder of the rectum, claimed as rectal bleeding, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for flat foot, claimed as pes planus, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle disorder, claimed as a lateral collateral ligament sprain, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder, claimed as patellofemoral pain syndrome, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder did not have its onset in service, is not etiologically related to his service and psychosis did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service discharge.

2. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis of the rectum, to include rectal bleeding, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

3. The Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome did not have its onset in service and is not etiologically related to his service.

4. The Veteran's bilateral pes planus did not have its onset in service and is not etiologically related to his service.

5. The Veteran's left ankle disorder, claimed as a lateral collateral ligament sprain, did not have its onset in service, is not etiologically related to service and arthritis did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service discharge.

6. The Veteran's right knee disorder, claimed as patellofemoral pain syndrome, did not have its onset in service, is not etiologically related to service and arthritis did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service discharge.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as adjustment disorder with anxiety, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for a disorder of the rectum, claimed as rectal bleeding have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for flat foot, claimed as pes planus, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for left ankle disorder, claimed as a lateral collateral ligament sprain, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

6. The criteria for service connection for a right knee disorder. claimed as patellofemoral pain syndrome, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2012 to March 2016, from April 3, 2020, to June 23, 2020, from January 7, 2021, to February 15, 2021, and from January 1, 2022, to April 1, 2022. A July 2023 VA Memorandum determined that the Veteran did not participate in a toxic exposure risk activity.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2024 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decisions on appeal constitutes initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted two separate VA Forms 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of psychiatric, back, rectal, irritable bowel, left ankle, flat feet, and right knee disorders most recently addressed in the July 2023 and August 2023 rating decisions. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decisions on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of the decisions.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decisions on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the lumbar spine disorder claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the dates that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the April 2024 VA Form 10182. 

Finally, the Board is cognizant of the Court's holding in Edwards v. McDonough that new evidence submitted with a VA Form 10182 on which the Direct Review option is selected creates uncertainty as to which Board review option the claimant intended, triggering the Board's duty to seek clarification under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f). Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023). The Court reasoned, in-part, that consideration must be given to the "full context within which [veterans'] submissions are made" including liberally construing the filings of pro se claimants. Id. (citing Rivera v. Shinseki, 654 F.3d 1377, 1380, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2011)). Here, new evidence was not submitted with the April 2024 VA Form 10182. Rather, the evidence submitted was already of record before the AOJ's decision. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication

Service Connection Criteria

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service"- the so-called "nexus" requirement." Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established for a current disability on the basis of a presumption that certain chronic diseases, including arthritis, manifesting themselves to a certain degree within a certain time after service must have had their onset in service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309(a). Generally, the disease must have manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(3).

For the showing of chronic disease in service there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word "chronic." 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). When the disease identity is established, there is no requirement of evidentiary showing of continuity. Id. Continuity of symptomatology is required only where the condition noted during service (or in the presumptive period) is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned. Id. When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim. Id. Continuity of symptomatology is only applicable to those diseases recognized as chronic for VA purposes. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (2013); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309.

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of a current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service. Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); see also Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992). Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability").

In McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007), the Court held that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time he/she files his/her claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim. However, in Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013), the Court held that when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to a claimant filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature. Id., see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3rd 1391 (2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as adjustment disorder with anxiety, is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he has an acquired psychiatric disorder due to service. See December 2022 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ). A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with an adjustment disorder with anxiety; the Board is bound by this favorable finding. In an October 2023 statement, B.A. indicated that he noticed the Veteran experience anxiety while serving together on active duty.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatments, or diagnosis associated with an acquired psychiatric disorder. During the November 2015 separation examination, the clinical evaluation of the Veteran's psychiatric system was found to be normal. In a corresponding Report of Medical History, the Veteran reported receiving counseling; however, the examiner noted that it was normal routine counseling. The Veteran denied that he had or ever had nervous trouble of any sort or depression or anxiety. He also denied that ever had any illness or injury other than those already noted.

Post service treatment records are negative for chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety until the January 2023 VA examination. 

The Board has first considered whether service connection for psychosis is warranted on a presumptive basis, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology. In this regard, the clinical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran manifested such disease to a compensable degree within the year following his discharge from active duty service. The Veteran's post-service treatment record did not reflect any complaints for his acquired psychiatric disorder until January 2023. In addition, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with psychosis. Therefore, the Board finds that presumptive service connection for arthritis, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Turning to the question of whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's service and his diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder, the Board notes that the record contains two etiology opinions which must be considered and weighed. See Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993). When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other. See Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998). The Board will consider each of these opinions below.

A January 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran endorsed symptoms associated with a chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety in response to multiple life stressors. The Veteran denied current depressive symptoms. There are no other diagnoses warranted at this time. The examiner opined that chronic adjustment disorder is at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by an in-service stressor; however, no rationale was provided. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

In an August 2023 VA addendum opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's chronic adjustment disorder was less likely than not due to an in-service injury, illness, or event. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran has served in the Army National Guard since 2012, reported that he first noticed experiencing symptoms associated with his mood in 2012 when he was stationed in Alaska and that his mood was adversely affected by the climate, to include temperature and amount of day light. The examiner stated there is no objective evidence to support this claim. The examiner noted that the Veteran continued to experience mood lability in response to life stressors and that he currently endorses adjustment related challenges, to include anxiety in response to recent academic and performance related stressors. The Board finds the August 2023 VA etiology opinion to be highly probative. In this regard, the August 2023 VA examiner completed a thorough review of the claims file, interviewed, and examined the Veteran during the January 2023 examination when rendering the opinion. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's statements and contentions regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, the circumstances of his active service, and the current diagnosis and symptoms as it related to this particular Veteran. The VA examiner specified the condition was unrelated to active service. Indeed, the examiner noted that there is no objective evidence to support this claim. The examiner noted that the Veteran continued to experience mood lability in response to life stressors and that he currently endorses adjustment related challenges, to include anxiety in response to recent academic and performance related stressors. The Board finds this opinion to be adequate as she provides a thorough rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The opinion is therefore afforded probative weight.

In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a private certified nurse practitioner opined that current adjustment disorder with anxious mood is at least as likely as not caused by or made worse by the Veteran's time spent in the military secondary to the stress. No rationale was provided. The Board finds the October 2023 private medical opinion inadequate to decide the appeal. In this regard, the provider did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusion reached. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Rather, the private examiner provided a mere conclusory statement that the chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety was due to stress experienced in service without any further elaboration. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

The Board notes that the Veteran and his friend B.A. are competent to report symptoms or matters within their personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. However, the matter of a medical etiology for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-38 (1994). In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran or B.A. has an expertise in the diagnosis and/or etiology for an acquired psychiatric disorders. Therefore, as they do not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose nor provide an etiology opinion as to the acquired psychiatric disorder, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377; see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include chronic adjustment with anxiety, is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a disorder of the rectum, claimed as rectal bleeding

The Veteran contends that he suffers from rectal bleeding was caused by an in-service event, injury or exposure. Specifically, he contends that his rectal bleeding was due to a stressful environment. See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Service and post-service treatment records are negative for complaints, treatments or diagnosis related to rectal bleeding. A June 2023 VA examiner opined that there are no findings, signs, and or symptoms of rectal bleeding. In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a certified registered nurse practitioner indicated that the Veteran reported a history of rectal bleeding and that such is due to diarrhea. A February 2024 VA examiner opined that there are no findings, signs, and or symptoms to support a diagnosis attributable to rectal bleeding.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have, nor has he had at any time proximate to or during the course of this appeal, a disorder of the rectum manifested as rectal bleeding. Although an October 2023 examiner indicates the Veteran may have rectal bleeding, the Board finds the opinion speculative as the examiner indicated that the Veteran reported a history of rectal bleeding. Subsequently, in February 2024, the VA examiner who concluded that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of rectal bleeding reasoned that no objective evidence was found on examination to diagnose rectal bleeding. See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, supra; McClain v. Nicholson, supra. As the record does not reflect a current diagnosis related to rectal bleeding, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted. See Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra. No further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary.

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of rectal bleeding. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. The Veteran's treatment records do not show that the Veteran has symptoms which impacts his earning capacity as due to a rectal disorder. As such, the Veteran's complaints of rectal bleeding do not amount to a functional impairment of earning capacity, and Saunders is not applicable in this case. In addition, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran did not allege, that he suffered from impairment of earning capacity due to his claimed rectal bleeding that was of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

In reaching this determination, the Board has also considered the lay assertions of record, including the contentions of the Veteran in support of a medical nexus. The Veteran generally contends that he has rectal bleeding that is due to his service. As a lay person, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms. See Washington v. Nicholson, supra; see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). Lay evidence may be competent on a variety of matters concerning the nature and cause of disability. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 n.4. However, although the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of muscle pain and fatigue, he is not competent to opine on the etiology of the condition. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.

In summary, the controlling question in this case is answered in the negative. In the absence of proof of a present disability (and, if so, of a nexus between that disability and service), there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Boyer v. West, supra; Brammer v. Derwinski, supra. Therefore, as the evidence of record shows that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of rectal bleeding, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary. See Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309, 314 (1993) ("A determination of service connection requires a finding of the existence of a current disability and a determination of a relationship between that disability and an injury or a disease incurred in service."); see also Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection).

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a disorder of the rectum, claimed as rectal bleeding, is denied. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

3. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he has irritable bowel syndrome due to service. See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the February 2024 VA examination showed a diagnosis for irritable bowel syndrome; the Board is bound by this favorable finding.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatments, or diagnosis associated with irritable bowel syndrome. During the November 2015 separation report of medical examination, the clinical evaluation of the Veteran's gastrointestinal system was normal. The Veteran stated that he was in excellent health.

Post service treatment records are negative for irritable bowel syndrome until the June 2023 VA examination.

With regards to direct service connection, a June 2023 VA examination provided a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome and reflected the Veteran complaints of having diarrhea most of the time and that he "feels I can't produce solid stool." In addition to loose stool, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported abdominal cramps, flatulence, and bloating, that his symptoms began in 2012, and that he has not sought formal help. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms are mostly self-limiting without the use of medication. The examiner did not provide an etiology opinion.

In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a private certified nurse practitioner opined that current irritable bowel syndrome is at least as likely as not caused by or made worse by the Veteran's time spent in the military secondary to the stress. No rationale was provided. The Board finds the October 2023 private medical opinion inadequate to decide the appeal. In this regard, the provider did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusion reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Rather, the private examiner provided a mere conclusory statement that the irritable bowel syndrome was due to stress experienced in service without any further elaboration. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

A February 2024 VA examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition irritable bowel syndrome is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome and military service. The examiner further reasoned that, without chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds the February 2024 VA etiology opinion to be highly probative. In this regard, the February 2024 VA examiner completed a thorough review of the claims file, interviewed, and examined the Veteran during the examination when rendering the opinion. The VA examiner specified the condition was unrelated to active service. Indeed, the examiner noted that there is no objective evidence to support this claim. The examiner noted without chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds this opinion to be adequate as she provides a thorough rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The opinion is therefore afforded probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. However, the matter of a medical etiology for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of irritable bowel syndrome, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has an expertise in the diagnosis and/or etiology for gastrointestinal disorders. Therefore, as he does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose nor provide an etiology opinion as to the irritable bowel syndrome, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

4. Entitlement to service connection for flat foot, claimed as pes planus, is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he has bilateral flat feet due to service. See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with bilateral flat foot (pes planus); the Board is bound by this favorable finding. In an October 2023 statement, B.A. indicated that he noticed the Veteran experience problems with flat feet while serving together on active duty.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatments, or diagnosis associated with flat feet. During the November 2015 separation report of medical examination, the clinical evaluation of the Veteran's feet was normal. The Veteran stated that he was in excellent health.

Post service treatment records are negative for bilateral flat feet until the June 2023 VA examination.

With regards to direct service connection a June 2023 VA examination provided a diagnosis of bilateral pes planus (flat feet). The examiner noted that the Veteran presented with moderately pronated arches in both feet and that the Veteran reported that he became aware of his flat foot in 2013 after he started experiencing pain, but he did not know there was treatment for it. The examiner noted that the Veteran still has not sought medical care but he uses oral medication as needed. The examiner did not provide an etiology opinion.

In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a private certified nurse practitioner opined those current conditions to include flat feet is at least as likely as not caused by or made worse by the Veteran's time spent in the military. The Board finds the October 2023 private medical opinion inadequate to decide the appeal. In this regard, the provider did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusion reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Rather, the private examiner provided a mere conclusory statement that the irritable bowel syndrome was due to stress experienced in service without any further elaboration. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

In a February 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition bilateral flat foot, is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of bilateral flat foot and military service. The examiner further opined that chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds the February 2024 VA etiology opinion to be highly probative. In this regard, the February 2024 VA examiner completed a thorough review of the claims file, interviewed, and examined the Veteran during the examination when rendering the opinion. The VA examiner specified the condition was unrelated to active service. Indeed, the examiner noted that there is no objective evidence to support this claim. The examiner noted without chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds this opinion to be adequate as she provides a thorough rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The opinion is therefore afforded probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board notes that the Veteran and his friend B.A. are competent to report symptoms or matters within their personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. However, the matter of a medical etiology for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of bilateral flat feet, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran or B.A. has an expertise in the diagnosis and/or etiology for foot disorders. Therefore, as they do not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose nor provide an etiology opinion as to the bilateral flat feet, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for flat feet, claimed as pes planus, is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

5. Entitlement to service connection for left ankle disorder claimed as a lateral collateral ligament sprain, is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he has a left ankle disorder due to service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his left ankle disorder is the result of countless rucks, runs and training in full gear. See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a left ankle lateral collateral ligament; the Board is bound by this favorable finding. In an October 2023 statement, B.A. indicated that he noticed the Veteran experience problems with his left ankle while serving together on active duty.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatments, or diagnosis associated with his left ankle. During the November 2015 separation report of medical examination, the clinical evaluation of the Veteran's feet was normal. The Veteran stated that he was in excellent health.

Post service treatment records are negative for left ankle disorder until the June 2023 VA examination.

With regards to direct service connection a June 2023 VA examination provided a diagnosis of left ankle sprain, chronic/recurrent. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported he rolled his left ankle during a rock march which he self-treated with oral analgesics and that he has been having this numbing pain since then that has progressively worsened over the years. The examiner noted the Veteran's reports that he stretched his ankle every now and then and uses oral medications with severe pain and that the Veteran states that pain sometimes interferes with ambulation. The examiner did not provide an etiology opinion.

In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a private certified nurse practitioner, opined those current conditions to include left ankle disorder is at least as likely as not caused by or made worse by the Veteran's time spent in the military. No rationale was provided. The Board finds the October 2023 private medical opinion inadequate to decide the appeal. In this regard, the provider did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusion reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Rather, the private examiner provided a mere conclusory statement that the irritable bowel syndrome was due to stress experienced in service without any further elaboration. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

A February 2024 VA examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition left ankle disorder is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of left ankle disorder and military service. The examiner reasoned that, without chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds the February 2024 VA etiology opinion to be highly probative. In this regard, the February 2024 VA examiner completed a thorough review of the claims file, interviewed, and examined the Veteran during the examination when rendering the opinion. The VA examiner specified the condition was unrelated to active service. Indeed, the examiner noted that there is no objective evidence to support this claim. The examiner noted without chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds this opinion to be adequate as she provides a thorough rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The opinion is therefore afforded probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board notes that the Veteran and his friend B.A. are competent to report symptoms or matters within their personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. However, the matter of a medical etiology for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of left ankle disorder, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran or B.A. has an expertise in the diagnosis and/or etiology for foot disorders. Therefore, as they do not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose nor provide an etiology opinion as to the left ankle disorder, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for left ankle disorder is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder, claimed as patellofemoral pain syndrome, is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he has a right knee disorder due to service. Specifically, he contends that his right knee disorder is the result of countless rucks, runs and training in full kit See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome; the Board is bound by this favorable finding. In an October 2023 statement, B.A. indicated that he noticed the Veteran experience problems with his right knee while serving together on active duty.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatments, or diagnosis associated with his right knee. During the November 2015 separation report of medical examination, the clinical evaluation of the Veteran's knee was normal. The Veteran stated that he was in excellent health.

Post service treatment records are negative for right knee disorder until the June 2023 VA examination.

With regards to direct service connection a June 2023 VA examination provided a diagnosis of right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome. The examiner noted the Veteran's reports that his knee problem began after he stepped on something during a rock march and that he did not go on sick calls but later had a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan done by an outside doctor. The examiner noted that the Veteran's right knee problem has progressively worsened over the years with reports of aching pain, stiffness, crepitus, and locking, that he just completed Police Academy two weeks prior, and that he stated that it was difficult to complete his physical training exercises due to his knee pain.  The examiner did not provide an etiology opinion.

In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a private certified nurse practitioner, opined those current conditions to include right knee pain is at least as likely as not caused by or made worse by the Veteran's time spent in the military. No rationale was provided. The Board finds the October 2023 private medical opinion inadequate to decide the appeal. In this regard, the provider did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusion reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Rather, the private examiner provided a mere conclusory statement that the irritable bowel syndrome was due to stress experienced in service without any further elaboration. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

A February 2024 VA examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, the right knee disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner noted that the Veteran reports right knee pain started in 2014 and that there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis and military service. The examiner further reasoned that, without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. The Board finds the February 2024 VA etiology opinion to be highly probative. In this regard, the February 2024 VA examiner completed a thorough review of the claims file, interviewed, and examined the Veteran during the examination when rendering the opinion. The VA examiner specified the condition was unrelated to active service. Indeed, the examiner noted that there is no objective evidence to support this claim. The examiner noted without chronicity during service a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more etiology. The Board finds this opinion to be adequate as she provides a thorough rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The opinion is therefore afforded probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board notes that the Veteran and his friend B.A. are competent to report symptoms or matters within their personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. However, the matter of a medical etiology for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of right knee disorder, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran or B.A. has an expertise in the diagnosis and/or etiology for knee disorders. Therefore, as they do not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose nor provide an etiology opinion as to the right knee disorder, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for right knee disorder is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he had a lumbar spine disorder that developed as a result of her service. See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. A March 2024 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a lumbosacral strain with facet arthropathy (facet joint osteoarthritis); the Board is bound by this favorable finding.

In an October 2023 statement, A.B., a private certified nurse practitioner, opined those current conditions to include lumbar spine disorder is at least as likely as not caused by or made worse by the Veteran's time spent in the military. No rationale was provided.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2024, at which time he reports onset of low back pain during service form doing long marches with 35 pound ruck plus a 45 pound 81 mm cannon. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that the pain has worsened over time. Following an examination, the examiner reported a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain and facet joint osteoarthritis. However, an etiology opinion was not provided. On remand, such an etiology opinion should be obtained. Barr v. Nicholson, supra. The failure to obtain an etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his currently diagnosed lumbar spine disorder. The entire electronic VA claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination. Any indicated evaluations, studies and tests should be conducted. The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed lumbar spine disorder had its onset during service or is related to any incident of service, to include the reported back pain associated with marches during service?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. McPhaull, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.