Citation Nr: A25033014
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-426422
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1990 to April 1993. The Board thanks the Veteran for his service.

On August 23, 2017, the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) went into effect. This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review on or after February 19, 2019. As this case is an appeal of a March 2024 rating decision, this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

However, when, as here, there are pre-decisional, duty-to-assist, errors it is permissible for the Board to have them corrected before deciding the claim on appeal.

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) electing direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

After review, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion is required.

The Veteran contends that his knee disorders are secondary to his service-connected ankle disorders.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of both right and left knee strain.  The AOJ also found that the Veteran is service connected for the claimed primary disabilities of both right and left ankle strains with instability.  As the record is devoid of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). At issue is whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's current right and left knee strain and his service connected right and left ankle strains with instability.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination and opinion in February 2023. The VA examiner found that the knee disorders were less likely than not proximately due to his ankle disorders. The examiner noted that the damage to the knees wasn't severe enough to believe that it was proximately caused by the Veteran's ankle disorders.

However, the VA examiner failed to provide an opinion on aggravation. As the Veteran argued a theory of secondary service connection, an aggravation opinion should have been provided. On remand, the February 2023 VA examiner (or a VA examiner of appropriate expertise) will provide such an opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Return the claims file to the February 2023 VA examiner in order to determine the etiology of the Veteran's knee disorders. If the February 2023 VA examiner is unavailable, return the claims file to a VA examiner of appropriate expertise. It is at the discretion of the VA examiner if an updated in-person examination is required.

The VA examiner must answer whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the knee disorders are aggravated by service-connected disease or injury, specifically the Veteran's respective service-connected ankle disorders.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If service-connected disease or injury aggravates the knee disorders, the examiner should identify the percentage of disability which is attributable to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

A complete rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided in a report.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jonah Nelson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.