Citation Nr: A25033363
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241029-486570
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The issue of entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is dismissed.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

On December 4, 2024, during his hearing before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board), and prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Veteran, through his attorney, withdrew his appeal for entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of the appeal for entitlement to service connection for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from December 1966 to April 1973, from June 1974 to March 1982, and from February 1990 to October 1992. The Veteran is a Vietnam Veteran with service in the Republic of Vietnam.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 rating decision issued by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of February 2024 and December 2023 rating decisions. However, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the supplemental claim decision review option for additional development.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 4, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or his representative, at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to a left knee condition for further development, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). Under the modernized review system, the Board has jurisdictional authority to remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional regulatory or statutory duty to assist error if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable finding that new and relevant evidence had been received warranting readjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Accordingly, the Board need not make an independent determination as to whether new and relevant evidence had been received before addressing the merits of the underlying claims. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801.

The Board has advanced this case on the docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107; 38 C.F.R. § 20.902.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for PTSD

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative. Id. Withdrawal of a claim is only effective where the withdrawal is explicit, unambiguous, and done with full understanding of the consequences of such action on the part of the claimant. DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45 (2011). A withdrawal is effective upon receipt of the request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205(b)(3).

During the December 2024 virtual hearing before the Board, the Veteran's attorney withdrew the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD. See December 2024 Hearing Transcript. Specifically, the Veteran's attorney acknowledged that PTSD was "not a problem," and any claimed insomnia issues could be addressed under a separate pending mental health claim. Id. The attorney stated that they would "dismiss/withdraw [the] PTSD claim."

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, other than PTSD, will be addressed in a future Board decision.

The statement of intention to withdraw the appeal of service connection for PTSD satisfies the requirements for withdrawal. Although the United States Court of Appeal for Veteran's Claims (Court) has distinguished written withdrawals from those done on the record orally during hearings, here, the record shows that the Veteran testified that he has not experienced symptoms of PTSD since 1988, and his representative, who is an attorney, acknowledged that PTSD is no longer an issue. Additionally, the Veteran's request to withdraw the appeal of service connection for PTSD, as made through his attorney, is "explicit, unambiguous, and done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action." DeLisio, 25 Vet. App. at 57; see also Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 554 (2008) ("The presence of [an] attorney throughout the appeals process before the Agency is a significant factor... [w]e presume that [the] attorney, an experienced attorney in veteran's law, says what he means and means what he says"), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

In conclusion, the Board finds that the criteria for withdrawal of the appeal for service connection for PTSD have been met, and there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration. Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the aforementioned issue on appeal and it is dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for a left knee condition.

The AOJ found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of left knee osteoarthritis, chondromalacia, anterior patella spurs, and a left medial knee surgical clip. Additionally, the AOJ found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, specifically service treatment records (STRs) show complaints, treatment, and a diagnosis of a left knee injury. These are favorable findings by the AOJ and the Board is bound by them. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations in August 2024 and November 2023 to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed left knee condition. As an initial matter, the Board notes that despite finding a diagnosis of left knee strain, the November 2023 examiner failed to provide an etiological opinion. 

In August 2024, a clinical examination revealed left knee osteoarthritis, chondromalacia, anterior patella spurs, and a left medial knee surgical clip. In rendering a negative nexus opinion, the examiner noted in-service documentation for left knee limited range of motion but further noted that no left knee issues were documented upon retirement in 1992. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran attributed his current left knee condition to overcompensation due to right big toe gout. No further rationale was provided.

The August 2024 examiner failed to provide a clear and reasoned rationale to support her negative etiological opinion. Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240-42 (2012) (an unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service connection context). Rather the examiner's opinion is merely a conclusory statement without thorough analysis of the evidence of record and fails to clearly articulate why the Veteran's current left knee diagnoses are not related to his service. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 205, 304 (2008) ("Most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning" and a medical opinion is not "entitled to any weight...if it contains only data and conclusions.").

The Board finds there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error as there is no adequate medical opinion of record regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left knee condition. Accordingly, remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's left knee condition 

Lastly, a review of the evidence indicates that the Veteran has a period of active service from April 1, 1982, to February 8, 1990; however, there is no DD-214 or other service department records that characterize the Veteran's service during this timeframe. Since relevant STRs fall within this period of service, remand is necessary to ensure that the Veteran's complete service department records are obtained.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain and associate with the claims file the DD 214 for the period of active duty from April 1, 1982, to February 8, 1990.

2. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's left knee condition had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service.

If the reviewing health care provider finds that a physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. However, if there is a medical reason to doubt its veracity, the examiner should explain why the Veteran's statements or recollection are inconsistent with the evidence in this case, medical principles relating to the onset and progress of the disease, the specific findings in the record, and/or your professional judgment.

(Continued on the next page.)

?

A clear rationale must be provided for all opinions and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bellack, D., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.