Citation Nr: A25033276
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240417-431983
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1968 to March 1970.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On May 15, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim of service connection for prostate cancer. This is a favorable finding by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to address the claim on the merits. See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer.

The Veteran asserts that his prostate cancer is due to exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances during his work as a firefighter. See, e.g., July 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. The AOJ conceded the Veteran had non-deployment related exposure due to working with firefighting foam. See April 2024 VA memorandum. Additionally, during an airborne hazard and open burn pit registry assessment, the Veteran was found to have asbestos exposure from the fire protection coats worn. See January 2024 VA treatment records.

The Board notes that there is no legal presumption that prostate cancer is related to exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances. While the Veteran submitted a Congressional Act from the 116th Congress, see September 2021 correspondence, the Act is not law. Additionally, the Act did not discuss prostate cancer.

In January 2022, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's prostate cancer was less likely than not related to exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances. The examiner discussed that these substances are ubiquitous environmental contaminants, and that current literature did not reveal a firm association between exposure and development of prostate cancer. The examiner also stated that the Veteran had commonly found risk factors for prostate cancer. This opinion is inadequate because the examiner did not discuss a medical article submitted by the Veteran in July 2021 that discussed that firefighters, who have elevated perfluorooctanoic acid levels from occupational exposure to firefighting foam, have an increased prostate cancer risk compared to the general population.

In March 2024, a VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's prostate cancer was related to exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances. However, this opinion is inadequate because the examiner merely listed facts and then relied on the absence of evidence in service treatment records.

In April 2024, a VA examiner opined it was less likely than not the Veteran's prostate cancer was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined affected of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner stated that there was no medical or scientific evidence that there is any kind of relationship between the Veteran's toxic exposure in service and prostate cancer. This opinion is inadequate because it is contradicted by the Veteran's submission of a medical article stating that firefighters have an increased risk of prostate cancer, as discussed above. It also does not discuss asbestos exposure.

Because there are no adequate opinions of record, remand for a new opinion is required.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should arrange for a VA medical opinion, with examination of the Veteran only if deemed necessary, to determine the nature and likely cause of his prostate cancer. The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

Is the Veteran's prostate cancer at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to his in-service exposure to toxins during service, to include from firefighting foam and any asbestos exposure from wearing a firefighting coat? When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner should discuss the medical article submitted by the Veteran in July 2021 reflecting an increased risk of prostate cancer for firefighters. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical records.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Sandler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.