Citation Nr: A25033842
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 221028-295081
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date of August 24, 2017, for the grant of service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with major depressive disorder (MDD) on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE), is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A November 2017 rating decision denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for PTSD and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder.

2. The Veteran was provided notice of the decision in a November 14, 2017, letter sent to his address of record which included notice of his procedural and appellate rights; the Veteran did not file a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) challenging this determination, nor was additional evidence received within one year of the November 14, 2017, notice letter.

3. The correct facts, as they were known as the time, were not before the adjudicator and statutory or regulatory provisions then extant were not correctly applied in the November 2017 rating decision, and the failure to correctly apply the laws and regulations manifestly changed the outcome of that rating decision.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The November 2017 rating decision became final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104 (a), 3.160 (d), 3.156 (b), 20.302, 20.1103.

2. The criteria for revision of the November 2017 rating decision on the basis of CUE have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5109A, 7105 (c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1989 to September 1992, and from February 2014 to December 2014; he also had additional periods of Reserve and National Guard duty.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2021 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran timely appealed the November 2021 decision by submitting a VA Form 10182 NOD in October 2022. He selected a Board appeal and requested direct review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). The Board will consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2021 decision.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than April 20, 2020, for the grant of service connection for PTSD with MDD on the basis of CUE

The Veteran seeks entitlement to revision of a November 2017 rating decision that denied his claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, on the basis of CUE.

CUE

Previous determinations that are final and binding, including decisions of service connection and other matters, will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE. Where evidence establishes such error, the prior rating decision will be reversed or amended. For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (a).

CUE is a very specific and rare kind of "error." It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error. Simply to claim CUE on the basis that previous adjudications had improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE. Similarly, neither can broad-brush allegations of "failure to follow the regulations" or "failure to give due process," or any other general, nonspecific claim of "error." Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993). In addition, failure to address a specific regulatory provision involves harmless error unless the outcome would have been manifestly different. Id. at 44.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that there is a three-pronged test to determine whether CUE is present in a prior determination: (1) "[e]ither the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were not before the adjudicator (i.e., more than a simple disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated) or the statutory or regulatory provisions extant at the time were incorrectly applied," (2) the error must be "undebatable" and of the sort "which, had it not been made, would have manifestly changed the outcome at the time it was made," and (3) a determination that there was CUE must be based on the record and law that existed at the time of the prior adjudication in question. Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994) (quoting Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992) (en banc)).

The Court has held that allegations that previous adjudications had improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of clear and unmistakable error. See Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1, 5 (1999); Damrel, 6 Vet. App. at 246.

If a veteran wishes to reasonably raise a claim of CUE, there must be some degree of specificity as to what the alleged error is and, unless it is the kind of error that, if true, would be CUE on its face, persuasive reasons must be given as to why one would be compelled to reach the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 1999), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 967 (1999); Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 43-44. If the error alleged is not the type of error that, if true, would be CUE on its face, if the veteran is only asserting disagreement with how the RO evaluated the facts before it, or if the veteran has not expressed with specificity how the application of cited laws and regulations would dictate a "manifestly different" result, the claim must be denied or the appeal to the Board terminated because of the absence of legal merit or the lack of entitlement under the law. Luallen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 92 (1995); Caffrey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 377, 384 (1994). Further, VA's failure in the duty to assist cannot constitute CUE. See Cook v. Principi, 318 F.3d 1334, 1346 (Fed. Cir. 2003).

Service Treatment Records (STRs) and Post-Service Medical Treatment

The Veteran's DD-214 from his active-duty service from September 1989 to September 1992, shows his military occupational specialty (MOS) was Electrical/Mechanical Equipment Repairman. He was awarded the Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, Navy Unit Commendation, National Defense Service Medal, Southwest Asia Service Medal, and Kuwait Liberation Medal.

His DD-214 from his active-duty service from February 2014 to December 2014, shows his MOS was Automated Logistical. He was awarded the Afghanistan Campaign Medal with Campaign Star, Army Commendation Medal, USN Unit Commendation, National Defense Service Medal, Southwest Asia Service Medal with Bronze Service Star, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Army Service Ribbon, Army Reserve Component Overseas, Training Ribbon, Armed Forces Reserve Medal with M Device, USN Sea, Service Deployment Ribbon, NATO Medal, and Kuwait Liberation Medal; the DD-214 also shows he served in a designated imminent danger pay area.

The Veteran's STRs are absent for specific complaints of or treatment for psychiatric disabilities. However, the Board notes that at an April 2012 periodic health assessment (PHA), the Veteran reported financial problems and feeling upset when something reminded him of a stressful experience.

At a June 2013 PHA, the Veteran reported currently taking prescription or over-the-counter medications (including herbals/supplements) for sleep or mental health problems and having little interest or pleasure in doing things for few or several days in the last two weeks. He marked "a little bit" when asked how much (in the past 30 days) he had been bothered by suddenly acting or feeling as if a stressful experience were happening again; feeling very upset when something reminded him of a stressful experience; avoiding activities or situations because they reminded him of a stressful experience; and trouble remembering important parts of a stressful experience. He further marked "several days" when asked whether he had been bothered (in the last two weeks) by little interest or pleasure in doing things, feeling tired or having little energy, and poor appetite or overeating; he noted that these problems had not made it difficult for him to do his work, take care of things at home, or get along with other people.

At a February 2014 pre-deployment health assessment, the Veteran reported feeling tired or having little energy in the last two weeks.

At an April 2015 post-deployment health re-assessment, the Veteran reported feeling like he was in great danger of being killed during his deployment and trouble sleeping in the past month; he was referred to a provider for his reported sleep issues.

The Veteran's VA treatment records show that in February 2016, he reported that his wife noticed he is different; he reported occasional symptoms of depression and feeling isolated, he does not go out anymore and argues with his wife much more than prior to his deployment. He denied nightmares, reported hypervigilance, and had positive PTSD and depression screenings; he was referred for a mental health evaluation.

During the February 2016 VA psychology consultation, the Veteran reported that his wife had been concerned about him since he returned from his second deployment to Afghanistan in 2014. He reported frustrations related to his military service and in-service physical injuries; he endorsed rockets attacking his base during his second deployment to Afghanistan and a traumatic experience of finding a hanging corpse of a fellow serviceman who had committed suicide in 1990s when he was in the Navy. The Veteran reported some symptoms of PTSD in relation to these experiences, including irritability and hypervigilance; he also endorsed previously having nightmares about his experiences, but he did not have any for over a year. He denied other PTSD symptoms, including intrusive, hyperarousal, and avoidance symptoms; he also denied anhedonia and other depressive symptoms. The initial DSM-5 diagnosis was adjustment disorder with disturbance of conduct.

A September 2016 VA psychology note shows that the Veteran reported refusing psychiatric treatment following the February 2016 psychiatric consultation; he returned because he was interested in therapy. He reported suicidal ideations, nightmares, isolating himself, mood swings, poor sleep, irritability, paranoid ideation, depressed mood, and little interest in doing activities that he used to enjoy. The initial DSM-5 diagnoses were PTSD and undifferentiated depressive disorder; he was referred to the PTSD clinic.

During the October 2016 VA PTSD consultation, the Veteran participated in group and individual therapy sessions; he scored a 64 when his PTSD symptoms were assessed using the PCL-5.

A November 2016 VA psychology note shows the Veteran reported that he felt the impact of his military service during his first deployment, and he noted that such changes continued to the present day (especially detachment, and a decrease in motivation and socializing); his wife noted a change in his behavior, such as lack of motivation and loving feeling since returning from Afghanistan in 2014. The diagnostic assessment was PTSD.

The Veteran's PTSD diagnosis was confirmed at a June 2017 VA psychiatric visit.

Procedural History and Veteran's Contentions

On August 24, 2017, the Veteran submitted an intent to file a claim (ITF) form, followed by an August 29, 2017, VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), for service connection for PTSD.

In August 2017, the Veteran submitted a letter from his VA physician dated June 2, 2017, stating that the Veteran has been diagnosed with PTSD.

In a September 2017 VA Form 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, the Veteran reported that he witnessed many deaths during his service in the Gulf War, and he has constant memories and nightmares of these experiences.

The Veteran was afforded a VA initial PTSD examination in October 2017; the examiner found that the Veteran did not have PTSD, noting that the Veteran did not meet the full criteria for PTSD with the delayed onset of symptoms occurring years after the reported stressor, inconsistent reporting of symptoms, and other non-military stressors referenced when assessing symptoms. The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses as other specified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder and provided a positive nexus opinion with the rationale that the Veteran had no reported mental health issues prior to service; he now has clear symptoms of other specified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder, which are partially related to service stressors.

In a November 2017 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for PTSD on the basis that the evidence did not show a current diagnosed disability. The AOJ also denied service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder on the basis that they did not find a link between the Veteran's medical condition and military service. The AOJ noted that the Veteran's service treatment records do not include evidence of these disabilities, and his in-service stressors were verified based on his active-duty service in Southwest Asia; however, there was no evidence that the Veteran participated in combat.

The Veteran was notified of the denial in the November 2017 rating decision in a November 14, 2017, letter sent to his address of record, which included notice of his procedural and appellate rights. The Veteran did not file an NOD challenging this determination, nor was additional evidence received within one year of the November 14, 2017, notice letter. Thus, the November 2017 rating decision became final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(a), 3.160(d), 3.156(b), 20.1103.

On April 20, 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0966 ITF, followed by an August 12, 2020, VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application, to requesting to readjudicate his claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and asserting CUE in the November 2017 rating decision.

The Veteran was afforded a VA initial PTSD examination in September 2020; the examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses as PTSD and major depressive disorder and provided a positive nexus opinion.

In an October 2020 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for PTSD as directly related to service; a 70 percent rating was assigned from August 12, 2020, which was said to be the day VA received the claim. The AOJ noted that the November 2017 rating decision denied the PTSD claim because a PTSD diagnosis was not provided at that time.

In October 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review (HLR), seeking review of the October 2020 rating decision for failing to grant an earlier effective date and failing to grant a total disability rating for compensation based on individual unemployability (TDIU).

At the November 2021 HLR Informal Conference, the Veteran's representative noted that the Veteran is entitled to an earlier effective date based on CUE in the November 2017 rating decision because he was treated for a mental health condition during service.

In the November 2021 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted an earlier effective date of April 20, 2020, for PTSD, which was said to be the date the ITF was received; the AOJ addressed the Veteran's CUE contentions, noting that the November 2017 rating decision denied the PTSD claim because there was no diagnosis of this condition; and service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder was denied since there was no evidence of a mental health condition during service and no verified stressor related to this condition. The AOJ also found that the issue of TDIU was returned due to the need to obtain additional evidence to substantiate the claim; they planned to develop for employment history. TDIU was ultimately granted in a March 2022 rating decision, effective from August 29, 2021, which was said to be the day following the last day the Veteran worked.

The Veteran appealed the November 2021 rating decision to the extent that it denied his CUE claim. See October 2022 VA Form 10182 NOD. His representative included a brief stating that the November 2017 rating decision contained CUE for failing to sufficiently consider the substantive record when it denied service connection for PTSD and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder; the Veteran is seeking an effective date of August 24, 2017. Specifically, the representative noted that the Veteran reported psychiatric symptoms during and after service, as the Board has noted above; moreover, the October 2017 VA examiner provided a positive nexus opinion, and his private physician noted his PTSD diagnosis at that time. The representative further stated that at the time of the November 2017 rating decision, there was sufficient evidence of a diagnosed mental disorder related, at least in part, to his military service, as opined by the October 2017 VA examiner.

Legal Analysis

As an initial matter, the Board finds the allegations of CUE made by the Veteran and his representative are adequate to meet the threshold pleading requirements. See Simmons v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 104 (2003); Phillips v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 25 (1997) (distinguishing denial of CUE due to pleading deficiency and denial of CUE on merits).

The Board now turns to the pertinent laws and regulations extant at the time of the November 2017 rating decision.

The pertinent laws and regulations at the time of the November 2017 rating decision were essentially the same as they are now. Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a) (2017). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d) (2017).

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Specific to claims of PTSD, service connection requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125 (a) (2017); (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f) (2017).

Concerning the requirement that there be credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred, 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f) sets forth circumstances that are exceptions to this rule and allow a claimant's lay testimony, alone, to establish the occurrence of the alleged stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f) was amended in July 2010 to specifically address fear of hostile military activity, this amendment relaxed the evidentiary burden for requiring corroborating evidence and is applicable to the present case as the Veteran submitted his claim in 2017.

One of these exceptions is if a stressor claimed by a veteran is related to his "fear of hostile military or terrorist activity" and a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a psychiatrist or psychologist with whom VA has contracted, confirms the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(3) (2017).

For purposes of the relaxed evidentiary standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(3), "fear of hostile military or terrorist activity" means that a veteran experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or circumstance that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of the veteran or others, such as from an actual or potential improvised explosive device; vehicle-imbedded explosive device; incoming artillery, rocket, or mortar fire; grenade; small arms fire, including suspected sniper fire; or attack upon friendly military aircraft, and the veteran's response to the event or circumstance involved a psychological or psycho-physiological state of fear, helplessness, or horror. Id.

As detailed above, evidence of record at the time of the November 2017 rating decision included the Veteran's DD-214 showing he served in a designated imminent danger pay area; the Veteran's statements indicating that his claimed stressor was due to fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, which is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the Veteran's service; STRs showing complaints of psychiatric symptoms; VA treatment notes containing PTSD and MDD diagnoses and detailing the Veteran's reported in-service stressors; and an October 2017 VA examination report finding that the Veteran did not have PTSD, but confirming the Veteran's diagnoses as other specified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder, and the examiner provided a positive nexus opinion for these diagnoses.

The Board finds that although the November 2017 rating decision indicated that the Veteran's VA treatment records were reviewed, the AOJ failed to acknowledge and consider those records, which were replete with diagnoses of PTSD based on the Veteran's military service; specifically, his last deployment. The Board finds that the November 2017 rating decision clearly and unmistakably contained an error of fact, as it incorrectly found that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of PTSD and his STRs do not include evidence of his claimed conditions. Here, the November 2017 rating decision "denied the existence of [probative] evidence in the claims file that did indeed exist" and thus "either violated the regulation requiring that the decision be based on all evidence of record or engaged in erroneous factfinding." Bouton v. Peake, 23 Vet. App. 69-70 (2008) (internal parenthetical citation to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a) (1997) omitted).

Thus, the correct facts as they were known as the time, were not before the adjudicator. The RO's denial of the existence of the Veteran's treatment records showing a PTSD diagnosis, and consequently, its failure to follow the regulation requiring that it base its determination on all evidence of record, is an error sufficient to satisfy the first CUE requirement. See Bouton v. Peake, 23 Vet. App. 70, 72 (2008); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Such error, however, cannot constitute CUE unless it is the type of error that would have manifestly changed the outcome of the RO's decision in November 2017. This may be shown where all evidence at the time of the decision "militated in support of the claim." Crippen v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 412, 422 (1996).

Turning to the issue of whether, but for such error of fact, the outcome would have been manifestly different, the Board finds that the medical evidence of record at the time of the November 2017 rating decision clearly indicates that the Veteran had diagnosed psychiatric disorders, to include depressive disorder and PTSD. Moreover, the record clearly links the Veteran's diagnosed psychiatric disorders to an in-service stressor. Furthermore, there is credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. Specifically, at the time of the November 2017 rating decision, the Veteran's STRs and medical treatment records credibly supported a finding that his then diagnosed PTSD is related to service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Critically, the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD in conjunction with his reports of serving in Afghanistan. Further, the Veteran's DD-214 shows he served in a designated imminent danger pay area, which is consistent with the Veteran's reported in-service stressors. As a result, the Board finds that the RO's error manifestly changed the outcome of the RO's decision.

Except for eating disorders, all psychiatric disabilities are evaluated under the General Rating Formula according to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The subsequent PTSD diagnosis was based on the same stressors and events noted in the October 2017 VA examination and the Veteran's VA treatment records. The PTSD with MDD diagnosis is based on the same events and symptoms associated with the Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder, based on the VA examination reports.

As such, applying the law in effect in 2017 to the evidence of record at the time of the November 2017 rating decision compels the conclusion that the Veteran's psychiatric disorders, to include PTSD and MDD, are related to service. For these reasons, the Board finds that a factual error exists in the November 2017 rating decision, and that such error is "undebatable" and of the sort which, had it not been made, would have manifestly changed the outcome at the time it was made. Per the law in effect at the time of the November 2017 rating decision, discussed above, as the Veteran's currently diagnosed psychiatric disorders, to include PTSD and MDD, are related to in-service stressors and there is credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred, a grant of service connection for PTSD with MDD, was manifestly in order pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f).

In sum, the November 2017 rating decision is clearly and unmistakably erroneous; therefore, the November 2017 rating decision should be revised, resulting in an award of service connection for PTSD with MDD, effective August 24, 2017, the date of receipt of the ITF followed by the August 2017 request to reopen the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A, 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (a), 3.400.

 

 

Emily Tamlyn

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Frazier, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.