Citation Nr: A25033931
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-439048
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (acquired psychiatric disorders), is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU), is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the appeal period, the severity and manifestations of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders most nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment has not been shown.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders have been met from March 13, 2023.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9440. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from May 2017 to May 2021, with additional service in the Reserves.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of a November 2023 rating decision that denied an evaluation greater than 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  The April 2024 rating decision, which only considered evidence as of the date of the November 2023 rating decision, granted an increased rating of 50 percent for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders, effective March 13, 2023.

In a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected Direct Review.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision, which was later subject to higher level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  Regarding the issue the Board is deciding, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the related claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Regarding the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board finds that the issue of entitlement to TDIU has been raised by the record as part of the increased rating claim on appeal; specifically, on the October 2023 private psychological assessment, it was noted that the Veteran missed work because of his acquired psychiatric symptoms and the examiner noted the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  

Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 50 percent for acquired psychiatric disorders from March 13, 2023.  

The Veteran was granted service connection and an initial evaluation of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder in a January 2022 rating decision, and the Veteran was provided notice on January 7, 2022.  VA received the Veteran's intent to file on March 13, 2023, followed by a May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ that included a claim for an increased evaluation for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  The claim for an increased evaluation was denied in an October 2023 rating decision, and within a year, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 supplemental claim.  The November 2023 rating decision made a specific finding of new and relevant evidence and denied the claim for an increased evaluation, and within a year, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 request for higher level review. The April 2024 higher level review rating decision granted an increased rating of 50 percent for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders, effective March 13, 2023, and within a year, the Veteran filed the current appeal to the Board.  Based on the foregoing procedural history, because the Veteran filed a new claim for an increased rating on a VA Form 21-526EZ and did not select one of the review options available and addressed in the January 7, 2022, rating notification letter, the Board finds that there has not been continuous pursuit of the initial rating decision.  However, the Board does find the Veteran has continuously pursued entitlement to a higher evaluation since the October 2023 rating decision.  Therefore, the review period for the Veteran's increased evaluation for an acquired psychiatric disorder begins on March 13, 2023, the date of the Veteran's intent to file, with a one-year look back period.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400(o)(2), 3.2500; see also Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  

The Veteran contends he is entitled higher evaluation for his service connected acquired psychiatric disorders.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, May 2023 VA Form 21-4138, May 2024 VA Form 10182.  The Veteran specifically contends entitlement to an evaluation of "at least 100 percent."  See October 2023, November 2023 Claim Accuracy Requests.   

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate rating codes identify the various disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind.  See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). For increased rating claims, "the present level of disability is of primary concern." See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58.  However, each disability is viewed "in relation to its history" to "accurately reflect the elements of disability present," respectively.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1 and 4.2; see also Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 62 (2012).  "Staged" ratings may be assigned when the evidence shows distinct periods during the evaluation period when manifestations of the disability warranted varied ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2009).  

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is currently assigned a 50 percent evaluation from March 13, 2023, under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (Formula) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9440.   

Under this Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id. 

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  A Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  While symptomatology should be the primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating, § 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused the requisite occupational and social impairment.  Id.

As previously discussed, the Board has applied a one-year look back from the Veteran's March 13, 2023, intent to file, as it was followed by a VA Form 21-526EZ, new claim for an increased rating.  However, the Board does not find that it is factually ascertainable that an increase in the severity of the Veteran's psychiatric disorders occurred within the one year period prior to the March 13, 2023, intent to file the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 3.400(o)(2); Gaston, 605 F.3d at 984.

Therefore, to determine the Veteran's entitlement to an evaluation greater than 50 percent from March 13, 2023, the Board has considered the Veteran's VA treatment records, lay statements, as well as his September 2023 VA mental disorders examination, and an October 2023 private mental disorders examination.  After careful consideration, the Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder symptoms more closely approximate those contemplated by a 70 percent rating from March 13, 2023.  

The Veteran was first seen by VA for mental health treatment in March 2023.  See March 2023 VA Mental Health Note.  When the Veteran was screened, he reported problems with depression, anxiety, and alcohol abuse, including drinking between six and twelve beers every two days and that he worked out of town Monday through Friday and would begin drinking immediately after work.  Id.  In April 2023, he saw a VA mental health provider and reported feeling down, depressed, and hopeless, agitated, low motivation, nightmares, and expressed concern that his drinking was "beyond reasonable limits."  See April 2023 VA Mental Health Initial Evaluation Note.  The Veteran explained he was drinking twelve beers a night, was unable to stop drinking, had not been able to abstain for the past two years, and had been encouraged by his family members to seek help, explaining that he had sought but been refused substance abuse treatment in service.  He also reported that while his marriage was "good", his drinking was causing marital tension.  Id.  The VA mental health evaluator noted that the Veteran's excessive drinking and adjustment disorder impacted his functioning, and he avoided situations that reminded him of a traumatic event that he had witnessed in service.  Id.

The Veteran provided a statement that he mostly self-medicated with alcohol, had significant issues with sleeping, and had started drinking heavily again, averaging twelve beers a day.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-4128. 

The Veteran's spouse provided a statement that he had become quiet, lost in thought, quick to anger, and engaged in binge drinking to mask his mental and physical pain.  See May 2023 Statement, T.R.  She stated that she observed him suffer from physical pain, major depression, anxiety, anger issues, sleep paralysis, nightmares, memory issues, and alcoholism.  She also stated that he was unable to have a meaningful, happy relationship, was unable to express emotion, unable to ask for help, or to enjoy life.  Id. 

After multiple failed scheduling attempts, the Veteran was seen by VA mental health in May 2023 and evaluated for an intensive substance treatment and recovery program.  During the evaluation, the Veteran requested treatment, explaining he was drinking a twelve pack a day, was irritable, sleeping poorly, had cravings to drink, was unable to cut down on his drinking, and felt that stress triggered his drinking.  See May 2023 VA Mental Health Note.  The Veteran also reported that he worked out of town a lot installing telephone poles, and that his coworkers drank on the job.  Id.  

In June 2023, the Veteran reported that he was not able to engage in substance treatment and recovery therapy because he was "in between jobs" and had a "lot of other pressing matters." 

During a September 2023 VA mental disorders examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, with symptoms that could not be differentiated.  The examiner noted that the Veteran struggled to make or maintain relationships, but that his marital relationship was "fine."  The Veteran reported that he occasionally interacted with extended family but felt anxious talking to others because he felt that they did not understand him, and only talked to people he worked with.  The Veteran stated he had worked in power lines since leaving service, and that he disliked his upper management, but not those he typically worked around.  The Veteran reported that he was trying to get involved with mental health treatment through VA because he had nightmares, difficulty sleeping, continued to struggle with anxiety and depression, was drinking daily and was concerned about his drinking, became agitated when he is not able to drink, was restless and on edge, bit his fingernails, had low energy and mood, was not motivated to engage in activities, felt helpless, was regularly irritable, and felt anxious around new people or in new settings.  The examiner noted the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, impaired judgment, and observed that he appeared fidgety, made only intermittent eye contact, but that he was appropriately groomed and oriented during the examination, and denied a history of suicidal or homicidal ideation.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's responses to his health questionnaires reflected "severe" depression and anxiety symptoms, that his symptoms were in response to stressor events that caused his alcohol use disorder, and that his symptoms overlapped and were mutually aggravating and impairing.  However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms were not severe enough to interfere with his occupational and social functioning.  

In October 2023, the Veteran was seen by a private behavioral health provider who assessed his symptoms as causing total occupational and social impairment.  The private provider based this assessment on his worsening and ongoing anxiety and depression, isolation, attempts not to interact that severely impaired his social and marital relationships, flashbacks, nightmares, increasing anxiety, and traumatic memories.  The report indicated that the Veteran's symptoms caused absences from work, and impaired him socially and behaviorally.  The provider noted that the Veteran displayed symptoms including a depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression, chronic sleep impairment, impaired long and short term memory, forgetting to complete tasks, memory loss for the name of his close relatives, own occupation or his own name, a flattened affect, disturbed motivation and mood, an inability to establish and maintain effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful situations including work or a work-like setting, obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities, and suicidal ideation.  During the evaluation, the Veteran was observed as having slowed speech, a flattened affect, a sad mood, and anxious fidgeting.  

The Board considered whether the Veteran's symptoms increased within the year prior to his March 13, 2023, intent to file a claim for an increased rating to determine whether he is entitled to an earlier effective date within that one-year period.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400(o)(2), 3.2500; see also Gaston, 605 F.3d at 984.  However, the evidence shows that the Veteran's symptoms had increased more than a year prior to March 13, 2023; therefore, the Board has assigned an effective date for the increase rating as of the date he filed his claim for an increased rating.   

The Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric conditions more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating.  The Veteran's VA examinations, statements, and private psychological evaluation demonstrate a significant difficulty with social and work relationships as shown by his social avoidance, isolation, and significant difficulty with social relationships, as well as difficulty with speech, insight, memory, and judgment.  The evidence shows the Veteran's continued difficulty adapting to stressful situations, including work, as well as his continued nightmares, sleep disturbances, increased drinking, and suicidal ideations.  The Veteran's reported depression and anxiety symptoms were noted to be "severe" by the VA examiner, and the Veteran demonstrated severe lack of impulse control as shown by his uncontrollable drinking.  The Veteran expressed near continuous panic and depression, demonstrated fidgeting, slowed speech, and obsessive rituals, and it was noted that his symptoms affected his ability to function appropriately and effectively, caused him to miss work, and put a strain on his marriage.  After considering all the evidence, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

However, the Board does not find that the evidence shows total occupational and social impairment.  The Veteran did not express or demonstrate on examination gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; an inability to perform activities of daily living; or disorientation to time or place.  Further, while the Veteran did not have friends outside work, he expressed the ability to maintain a relationship, albeit strained, with some family members.  Additionally, while the Veteran reported suicidal ideation, a serious symptom, he was not found to be in persistent danger of hurting himself or others.  Therefore, a 100 percent rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder is not warranted. 

Accordingly, after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds the evidence weighs in favor of assigning a rating of 70 percent, but not higher, for the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorders, from March 13, 2023.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

Under the AMA framework, the Board may remand where there has been a duty to assist error prior to issuance of a rating decision.  While the Board regrets the additional delay, due to the VA's failure to assist, the issue of the Veteran's ability to maintain substantially gainful employment must be remanded, as no development was undertaken prior to the November 2023 rating decision.  The VA has the duty to make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in securing evidence necessary to substantiate their claim for VA benefits.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

During the October 2023 private psychological assessment, it was noted that he had missed work because of his acquired psychiatric symptoms and the examiner opined that he demonstrated total occupational and social impairment, raising the issue of entitlement to a TDIU.  However, the specifics of the Veteran's work history and correlation with the difficulties he has experienced with employment due to acquired psychiatric symptoms are not clear from the record and have not been developed by the AOJ.  Therefore, the Veteran's employment history must be obtained and verified. Accordingly, remand is warranted for further development to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send the Veteran an Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, VA Form 21-8940, for completion, with instructions to return the completed form.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete and submit a VA Form 21-4192, Request for Employment Information, to allow VA to attempt to request employment verification information from his employers.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zahn, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.