Citation Nr: A25033770
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-428313
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral finger condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral eye condition, to include pinguecula, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tinnitus is related to his active military service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active military service in the United States Air Force from May 2007 to October 2007 and March 2012 to November 2012 with additional unconfirmed active service in 2009, plus additional service the Air National Guard. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for bilateral finger condition, acquired psychiatric disorder, eczema, and bilateral eye condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Generally, to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection may be granted for an organic disease of the nervous system, such as tinnitus, when there is a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge. See 38?C.F.R. §§?3.307, 3.309; Fountain v. McDonald, 27?Vet. App.?25 (2015); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran contends that his tinnitus is due to his active military service.

First, the Veteran stated that he experiences ringing in his ears. See February 2024 VA examination. Tinnitus is a disorder which can be ascertained through a veteran's own senses. Charles v. Principi, 16?Vet. App.?370 (2002). Therefore, the Board finds that the first element of service connection is met. 

Second, the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was Security Forces, and he received the Small Arms Expert Marksmanship ribbon. See Department of Defense Form 214. Further, the February 2024 VA examiner stated that the Veteran reported significant noise exposure in service. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise in service, and such exposure meets the second element of service connection (in-service injury or incident). 

Finally, the analysis becomes whether the Veteran's current disability of tinnitus is related to his service. Here, the Veteran stated that he started experiencing recurrent tinnitus around 2013 when he was in the military or shortly after getting out. See February 2024 VA examination. He reported that it comes and goes. Sometimes he will experience the ringing multiple times per day, and at other times he will go a week without hearing it. Finally, the Veteran stated that these symptoms have stayed the same since onset. The Board finds these statements to be both competent and credible. Therefore, the Board finds a continuity of symptomatology for tinnitus since the Veteran's service until present day. The third element of service connection is met. 

While recognizing the February 2024 VA nexus opinions, which concluded that the Veteran's tinnitus was not related to his active service based on a lack of documentation in service and that medical research does not show a connection between tinnitus and toxic exposures, the Board finds these rationales inadequate as they do not consider the Veteran's lay reports. Thus, they are afforded little to no probative value. Similarly, the record indicates that the Veteran had a civilian occupation of lobstering which was noted to be loud at times. See January 2010 service treatment record. However, the VA opinions do not associate this noise exposure with the Veteran's tinnitus. Further, the Veteran stated at the February 2024 VA examination that his tinnitus started around 2013 following his military deployment in 2012, which is after the January 2010 notation regarding his civilian work. Therefore, the Board affords this notation little probative value.

Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is warranted. 38?U.S.C. §?5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.102. The appeal is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

VA is required to provide an examination to a veteran seeking benefits when certain factors are met. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-83 (2006). In McLendon, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that an examination is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing an "in-service event, injury or disease," or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the current disability may be related to the in-service event, but (4) insufficient evidence to decide the case. Id. The threshold for providing Veterans with an examination is low. Id at 83. When these factors are met, the AOJ must order a VA examination.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran filed a claim for "anxiety/depression" in his October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. Accordingly, the Board has reframed the claim as one for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression and anxiety. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

The record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with anxiety. See September 2022 private treatment record. Further, the record shows that the Veteran has been treated for symptoms of anxiety and/or related psychiatric disorders. For example, the September 2022 private treatment record noted that the Veteran has had panic attacks in the past and has had symptoms including atypical chest pains. See also August 2017 private treatment records. Additionally, the Veteran recalled a stressor incident from his active service and stated that following his military service he became overly anxious, irritable, and stressed out. See October 2023 VA Form 21-0781. Also, the Veteran had an emergency room visit for acute chest pain in April 2012, during a period of his active service, although he was noted to be at a low risk for a cardiac event and a cardiac cause was ruled out. See April 2012 service treatment record. 

Next, although the Veteran is not competent to provide a medical opinion on the etiology of his diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder, he is competent to state that he has had symptoms such as anxiety, being irritable, and stressed out since his time in service. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994). These reports are supported by the evidence of record. Therefore, the Board finds that the low threshold for obtaining a VA examination regarding his acquired psychiatric disorder has been reached. See McLendon, supra. Pre-decisional error occurred as a result of the AOJ adjudicating this case without first obtaining an examination. Remand is required to correct this per-decisional error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral finger condition.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral finger condition is related to his active military service. His post-service medical treatment records show notations related to a finger condition. See April 2020 private treatment record; May 2020 private treatment record; April 2023 private treatment record. The May 2020 private treatment record described the finger condition as "chronic." 

It is unclear from the record whether the Veteran's finger condition is associated with his diagnosed psychiatric condition. See, e.g., May 2020 private record; Nail Biting; Etiology, Consequences, and Management, available at: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3556753/ (last visited April 10, 2025). Accordingly, the Board finds that the issue must also be remanded as inextricably intertwined. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

Entitlement to service connection for eczema.

The Veteran contends that his eczema is due to his active military service, to include an in-service Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024 with regards to his eczema. The examiner stated that the date of onset of the Veteran's eczema was in 2015, and the Veteran reported that he would have eczema that randomly affected his bilateral arms and legs, especially in winter. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's eczema was caused by his in-service TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. Further, the examiner reasoned that the eczema was first diagnosed many years after exposure. Additionally, the examiner stated a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship, thus the examiner found there is no medical evidence that the Veteran's TERA is related to his diagnosis of eczema.

The Board finds the February 2024 VA opinion is inadequate as it does not address that the Veteran reported "yes" to going to sick call for skin diseases or rashes in the October 2012 Post-Deployment Health Assessment. The VA examiner also did not discuss whether the Veteran's condition was caused by his active military service directly, whether the condition had its onset during active service or is related to a cause from his active service other than his TERA. Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a service-connection claim, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). The AOJ's reliance on the February 2024 VA opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires remand to correct. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral eye condition.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral eye condition is directly related to his active military service.

At the February 2024 VA examination, the examiner confirmed the Veteran's eye condition diagnosis of bilateral pinguecula. The examiner listed the onset date as 2013. The Veteran reported that he returned from his military deployment to Qatar, where he recalled no ocular trauma or injury but excessive glare and sun exposure and started to notice tissue growth on the sides of his corneas. The examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's eye condition is due to synergistic toxic exposure. The examiner reasoned that the condition is usually caused by natural environmental conditions such as exposure to wind, dust, ultraviolet light, and working outdoors for a long duration. The examiner provided a citation for this proposition. The examiner also noted that the Veteran reported increased sun exposure while in Qatar.

The Board finds the February 2024 VA opinion is inadequate as it only addresses the Veteran's TERA as it relates to the eye condition. The opinion does not explicitly opine on whether something other than TERA is at least as likely as not the cause of the Veteran's eye condition or whether that condition was incurred during active military service. Instead, the opinion acknowledged the Veteran's report that he had increased sun exposure while in Qatar and merely stated that exposure to ultraviolet light and working outdoors are common causes for the eye condition without opining on whether that was the cause of this Veteran's eye condition. The AOJ's reliance on the February 2024 VA opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires remand to correct. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); Barr, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician regarding his acquired psychiatric disorder.

After reviewing the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this remand, the examiner should opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder is causally or etiologically related to any in-service event, disease, or injury. The examiner must address the Veteran's statement in the October 2023 VA Form 21-0781 and the April 2012 service treatment record. 

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to determine the likely etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed eczema. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without an in-person examination, one should be scheduled.

After reviewing the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this remand, the examiner should opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's eczema is causally or etiologically related to any in-service event, disease, or injury, to include TERA during his active military service.

This examination must include protocol that allows for the examiner to make an opinion as to the nexus between the Veteran's TERAs and his diagnosed condition. As to the opinion regarding TERA, above, the examiner must address whether the Veteran's eczema is related to the Veteran's military service, to include the specific toxic agents to which the Veteran was deemed exposed in the January 2024 VA Memorandum, and/or due to the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities. Further, the examiner must discuss that the Veteran reported "yes" to going to sick call for skin diseases or rashes in the October 2012 Post-Deployment Health Assessment. Additionally, the examiner must discuss whether the Veteran's condition was caused by his active military service directly, regardless of TERA (i.e. onset in or otherwise related to service).

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to determine the likely etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral eye condition. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without an in-person examination, one should be scheduled.

After reviewing the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this remand, the examiner should opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed bilateral eye condition had its onset in or is otherwise related to his active military service, to include the reported increased sun exposure while on military deployment. Although the examiner may discuss the Veteran's TERA if he or she thinks that it is relevant, the examiner must discuss direct service connection regardless of TERA (i.e. onset in or otherwise related to service) and the Veteran's report of increased sun exposure.

4. The clinician must provide all findings, along with a complete rationale for his or her opinions, in the examination reports. If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why this is so and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. J. Goozée, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.