Citation Nr: A25033672
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-463525
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for generalized anxiety disorder is remanded.

Entitlement service connection for unspecified depressive disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1979 to June 1983 and from February 1986 to December 1991.

A June 2022 rating decision was issued under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Within one year, the Veteran submitted a May 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking supplemental review of the issues decided in that decision.  The AOJ then issued the August 2023 supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5104A; 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c). 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for generalized anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The issues are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the August 2023 rating decision on appeal.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) did not obtain a VA examination and failed to obtain opinions regarding whether either of the Veteran's claimed mental health disorders were incurred in or are related to active service or whether either of them were caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected back disability, bilateral ankle disabilities, GERD, and/or tinnitus.  However, based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the August 2023 rating decision, particularly including an April 2023 Private Psychological Evaluation, the Board finds that a VA examination and medical opinions are required to answer these questions.   

In particular, the private psychologist opined that the Veteran's documented in-service use of cannabis and counseling related to that cannabis use (as well as the Veteran's and others lay statements associated with the claims file) were indications that the Veteran's mental health disorders were present during service and that he was using substances as a coping mechanism.  This is sufficient to satisfy the low threshold of whether there is some indication in the record that the Veteran's current mental health disorders may be associated with an in-service event.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-86 (2006).  The private psychologist further opined that the pain caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities aggravates the Veteran's mental health disorders.  Therefore, the record prior to the August 2023 rating decision on appeal raised the issues of direct and secondary service connection with sufficient evidence to warrant providing a VA examination and obtaining expert opinions regarding those theories. The Board is expressly not determining the in-service element of the claim is satisfied, but only that the evidence is enough to warrant an opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed acquired psychiatric disorders including generalized anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder.  The examiner must review the claims file.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

a.	Are any of the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorders, to include generalized anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder, at least as likely as not related to service? Please address the April 2023 opinion that the Veteran's in-service use of cannabis and counseling for substance abuse (as documented in September 1987 and December 1987 service treatment records) was a coping mechanism for mental health symptoms?

b.	If the answer to (a) is negative, is it at least as likely that any of the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorders have been caused or are due to service-connected disability, to include pain and irritation associated with those disabilities, which include a back disability, bilateral ankle disabilities, GERD, and tinnitus?

c.	If the answer to (b) is negative, is it at least as likely that any of the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorders have been aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include pain and irritation associated with those disabilities, which include a back disability, bilateral ankle disabilities, GERD, and tinnitus?

Provide a rationale to support the opinions.

In forming a conclusion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's statements, and, for the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition(s).  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as the Board will weigh the evidence once the appeal returns. 

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether or not the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.   

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hubers, Kerry

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.