Citation Nr: A25033861
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210301-138943
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder degenerative changes is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder degenerative changes is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for neck disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand arthritis is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that right shoulder degenerative changes began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that left shoulder degenerative changes began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a neck disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right knee disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left knee disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left-hand arthritis at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for right shoulder degenerative changes are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for left shoulder degenerative changes are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a neck disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a right knee disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for left hand arthritis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Coast Guard from April 1979 to April 1983. Unfortunately, the Veteran passed away in December 2023. The Veteran's surviving spouse has been substituted as the Appellant for purposes of processing the claim to completion. See 38 U.S.C. § 5121A.

In August 2019, the Veteran filed his initial claim for arthritis. No specific joints or body parts were listed. This resulted in a November 2019, Rating Decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied service connection for left hand arthritis as the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) were silent for any such complaints. Claims for left foot arthritis, right foot arthritis, and right-hand arthritis were also denied by this rating decision but are not currently on appeal. No appeal was filed, however, in October 2020, the Veteran filed a new claim which included the left hand. This new claim also included claims for the bilateral knees, bilateral shoulders, and the neck. In December 2020, an RO rating decision denied service connection for all five claims. The bilateral shoulder claims were denied despite a diagnosis as there was no evidence that the condition was caused by or occurred in service. The left knee, right knee, and neck were all denied as there was no disability diagnosed. The Veteran did not appeal but instead filed a new claim in January 2021. This claim included the bilateral shoulders, the left hand, and the neck. However, this form was not signed. In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for the neck, bilateral shoulders, left hand, right knee, and lower back. In February 2021, an RO rating decision denied the neck, left hand, and right knee as there was no currently diagnosed disability. This February 2021, RO rating decision denied the bilateral shoulders as there was no evidence that the disabilities occurred in or were caused by the Veteran's time in service. In March 2021, the Veteran appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) via a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)). The Veteran requested the Direct Review docket. The Veteran listed the right shoulder, left shoulder, left hand, right hand, neck, left foot, right foot, left knee, and right knee as the issues he was appealing. However, a March 2021 letter from the VA advised the Veteran that the appeals for the left and right foot could not be docketed due to the length of time from the rating decision which denied service connection. These claims had most recently been denied in November 2019 and therefore were not appealable. This is also true of the Veteran's right hand disability claim. Therefore, the left and right foot plus the right hand are not properly before the Board. In March 2021, prior to any Board decision, the Board received notice that the Veteran had passed away. In May 2024, the Board issued a dismissal of the pending claims. However, the Board dismissal included only the neck, right shoulder, left shoulder, left hand, and right knee. It failed to include the Veteran's left knee appeal, and no explanation was provided. In January 2025, following the request for substitution, a deferred rating also failed to include the left knee as an issue that was pending appeal upon the Veteran's death. No explanation was provided. The Board has included the left knee in the Appellant's claim as there is no evidence that it was meant to be excluded by the Veteran prior to his death or by the Appellant thereafter. The prior exclusion of the left knee from the May 2024 Board dismissal seems to merely be an oversight that the Board will now correct. In January 2025, the Appellant was granted substitution. 

As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the respective decisions on the issues on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence has been submitted during a window of time when the Board may not consider it in reaching this decision. This evidence includes, but is not limited to, additional medical records. If the Veteran wishes for this evidence to be considered, he may do so by filing a supplemental claim. Instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service." Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1315-16 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), service connection may be granted for disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. Such permits a grant of service connection not only for disability caused by a service-connected disability, but for the degree of disability resulting from aggravation to a nonservice-connected disability by a service-connected disability. Id. See also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b). 

In order to prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

Entitlement to service connection for right and left shoulder degenerative changes.

In his initial October 2020 claim, the Veteran did not provide any information as to his contention as to what the cause of his bilateral shoulder conditions was. Throughout the entire time that the Veteran and the Appellant have pursued this claim, there has been no information provided as to a supposed cause of the Veteran's bilateral shoulder degenerative changes. 

In October 2020, the Appellant submitted a lay statement regarding various injuries suffered by the Veteran. There was nothing specific listed about the shoulders. The statement did note a generic upper body pain. No specific injury in service was noted and there was no indication as to how the Veteran's upper body pain related to his time in service. 

An October 2014, x-ray of the bilateral shoulders showed degenerative changes in the acromioclavicular joint spaces. This is enough to satisfy the first element of service connection for the bilateral shoulders. 

A review of the Veteran's STRs failed to find any complaints of bilateral shoulder injuries or treatment for any such injuries. 

In January 2021, the Veteran complained of shoulder pain. No specific diagnosis or treatment was provided. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination prior to his death. However, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not justify a VA examination. A medical examination or opinion is considered necessary when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d).

There is no evidence of record, or even contentions by the Veteran or the Appellant, that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder degenerative changes began during service or were caused by some injury or issue while in service. As noted above, the STRs are silent for any such complaints or injuries to the bilateral shoulders. As the second and third elements of the McLendon standard have not been met, the Board finds that a VA examination, or even a retrospective opinion is not required. 

The Veteran and Appellant submitted no evidence showing an injury in service and have included no medical evidence to show that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disabilities have been linked to his time in service. A review of the STRs shows no complaints of bilateral shoulder issues in service. Therefore, based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the second element of service connection, an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, has not been met and the claim is denied. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disabilities did not result from an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability.

In his initial October 2020 claim, the Veteran did not provide any information as to his contention as to what the cause of his claimed neck disability was. Throughout the entire time that the Veteran and the Appellant have pursued this claim, there has been no information as to a supposed cause of the Veteran's claimed neck disability. 

In her October 2020 lay statement, the Appellant indicated that the Veteran suffered from limited movement of the neck. There was no indication as to a cause or any injury suffered by the Veteran. 

The first element of service connection is the existence of a present disability. The Board finds that there is no evidence the Veteran suffered from a neck disability. A review of the Veteran's STRs find no neck complaints. A February 2019 medical record shows the Veteran's neck had normal range of motion (ROM) that there was no tenderness, and that the neck was supple. 

In December 2020, the Veteran was treated for a number of issues, but the only issue noted with the neck was a rash located on the left side of the neck. The Veteran was being treated for this rash and it was getting better. 

There are no additional complaints of neck pain, an inability to move the neck, a limitation of the Veteran's neck ROM, or any other neck complaints. The Board notes that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination prior to his death. However, as discussed earlier in this opinion, the right to a VA examination requires certain criteria to be met. The Veteran's medical history and contentions fail to show that there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that would warrant continuing to review the remaining McLendon elements. A VA examination, or a retrospective opinion as the Veteran has passed away, is not required. The first element of service connection has not been met and therefore, the claim is denied. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran failed to show the existence of a present neck disability. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability.

In his initial October 2020 claim, the Veteran did not provide any information as to his contention as to what the cause of his claimed right knee disability was. Throughout the entire time that the Veteran and the Appellant have pursued this claim, there has been no information as to a supposed cause of the Veteran's claimed right knee disability. 

In her October 2020 lay statement, the Appellant indicated that the Veteran suffered from a limited capability to stand for short periods of time. There was no indication as to a cause or any injury suffered by the Veteran that would impact his right knee. 

The first element of service connection is the existence of a present disability. The Board finds that the Veteran has some complaints of right knee pain, but it is not persistent enough to justify a finding of a disability. 

The Veteran's STRs are silent for any complaints of right knee pain or a right knee injury while in service. 

In June 2017, the Veteran complained of stiffness and pain in the right knee. No diagnosis or specific treatment was provided. In December 2020, the Veteran complained of pain in the right knee. This was over three years since the prior complaint of right knee pain. In January 2021, the Veteran complained of knee pain but did not indicate which knee. 

There are no additional complaints of right knee pain, an inability to move the right knee, a limitation of the Veteran's right knee ROM, or any diagnosis of a right knee disability. The Board notes that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination prior to his death. However, as discussed earlier in this opinion, the right to a VA examination requires certain criteria to be met. The Veteran's medical history and contentions fail to show that there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a right knee disability that would warrant continuing to review the remaining McLendon elements. A VA examination, or a retrospective opinion as the Veteran has passed away, is not required. The first element of service connection has not been met and therefore, the claim is denied. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran failed to show the existence of a present right knee disability. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability.

In his initial October 2020 claim, the Veteran did not provide any information as to his contention as to what the cause of his claimed left knee disability was. Throughout the entire time that the Veteran and the Appellant have pursued this claim, there has been no information as to a supposed cause of the Veteran's claimed left knee disability. 

In her October 2020 lay statement, the Appellant indicated that the Veteran suffered from a limited capability to stand for short periods of time. There was no indication as to a cause or any injury suffered by the Veteran that would impact his left knee. 

The first element of service connection is the existence of a present disability. The Board finds no complaints of left knee pain or any disability of any type in the medical record. There is no documentation of persistent pain or of a diagnosis of a left knee disability.  

The Veteran's STRs are silent for any complaints of left knee pain or a left knee injury while in service. 

A review of the Veteran's post-service medical records fails to find any specific complaints of left knee pain or a left knee diagnosis. 

There are no complaints of left knee pain, an inability to move the left knee, a limitation of the Veteran's left knee ROM, or any diagnosis of a left knee disability. The Board notes that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination prior to his death. However, as discussed earlier in this opinion, the right to a VA examination requires certain criteria to be met. The Veteran's medical history and contentions fail to show that there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a left knee disability that would warrant continuing to review the remaining McLendon elements. A VA examination, or a retrospective opinion as the Veteran has passed away, is not required. The first element of service connection has not been met and therefore, the claim is denied. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran failed to show the existence of a present left knee disability. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand arthritis.

In his initial October 2020 claim, the Veteran did not provide any information as to his contention as to what the cause of his claimed left hand arthritis disability was. Throughout the entire time that the Veteran and the Appellant have pursued this claim, there has been no information as to a supposed cause of the Veteran's claimed left-hand disability. 

The October 2020 lay statement from the Appellant did not address any left-hand disability or arthritis. 

The first element of service connection is the existence of a present disability. The Board finds that the Veteran's medical record does not include evidence of a diagnosis or persistent complaints of left-hand arthritis or any other left-hand complaints.   

The Veteran's STRs are silent for any complaints of left-hand complaints or a left-hand injury while in service. 

In December 2020, an x-ray of the left hand was taken. The results showed no fracture, dislocation, or arthritic changes.

There are no additional complaints of left-hand pain, an inability to move the left hand, a limitation of the Veteran's left-hand ROM, or any diagnosis of a left-hand disability. The Board notes that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination prior to his death. However, as discussed earlier in this opinion, the right to a VA examination requires certain criteria to be met. The Veteran's medical history and contentions fail to show that there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a left-hand disability that would warrant continuing to review the remaining McLendon elements. A VA examination, or a retrospective opinion as the Veteran has passed away, is not required. The first element of service connection has not been met and therefore, the claim is denied. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran failed to show the existence of a present left-hand disability. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

 

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Andrew Ledman II

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.