Citation Nr: A25033888
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240507-441341
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service from July 1969 to February 1972.  His decorations include a Vietnam Campaign Medal, Vietnam Service Medal, and Army Commendation Medal.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), here the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran is proceeding pro se (unrepresented).  He is advised that if he wishes to appoint a representative in this matter, he must submit a completed and signed VA Form 21-22, Appointment of Veterans Service Organization as Claimant's Representative or VA Form 21-22(a), Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative.

PCAFC eligibility is remanded.

The Veteran has been evaluated at a 100 percent disability rating since June 9, 2005.  He and the Caregiver-Applicant (spouse) filed an application for PCAFC benefits dated March 2024.

An April 2024 VHA decision denied entitlement to PCAFC.  The April 2024 decision on appeal found that the Veteran was not entitled to eligibility for participation in VA's PCAFC.  The decision relied in part on an April 2024 Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) decision which found that the Veteran was not in need of personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on an inability to perform an activity of daily living (ADL) and/or a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.

Remand is necessary.  

The April 2024 CEAT Review Consultation found that the Veteran did not meet the eligibility requirements under the program.  The Board finds that the CEAT medical review is legally inadequate to support the decision made.

As a general matter, a decision by VA affecting the furnishing of assistance or support under the Caregiver Program shall be considered a medical determination.  38 U.S.C. § 1720G.  The issue turns on the medical judgment of VHA and the CEAT in determining whether the Veteran met the basic medical eligibility criteria under PCAFC. 

However, decisions as to eligibility under a Caregiver Program have been held to be subject to Board review.  See Beaudette v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 95, 105 (2021).  To this end, it is within the Board's jurisdictional authority to review the adequacy of all medical opinions upon which eligibility decisions are made.  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992).  This includes the CEAT's medical determination upon which the instant eligibility decision was based.

A VA opinion is adequate if it "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of the medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion."  A non-exhaustive list of factors that, depending on the case, may be relevant considerations in determining the adequacy and probative value of a medical opinion include: (1) whether there was personal examination of the patient; (2) the expert's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data; (3) whether the opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two; (4) whether the opinion is clear and susceptible of only one meaning; (5) the expert's familiarity with pertinent medical history; (6) whether there is any inconsistency in the expert's statements; (7) whether the expert has provided a thorough and detailed opinion about an area within his or her expertise; (8) whether the expert has provided factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for his or her conclusion; (9) whether the expert relied on sufficient facts or data; (10) whether the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; (11) whether the opinion is the result of principles and methods reliably applied to facts; and (12) whether medical text evidence that a medical opinion relies on contains qualifying or contradictory aspects where the text is entered into the record, at least in part.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).

In short, a medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions.  A medical opinion that is a factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Here, the CEAT's review does not meet these requirements.  The medical opinion is conclusory and unexplained.  For example, during the March 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment, the Veteran reported partial/moderate assistance was required with upper body dressing, lower body dressing and putting on/taking off footwear.  Assistance with medication management was noted, to include medication administration (insulin injections).  The Caregiver-Applicant noted she monitors the Veteran for impulsive behavior and manages the finances after the Veteran was a victim of scamming and lost a significant amount of money.  The Occupational Therapist determined the Veteran had "minimal" judgment and physical ability to cope, make appropriate decisions and take action in a changing environment or a potentially harmful situation.  She determined his risk factors included hygiene that may compromise health, impairment of orientation, memory, reasoning, and/or judgment, and an inability to manage medications or to seek medical treatment that may threaten health or safety.  Ultimately, the Occupational Therapist determined the Veteran could not provide and/or arrange for his own health and safety.

Simply put, without an adequate supporting explanation, the Board has no way to know how or why the decision here was reached, to include what specific medical facts in this Veteran's case justified the denial.  Thus, remand is necessary for a new medical determination considering all medical information of record.  

On remand, the AOJ can also consider the contentions of the Caregiver-Applicant provided with the VA Form 10182 that included the Veteran requires daily medication management for his 27 medications due to his memory loss, forgetfulness, and inability to stay focused and requires administration of insulin.  She reported he requires assistance with putting on his shoes and mobility due to dizziness and she accompanies the Veteran to all his medical appointments so she can provide correct medical updates, as he is unable to independently engage in his treatment plans.  She reported the Veteran is 100 percent service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and suffers from night terrors, flash backs, episodes of depression, sleeplessness, and forgetfulness.

Correction of these errors by the AOJ is necessary to satisfy a duty-to-assist error that occurred prior to the decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see also 38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(12).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a current medical opinion from the CEAT as to whether the Veteran: 

(a.) Requires personal care services each time he completes one or more of the following:

i.	Dressing or undressing oneself;

ii.	Bathing;

iii.	Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable;

iv.	Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.);

v.	Toileting or attending to toileting;

vi.	Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 

vii.	Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.).

b.	Has a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or

c.	Has a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.

d.	In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion must be articulated.  

2.	Issue a notice of the decision on the issue of entitlement to eligibility for PCAFC benefits as described in 38 U.S.C. § 5104.  The notice shall include but is not limited to, a summary of the evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and identification of the elements not satisfied but necessary for establishing eligibility for PCAFC benefits under 38 C.F.R. § 71.15-71.25.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Notice must be sent to the Veteran, his representative (if applicable), and the Caregiver-Applicant.

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Johnson, Krista M. (BVA)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.