Citation Nr: A25033512
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-470113
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2012 to July 2016.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, the agency of original jurisdiction.

Initially, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review when submitting a February 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review. In a May 2023 rating decision, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In October 2023, the AOJ continued the denial of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection? 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during the service - the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).? 

In addition, service connection for certain chronic diseases may be established on a presumptive basis by showing that the condition manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a); Fountain v. McDonald, 27?Vet. App.?258, 271-72 (2015). Although the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).? 

For the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time. If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).? 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected disabilities with obesity as an intermediate step.

The Veteran, through his representative, asserts that he is entitled to service connection for OSA as secondary to conditions of the right shin, right knee, left hip, right hip, lumbar spine, and left shoulder with subsequent sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity. See September 2024 Attorney Brief. 

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); see Allen v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?439 (1995) (en banc). To establish service connection for a secondary disability, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) the existence of a service-connected disability; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).? 

Obesity is not considered a disease or disability for VA purposes and is not subject to service connection. Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?155 (2018). As obesity is not a disease or injury for purposes of 38 U.S.C. §§1110 and 1131, it may not be service connected on a direct or secondary basis. However, obesity may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be connected on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; see also Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300 (2020). This inquiry extends to causation and aggravation. That is, (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity; if so, (2) whether such obesity or aggravation thereof was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and if so, (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for such obesity or aggravation thereof. If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.? 

As an initial matter, the Board notes that there is no evidence that the Veteran's OSA is directly related to service. The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses of OSA. The Veteran's sole contention throughout the period on appeal is that his OSA is secondary to his service-connected disabilities and weight gain/obesity. As such, the Board will not discuss any other theory of entitlement aside from secondary service connection.

The Board is bound by previous favorable findings, and the October 2023 rating decision found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and that his primary disability, lumbosacral strain, is service-connected. The Board also notes that despite the Veteran and his representative's contentions, the Veteran has not been service-connected for a left hip condition. See October 2023 Rating Decision - Codesheet. 

According to the Veteran, his conditions of the right shin, right knee, left hip, right hip, lumbar spine, and left shoulder keep him from exercising. See March 2022 Statement in Support of Claim. He wrote that his musculoskeletal conditions prevent him from being able to sleep on his side and that the pain from his conditions make it difficult for him to fall or stay asleep. The Veteran also noted that his conditions have resulted in decreased activity, leading to weight gain and obesity.

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from Z.M., MD, FAASM, FAAN dated March 2022. Dr. Z.M. reviewed the Veteran's medical records, including lay statements of OSA symptomatology and the OSA screening tool. Dr. Z.M. diagnosed the Veteran with OSA and opined that "it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and/or obesity is due to their service-connected condition of right shin, right knee, left hip, right hip, lumbar spine, and left shoulder, and that overweight/obesity condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current OSA." Dr. Z.M. wrote that the Veteran "has a known service-connected condition(s) which can lead to and or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating, which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure," and ultimately weight gain and obesity. 

The examiner did not specifically discuss how the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal conditions led to his obesity, nor did he adequately explain how the Veteran's weight gain caused or aggravated his OSA. Instead, he noted rather generally that the Veteran has certain conditions which can cause certain symptoms that lead to and/or promote weight gain and obesity. Dr. Z.M. does not describe the Veteran's musculoskeletal symptomatology and other relevant factors pertaining to the Veteran's specific case. As such, the Board finds Dr. Z.M.'s opinion inadequate. 

In May 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. When asked if the Veteran has or has ever had sleep apnea, the examiner checked "NO." The examiner noted that the Veteran has not had any work up or sleep study and that no diagnosis is warranted because there is no objective evidence to support the claim. 

In addition, the examiner noted that the medical evidence is not sufficient to support a determination of a baseline level of severity or sleep apnea diagnosis and therefore, the Veteran's claimed condition/diagnosis was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by a service-connected condition. Regarding an opinion on secondary service connection, the examiner wrote that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal conditions due to the lack of a sleep apnea diagnosis. The examiner added that no nexus or plausible secondary relationship is established.

As noted above, the Veteran's claim was returned for additional development.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in June 2023. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea based on a December 2022 sleep study of record. The examiner also provided opinions on both direct and secondary service connection. The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness because there are no complaints of sleep disturbance during service, and therefore no nexus between service and sleep apnea. Regarding secondary service connection, the examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions because while pain may interfere with sleep, it does not cause sleep apnea. The examiner then defined sleep apnea and discussed the two types, obstructive and central. The examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions.

The Board finds the June 2023 examiner's opinion to be inadequate, as it did not consider the Veteran's obesity as an intermediate step. See October 2022 VA Diagnostic Study Report and December 2022 Sleep Study, noting a body mass index of 30 or above. In addition, the opinion did not consider aggravation as a component of secondary service connection. 

The evidence of record does not contain a probative medical nexus opinion that considers secondary service connection based on the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal conditions, with obesity as an intermediate step. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion supported by a complete, sound, and well-reasoned rationale constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring remand under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from a qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed OSA. The claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available and reviewed by the examiner. An in-person examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the clinician.

After a review of the claims file, the examiner should address the following: 

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA was caused by or aggravated by his service-connected right knee condition, right thigh condition, lumbosacral strain, left shoulder strain, and/or right hip strain?

In providing the opinion, the examiner must address whether the Veteran's obesity was an intermediate step between his service-connected right knee condition, right thigh condition, lumbosacral strain, left shoulder strain, and right hip strain and his current OSA.

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred or worsened but for the obesity caused by or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

Please note, causation and aggravation are separate concepts and must be addressed independently.

"Aggravation" covers situations where: 1) there is worsening directly due to a service-connected disability; and/or 2) the claimed disability would have been less severe but for the service-connected disability because the service-connected disability results in the inability to treat the claimed disability.

The clinician should consider the Veteran's contention that his OSA condition is secondary to weight gain due to decreased activity caused by his service-connected right knee condition, right thigh condition, lumbosacral strain, left shoulder strain, and right hip strain.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Klu, E. S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.