Citation Nr: A25033612
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231020-488431
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the grant of service connection for residuals of bladder cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1967 to January 1971.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in October 2023 and elected to have a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge.  He had also filed May 2023 and August 2023 supplemental claims as to the effective date assigned for the grant of service connection in the April 2023 rating decision; however, there is no concurrent election issue because the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) notified the Veteran that it did not accept those submissions for adjudication, and the Veteran then opted to file the Board appeal instead.  The Board ultimately accepted and docketed the Veteran's appeal.  See AOJ letters from June 2023 and September 2023; November 2024 docketing letter.  The Board has considered the Veteran's associated written statements as argument in connection with the appeal.

Because of the hearing docket selection, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 AOJ decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision and prior to the Board hearing or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38?C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  However, the AOJ will be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider because the case is being remanded. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

A hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in February 2025, and a hearing transcript is of record.  It was confirmed on the record that the Veteran waived the subsequent 90-day evidence submission period.

On review, the Board finds that additional development is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Veteran claimed that his bladder cancer was due to herbicide agent exposure while stationed in Thailand as a Morse code intercept operator at a U.S. Army installation in Udorn (first duty station) and Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base (RTAFB) (second duty station).  For the first duty station, he has asserted that he had such exposure because he was required to perform perimeter guard duty for two weeks when he first arrived and then after that time when there were alerts.  For the second duty station, he has contended that he had such exposure because his workstation was near the end of the runway that was located near the perimeter of the base and because he lived off base and traveled across the perimeter daily to arrive at and leave from his workstation.  See, e.g., written statements from April 2013 (with photographs, for a separate claim), February 2021, March 2021 (buddy statement), August 2022, and May 2023; February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr.

The current law provides that a veteran who performed covered service shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide agent, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service.  "Covered service" includes active military, naval, air, or space service performed in Thailand at any United States or Royal Thai base during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on June 30, 1976, without regard to where on the base the veteran was located or what military job specialty the veteran performed.  In such circumstances, service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for certain diseases, including bladder cancer.  38 U.S.C. § 1116 (as amended by the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) that expanded presumption of herbicide agent exposure to additional locations and Section 9109 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 2021 that added bladder cancer to the list of diseases presumptively associated with herbicide agent exposure).

Prior to that time, VA determined that there was significant use of herbicides on the fenced-in perimeters of military bases in Thailand intended to eliminate vegetation and ground cover for base security purposes and that there were some small U.S. Army installations established in Thailand during the same time period that may also have used perimeter herbicides in the same manner.  In addition, VA determined that there was some evidence that the herbicides used may have been either tactical, procured from Vietnam, or a commercial variant of much greater strength and with characteristics of tactical herbicides.  See Department of Defense declassified Vietnam era document "Project CHECO Southeast Asia Report: Base Defense in Thailand" and Parseeya-Picchione v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 171 (2016) (citing VA publication containing relevant provisions for Thailand service).  Thus, VA extended special consideration of herbicide agent exposure on a facts-found or direct basis to veterans whose duties placed them on or near the perimeters of certain Thailand military bases during the Vietnam era, including Ubon RTAFB.  A veteran must have served as a security policeman, a security patrol dog handler, a member of a security police squadron, or otherwise served near the air base perimeter, as shown by evidence of daily work duties, performance evaluation reports, or other credible evidence.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.2.

VA also extended special consideration of herbicide agent exposure on a facts-found or direct basis to veterans whose duties placed them on or near the perimeters of such U.S. Army installations during the Vietnam era.  A veteran must have been a member of a military police unit or assigned a military police military occupational specialty and state that his duties placed him at or near the base perimeter.  Although the PACT Act expanded the presumption of herbicide agent exposure for veterans serving in Thailand, the law did not affect the ability of a claimant to establish such exposure on a direct/facts-found basis.

In the April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for residuals of bladder cancer based on the Veteran's August 25, 2022, supplemental claim, assigning an effective date of August 10, 2022, based on the enactment date of the PACT Act, along with application of the earlier established presumptive disease provision (effective January 1, 2021).  See also 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) and 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.114, 3.400; Gozlon-Peretz v. United States, 498 U.S. 395, 404 (1991) ("It is well established that, absent a clear direction by Congress to the contrary, a law takes effect on the date of its enactment.").  Nevertheless, the Veteran filed an initial claim for the benefit in February 2021 alleging herbicide agent exposure on a direct/facts-found basis.  He continuously pursued the claim following the initial denial in a November 2021 rating decision through the filing of the August 2022 supplemental claim and now challenges the nature of the grant of service connection as part of the earlier effective date appeal.  He is seeking an earliest effective date based on the February 2021 claim.  See, e.g., May 2023 written statement; February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr.

The Veteran's service personnel records show that he served in Thailand as a Morse code intercept operator, first with Headquarters, 7th Radio Research Field Station (RR FLDSTA or RRFS) from May 1969 to May 1970 and then as attached to the 83rd Radio Research Special Operations Unit (RRSOU)/Detachment J with the duty station listed as Ubon from May 1970 to January 1971.  His service treatment records also show his locations as the 7th RRFS and Ubon RTAFB during those time periods.

The AOJ attempted to verify the claimed exposure for a portion of the initial assignment to the 7th RRFS through a research request to the VA Military Records Research Center (MRRC), but the September 2021 response shows that it was unable to research the request because the circumstances of exposure were not provided.  See also July 2012 3101 response (request for any documents showing exposure to herbicides for a separate claim with negative response).  It does not appear that a new request was submitted to update the initial request or to cover the Veteran's complete contentions as to his claimed exposure.  Thus, based on the foregoing and on review of the development to date, additional development was needed to afford the Veteran all due consideration as to his claimed herbicide exposure, as detailed in the directives below.

The case is REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  The AOJ should secure the Veteran's complete service personnel records and associate them with the claims file.  The prior request does not appear to be for the complete service personnel records. See July 2012 VA Form 21-3101 printout.

All attempts and responses should be documented in the claims file.

2.  After completing the above development, the AOJ should take any appropriate steps to attempt to verify the Veteran's claimed herbicide agent exposure in determining whether he had such exposure on a direct/facts-found basis (i.e., pre-PACT Act basis) for purposes of this earlier effective date appeal.  This development may include another referral to the VA MRRC.

The Veteran's contentions as to his herbicide agent exposure while stationed in Thailand as a Morse code intercept operator from 1969 to 1971 at his two duty stations; the continuous pursuit of his initial claim since February 2021; and earlier development are detailed in the remand basis discussed above.  

All attempts and responses should be documented in the claims file.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.