Citation Nr: A25033694
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-472941
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1970 to December 1971.  He appeals an October 2023 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for OSA.  He opted for direct review of the evidence by this Board.

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is related to his service-connected trauma disorder.  In May 2021, VA obtained an opinion from a VA examiner, who stated that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not related to his psychiatric symptoms.  In providing this opinion, the examiner stated simply that "trauma and stressor related disorders are not an established primary etiology of sleep apnea in the medical literature."  

However, in May 2022, the Veteran submitted a 2014 article from the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine which appears to directly contradict the VA examiner's rationale.  Unfortunately, a medical opinion assessing the relevance of this evidence was not obtained prior to issuance of the October 2023 rating decision on appeal.  As this amounts to a predecisional duty to assist error, the Board finds remand is necessary to obtain the requisite medical opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action: 

1. Obtain a supplemental medical opinion assessing the relationship between the Veteran's specified trauma and stressor related disorder and his sleep apnea. 

The examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea proximately due to OR worsened by his specified trauma and stressor related disorder.  In doing so, the examiner is specifically asked to the article from submitted by the Veteran in May 2022 from the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine when rendering the requested opinion.

A new examination is not necessary unless deemed so by the RO or the examiner. 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ballinger, Daniel