Citation Nr: A25033384
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-471054
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the probative, competent, and persuasive evidence of record shows that it is as likely as not that the Veteran has continuously had symptoms of tinnitus during and since service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1992 to January 1994.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In March 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of an October 2022 rating decision which denied entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

In June 2023, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined there had been a duty to assist error and that additional development pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act was required.  Pub. L. No. 117-168, § 405, 136 Stat. 1759.  In November 2023, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

In September 2024, the Veteran requested direct review of the appeal by the Board on VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).

As the current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket by a Veterans Law Judge, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based upon the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the previous RO decision on the issue on appeal, only evidence of record on the date of the November 2023 rating decision will be considered.  VA will not seek additional evidence on behalf of the Veteran as part of the review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran contends that currently diagnosed tinnitus is the result of noise exposure during active service.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he was exposed to acoustic noise trauma while working in the boiler room of a ship.  The Veteran contends that the boiler room was very loud and, after leaving the boiler room, it took several hours for his hearing to return to adequate levels of understanding.  The Veteran states that as a result of noise exposure, he began experiencing ringing and high-pitched noises in his ears, which has continued since active service.

A November 2023 rating decision found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with tinnitus. The rating decision also found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service in that the Veteran's service occupational specialty of interior communications electrician exposed him to hazardous noise.  The Board is bound by those favorable findings.

Generally, to prevail on a claim of service connection on the merits, there must be competent evidence of (1) current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) medical evidence or other competent evidence of a relationship between the disease or injury in service and a present disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

Service connection will be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § §1110.  With chronic disease shown as such in service so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  Tinnitus, as an organic disease of the nervous system, is among the chronic diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), and the Board finds that continuity of symptomatology may establish relationship to service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

Medical evidence is required to demonstrate a relationship between a current disability and the continuity of symptomatology demonstrated if the condition is not one where a lay person's observations would be competent.  Clyburn v. West, 12 Vet. App. 296 (1999).  Whether lay evidence is competent and sufficient in a particular case is an issue of fact and lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, sometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example, a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Lay evidence presented by a Veteran concerning continuity of symptoms after service may generally be considered credible and ultimately competent, regardless of a lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (2006).  The Board has the authority to discount the weight and probity of evidence in light of its own inherent characteristics and its relationship to other evidence.  Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  VA may favor one medical opinion over another, provided an adequate basis is provided.  Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429 (1995).

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

The Board finds that the Veteran, as a lay person, is both credible and competent to provide evidence of the existence of the medical condition of tinnitus, as it comes to him through his senses of ringing and high-pitch noises in the ears, and the fact that it has been continuous since active service.  Specifically, the Board finds that tinnitus, which manifests as ringing in the ears, is not the type of medical condition which requires specialized medical knowledge or training to assess.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  A lay person, such as the Veteran, may competently state that he perceives ringing in the ears.  The Veteran may also competently state when that condition started and if it has continued to the present.  

A review of the competent evidence of record shows the Veteran has credibly reported symptoms of tinnitus continuously since service.  Therefore, the Board finds that tinnitus can be service-connected based on a credibly reported continuity of symptomatology of a chronic disease.  The Veteran has consistently asserted that he began experiencing ringing in the ears during service as a result of loud noise conditions while in service.  VA has already conceded hazardous noise exposure for this Veteran in light of his service occupational specialty.

The Board also finds the Veteran's lay statements regarding the continuity of tinnitus symptoms to be credible.  The Board notes that the Veteran has consistently noted that the ringing in the ears began during service and that those symptoms have continued to the present.  Private treatment records showed that the Veteran reported and sought treatment for tinnitus in June 2011, April 2012, and November 2014.  Additionally, the Veteran reported experiencing high-pitched ringing in the ears since service on a June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits and during a July 2022 VA examination.  The Board finds the Veteran credible with regard to the assertions of continuity of tinnitus symptomatology since service.

The Board acknowledges that there may be medical evidence of record contrary to the Board's findings and that the Veteran's service treatment records do not reflect complaints of tinnitus during service.  A July 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) related to active service because there was no evidence of a significant permanent shift in the Veteran's hearing thresholds during active service and no reports of tinnitus were made during service.  Notably, while there were no reports of tinnitus, ringing in the ears, or ear problems in service, the Veteran's service record indicated that the Veteran was placed in a hearing conservation program in May 1997.  

The Board assigns substantial probative weight to the Veteran's lay statements of record because the Veteran, as a layperson, may competently state that he perceives ringing in his ears and when that condition began.  The Board finds that the evidence is in approximate balance as the favorable and unfavorable evidence has nearly equal evidentiary weight.

Accordingly, based on the evidence and arguments presented, the Board finds that the Veteran's tinnitus was as likely as not present during service and has a continuity of symptomatology since service.  As the Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements have competently and credibly established continuity of symptomatology, and resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the claim for service connection for tinnitus is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marissa R. Harper, Associate Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.