Citation Nr: A25033974
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 220316-334147
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to payment for remodeling the entrance to the home, including under the Home Improvement Structural Alterations (HISA) program, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1717, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 1966 to June 1968.  See DD 214. 

This matter comes for the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2021 administrative decision of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). 

In the March 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on February 6, 2025.  A transcript is of record.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a HISA Grant is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is eligible for a HISA grant to have his driveway lowered.  See February 2025 Board Hearing Transcript, pg. 4.  The Veteran's representative indicated that the initial application for a permanent ramp to the entrance of the home was initially denied in December 2021.  See id. at pg. 6. 

The Veteran testified before the undersigned that his driveway grade was too steep, and that he needed to modify the entrance to his home.  See id. at pgs. 3-4, 7.   The Veteran submitted photos of the entrance to his one-story home, which show one step at the front door to gain entry and an incline from a sidewalk to the middle of a carport in front of the home's entrance.  See Photos, received on February 6, 2025.  These photos appear similar to photos in the VHA claim file.  The Veteran testified that he had a contractor remove the concrete and dirt out of his driveway, to, "lower my driveway a foot," after which, "I was able to walk up that ramp without [a] problem to get into my home."  Id. at pg. 7. 

For the reasons stated below, the Board finds that remand is warranted to associate the original HISA application with the claim file, and to provide adequate notice of the decision under 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b).

A Veteran may seek HISA through the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), which provides for structural improvements and alterations to a veteran's residence such as those needed to allow entrance to or exit from the residence, use of essential lavatory and sanitary facilities, accessibility to kitchen or bathroom sinks or counters, improving entrance paths or driveways in immediate area of the home to facilitate access to the home through construction of permanent ramping, improving plumbing or electrical systems made necessary due to installation of home medical equipment, and other modifications specified under the regulation.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1710(a), 1717(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 17.3100.

The HISA program provides eligible beneficiaries monetary benefits for improvements and structural alterations to their homes when such improvements and structural alterations: (1) Are necessary for the continuation of the provision of home health treatment of the beneficiary's disability; or (2) Provide the beneficiary with access to the home or to essential lavatory and sanitary facilities.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1717(a), 1710(a); 38 C.F.R. § 17.3000.  Eligible Veterans include those requesting HISA benefits to address any disability if the Veteran has a service-connected disability rating of 50 percent or greater.  38 U.S.C. § 1710(a); 38 C.F.R. § 17.3102.   

For purposes of the governing regulations, "HISA benefits" mean a monetary payment by VA to be used for improvements and structural alterations to the home of a beneficiary in accordance with §§ 17.3100 through 17.3130.  "Home" means the primary place where the beneficiary resides or, in the case of a service member, where the beneficiary intends to reside after discharge from service. "Improvement or structural alteration" means a modification to a home or to an existing feature or fixture of a home, including repairs to or replacement of previously improved or altered features or fixtures.  38 C.F.R. § 17.3101.  Additionally, 38 C.F.R. § 17.3120 specifically explains requirements to complete HISA benefits application.

Application

In this case, the Veteran is service connected for coronary artery disease status post myocardial infarction at 60 percent disabling, diabetes mellitus (DM) at 20 percent disabling, peripheral neuropathy or the bilateral upper extremities each at 20 percent disabling, peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity at 10 percent disabling, scar at 0 precent disabling, for a combined rating of 90 percent rating, , individual unemployability from October 5, 2015, and Special Monthly Compensation (SMC) for loss of use of a creative organ.  See January 2016 Rating Decision Code Sheet, pgs. 1-2.  Therefore, the Board finds that he meets the basic eligibility criterion to apply for these benefits.

October 2021 VA Treatment Records (CAPRI) from cardiology indicate that the Veteran reported that he was feeling better, denied chest pain or pressure, dyspnea, orthopnea, palpitations, edema, dizziness, lightheadedness, and syncope.  See VHA File, received on November 19, 2024, pg. 21. 

The existing documentation of record tends to indicate that the Veteran applied for a grant from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) HISA Program to help pay the cost of altering the entrance to his home.  However, it is unclear whether he had originally applied for a ramp, or the lowering of his driveway, or both.

The VHA file indicates that it was unclear as to the scope and the extent of the work which the Veteran had requested.  See VHA File, pg. 43.  The file indicates that there is no indication of the use of a walker or wheelchair of record.  See id.  The prosthetics department sought to clarify the extent of the work requested noting the Veteran's report as follows: 

He has a steep driveway and he wants to change that driveway pattern so he does not have walk up it.  The entrance to the house is at the top of the driveway.  I do not know the construction specifics on what would need to be done to flatten a driveway.  He got a construction estimate and has what that person suggested but perhaps someone from your department can look at his pictures, previous estimate and the OT assessment which is pending.

Id. at pg. 43.

An occupational therapy (OT) assessment was completed in August 2021, which noted that Veteran's report that due to his conditions, he reported progressive issues with balance, disturbance, and dyspnea, for which he was seeking a HISA to flatten the driveway to street level and build steps to his home entrance, with estimates of $10,000.00 and one for $12,000.00. The occupational therapist indicated that a review revealed that the request to flatten the driveway was denied after a thorough review because it was considered to be a home maintenance issue, which does not meet HISA grant criteria.  See id. at pg. 41.  Subsequently, the Veteran's claim was re-evaluated by the prosthetics program.

The AOJ reviewed his claim to have the Veteran's driveway flattened and steps built.  In August 2021, the AOJ denied his claim because, "it was the consensus of the [HISA] Committee that the HISA Benefit criterion was not met."  Id. at pg. 49 (containing Bay Pines VA Healthcare System HISA decision dated August 2021).  At that time, the Veteran was informed that he could seek Higher Level Review (HLR) of the decision.  See id. at pg. 50.  In September 2021, the Veteran indicated that he was seeking HLR because of his unusually steep driveway, which made it difficult to get in and out of his home.  See id. at pg. 47.  The Veteran submitted photos for review, along with statements provided for the occupational assessment. The Veteran was notified that a team of clinical experts would review his claim.  See id. at pg. 12 (containing November 2021 Correspondence).

His claim was denied in December 2021 because, "it is deemed that a new evaluation of the potential modification to assess for permanent ramp access rather than stairs.  We feel that your request to find alternate access into your home meets the scope of HISA, according to your providers you already have documented difficulty with stairs."  December 2021 Decision.  

Here, the Board finds that the AOJ appears to concede that at least a portion of his request was within the scope of a HISA claim but does not provide an adequate explanation as to why the claim was denied.  

A claimant is entitled to receive notice of a decision by the Secretary, which must include particular information, as required by statute.  38 U.S.C. § 5104.  Notice under 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b) must generally include the following: (1) identification of the issues adjudicated; (2) a summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary; (3) a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; (4) identification of findings favorable to the claimant; (5) in the case of a denial, identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial; and (6) an explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in making the decision.

The December 2021 decision determined that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for a driveway alteration and steps.  However, it did not clearly explain the basis for this determination, without specific indications of which criteria were unmet.  Also, the letter notifying the Veteran of the decision did not include a summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; or identification of findings favorable to the claimant, as required by 38 U.S.C. § 5104.

Without adequate notice of the basis for the denial, a claimant cannot know what evidence they need to submit, or develop, to substantiate their appeal.  See Ingram v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 232, 252 (2007) (discussing the legislative history of 38 U.S.C. § 5104 and the importance of clear and informative notice of decisions). Moreover, the Board cannot meaningfully review the AOJ's determination.  

Additionally, the Board notes that it appears that the claim file does not contain the original HISA application (i.e., VA Form 10-103).  For this reason, it is unclear whether the Veteran had filed any prior or subsequent applications for Special Adaptation of the Home, or Special Home Adaptation, in conjunction with this claim.  As this matter is being remanded, the AOJ may undertake any required development, or clarification, regarding his claim for home modification.

Finally, the Board is mindful that the evidence in this case suggests that the Veteran undertook work to modify his home prior to receiving approval from the VA for a HISA grant.  Provisions in VHA Directive 1173.14(1) (amended June 24, 2024) provide that "HISA claims without pre-approval are only approved for reimbursement when: the beneficiary meets both the eligibility and medical criteria for the modifications during the period of the improvement and structural alterations as if the HISA claim was already approved; and either the claim was submitted within 30 days of the date that the HISA project was completed, or documentation indicates a prescription/consult or HISA request made on behalf of the beneficiary was warranted and required as if the HISA claim was already approved." In light of that provision, the AOJ must take into consideration factors that would meet this criteria in a reimbursement footing given that the modification has already been completed.

This is a pre-decisional duty to notify error and failure to satisfy a statutory duty under 38 U.S.C. § 5104.  Similarly, not including all pertinent evidence in the claims file for review (e.g., any HISA application filed on VA FORM 10-0103) also constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.

On remand, the AOJ must associate with the claim file all pertinent evidence, including any HISA program applications filed by the Veteran, to include if filed on VA Form 10-0103.  After associating all the pertinent evidence with the file, the VAMC should provide the Veteran with complete notice of its decision as required by 38 U.S.C. § 5104, including identification of whether or not the claim meets HISA program criteria under 38 U.S.C. § 1717 and 38 C.F.R. §§ 17.3100-17.3130.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Associate with the claims file all evidence pertinent to the Veteran's appeal, including any initial HISA application filed on VA Form 10-0103.

2. After associating all the pertinent evidence with the claims file and conducting an appropriate review of all pertinent evidence of record, the VAMC should issue the Veteran and his representative a decision and notice of decision on the issue of entitlement to driveway flattening, or modification to the entrance by the use of steps, including under the HISA program, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1717, as required by 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b).

3. The notice should include a summary of all the pertinent evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and identification of any elements not satisfied but necessary for establishing entitlement to modification to his driveway, and or entrance to his home under the HISA program, pursuant to the criteria set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 1717 and 38 C.F.R. §§ 17.3100-17.3130.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

4. The VAMC should ensure that the Veteran is notified of options to file a Supplemental Claim, seek Higher-Level Review, or appeal the AOJ's decision to the Board via submission of another VA Form 10182.

 

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McKenzie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.