Citation Nr: A25033008
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-440263
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder tendonitis, claimed as left shoulder condition, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain, claimed as lumbar spine condition, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle strain, claimed as right ankle injury, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain, claimed as right knee condition, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's left shoulder tendonitis was incurred in-service and continues to the present.

2. The competent evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was incurred in-service and continues to the present. 

3. The competent evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's right ankle strain was incurred in-service and continues to the present.   

4. The competent evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's right knee strain was incurred in-service and continues to the present.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for left shoulder tendonitis, claimed as left shoulder condition, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain, claimed as lumbar spine condition, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for right ankle strain, claimed as right ankle injury, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for right knee strain, claimed as right knee condition, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1976 to December 1986.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the July 2023 rating decision references a June 22, 2023 request for a higher-level review.  The Board finds that there is no request for a higher-level review which corresponds with that date.  Rather, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application on June 22, 2023, along with medical evidence.  The July 2023 VA rating decision was issued in response to the Veteran's supplemental claim application.   

Service connection.

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995), aff'd per curiam, 78 F. 3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (table); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. 

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after the military discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to the period of military service, establishes that the disease was incurred during the active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1113 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the Veteran.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder tendonitis is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for left shoulder tendonitis.  After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, and considering all relevant laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is warranted. 

Initially, the March 2023 rating decision concedes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with left shoulder tendonitis and that the Veteran's left shoulder condition had its onset in-service.  Therefore, the first two elements of service connection have been satisfied. 

Turning to the question of whether there is a nexus, or link, between the Veteran's current left shoulder tendonitis and his military service, the Veteran has submitted a November 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim on which the Veteran indicated that he initially injured his shoulder in-service while participating in physical training.  Further, the Veteran averred that he was treated for his shoulder in-service and his shoulder pain has persisted from the time of his initial in-service injury to the present.  A March 1986 service treatment record documents that the Veteran was treated for his back, neck, and shoulders.

The Board finds the Veteran's statement credible.  A veteran is competent to report on the severity of his symptoms, the onset of his disability, and the chronicity of his symptoms.  A veteran is competent to report of that of which he has personal knowledge.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2023.  The examiner provided a diagnosis of left shoulder tendonitis and acknowledged that the Veteran initially injured his left shoulder in-service.  The examiner ultimately concluded that it was less likely than not the Veteran's left shoulder tendonitis was caused by the claimed in-service event.  The examiner stated that there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of left shoulder tendonitis and military service.  The examiner added that without chronicity during or after service, a post-service event is a more likely etiology.  In as much as this report is not well reasoned, does not consider the Veteran's November 2022 statement, and considering the fact that there is no evidence of any type of post-service event or injury, the Board affords this report little probative weight.  

When the conflicting medical opinions are weighed against one another, the evidence is at least equally balanced on this issue.  As such, the Board finds the evidence is at least equally balanced as to whether the Veteran's left shoulder tendonitis is causally related to his active duty military service.  Accordingly, resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for left shoulder tendonitis is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for lumbosacral strain.  After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, and considering all relevant laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is warranted. 

Initially, the March 2023 rating decision concedes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a lumbosacral strain and that the Veteran's low back condition had its onset in-service.  Therefore, the first two elements of service connection have been satisfied.  The remaining issued to be decided is whether there is a causal relationship between the Veteran's current lumbosacral strain and his in-service occurrence. 

Turning to the question of whether there is a nexus, or link, between the Veteran's current lumbosacral strain and his military service, the Veteran has submitted a November 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim on which the Veteran indicated that he initially injured his low back in-service.  Further, the Veteran averred that he was treated for his low back in-service and his back pain has persisted from the time of his initial in-service injury to the present.  The Veteran indicated that since his initial in-service injury, he has treated his back condition with Tylenol, ibuprofen, and topical creams.  The Veteran also stated he uses a back brace when his pain is at its worst.  A March 1986 service treatment record documents that the Veteran was treated for his back, neck, and shoulders.

The Board finds the Veteran's statement credible.  A veteran is competent to report on the severity of his symptoms, the onset of his disability, and the chronicity of his symptoms.  A veteran is competent to report of that of which he has personal knowledge.  Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469.    

The Veteran attended a VA examination in March 2023.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a lumbosacral strain and acknowledged that the Veteran initially injured his low back in-service.  The examiner ultimately concluded that it was less likely than not the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was caused by the claimed in-service event.  The examiner stated that there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of lumbosacral strain and military service.  The examiner added that without chronicity during or after service, a post-service event is a more likely etiology.  In as much as this report is not well reasoned, does not consider the Veteran's November 2022 statement, and considering the fact that there is no evidence of any type of post-service event or injury, the Board affords this report little probative weight.   

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a June 2023 private medical report.  The Physician took a history that the Veteran's low back pain developed in-service from overuse.  The physician further indicated that the Veteran's low back pain has continually progressed since his time in-service.  The physician indicated that the VA has diagnosed the Veteran as suffering from a lumbosacral strain.  Considering the Veteran's history and his service treatment records, the physician concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current lumbosacral strain is a continuation of the low back injury the Veteran sustained in-service.   

When the conflicting medical opinions are weighed against one another, the evidence is at least equally balanced on this issue.  As such, the Board finds the evidence is at least equally balanced as to whether the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is causally related to his active duty military service.  Accordingly, resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for lumbosacral strain is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for right ankle strain.  After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, and considering all relevant laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is warranted. 

Initially, the March 2023 rating decision concedes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a right ankle strain and an October 1985 service treatment record documents that the Veteran injured his right ankle playing football.  Therefore, the first two elements of service connection have been satisfied.  The remaining issued to be decided is whether there is a causal relationship between the Veteran's current right ankle strain and his in-service occurrence. 

Turning to the question of whether there is a nexus, or link, between the Veteran's current right ankle strain and his in-service incident, the Veteran has submitted a November 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim on which the Veteran indicated that he initially injured his right ankle in-service.  Further, the Veteran averred that he was treated for his right ankle in-service and his ankle pain has persisted from the time of his initial in-service injury to the present.  The Veteran indicated that since his initial injury, he has suffered from pain, swelling, and limited motion in his right ankle.  The Veteran stated that he treats his ankle with Epsom salt soaks and over the counter medications. The Veteran also stated he uses a compression sock brace when his pain is at its worst. 

The Board finds the Veteran's statement credible.  A Veteran is competent to report on the severity of his symptoms, the onset of his disability, and the chronicity of his symptoms.  A Veteran is competent to report of that of which he has personal knowledge.  Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469.    

The Veteran attended a VA examination in March 2023.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a right ankle strain.   The examiner ultimately concluded that it was less likely than not the Veteran's right ankle strain was caused by the claimed in-service event.  The examiner stated that there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of right ankle strain and military service.  The examiner added that without chronicity during or after service, a post-service event is a more likely etiology.  In as much as this report is not well reasoned, does not consider the Veteran's November 2022 statement, and considering the fact that there is no evidence of any type of post-service event or injury, the Board affords this report little probative weight. 

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a June 2023 private medical report.  The private physician took a history of the Veteran sustaining a right ankle injury in-service.  The physician indicated that the VA has diagnosed the Veteran with a right ankle strain.  The examiner took a history that the Veteran has continuously experienced pain in his right ankle since his initial in-service injury.  Considering the Veteran's in-service injury and his report of pain and discomfort which have persisted since his original injury, the physician concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right ankle strain is a continuation of his initial in-service injury.

When the conflicting medical opinions are weighed against one another, the evidence is at least equally balanced on this issue.  As such, the Board finds the evidence is at least equally balanced as to whether the Veteran's right ankle strain is causally related to his active duty military service.  Accordingly, resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for right ankle strain is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for right knee strain.  After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, and considering all relevant laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is warranted. 

Initially, the July 2023 rating decision concedes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a right knee condition and a December 1983 service treatment record documents that the Veteran was treated for his bilateral lower extremities.  Therefore, the first two elements of service connection have been satisfied.  The remaining issued to be decided is whether there is a causal relationship between the Veteran's current right knee condition and his in-service occurrence. 

Turning to the question of whether there is a nexus, or link, between the Veteran's current right knee condition and his in-service incident, the Veteran has submitted a November 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim on which the Veteran indicated that he initially injured his right knee in-service.  Further, the Veteran averred that he was treated for his right knee in-service and his knee pain has persisted from the time of his initial in-service injury to the present.  The Veteran indicated that since his initial injury, the Veteran has suffered from pain, swelling, and limited motion in his right knee.  The Veteran stated that he treats his knee with over-the-counter medications. The Veteran also stated he uses a knee brace and a cane when his pain is at its worst. 

The Board finds the Veteran's statement credible.  A veteran is competent to report on the severity of his symptoms, the onset of his disability, and the chronicity of his symptoms.  A Veteran is competent to report of that of which he has personal knowledge.  Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469.    

The Veteran submitted a June 2023 private medical report in support of his claim.  The private physician diagnosed the Veteran as suffering from a right knee strain.  The physician took a history that the Veteran's right knee condition developed in-service and has continued to the present.  The physician indicated that the Veteran's symptoms persist to this day.  Considering the in-service onset and the Veteran's report of continuous pain since the onset, the physician opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right knee strain is a continuation of his initial right knee injury which occurred in-service.

In the case at hand, the VA opted not to obtain a medical examination on this issue.

Given the June 2023 private medical report, the Veteran's credible statement as to the onset and chronicity of his symptoms, the lack of a credible medical report opining against service connection, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for the Veteran's right knee strain is warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Litts, Norman W. Jr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.