Citation Nr: A25033665
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-423870
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating for compensation based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment as a result of service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU rating have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served active duty in the Air Force from March 1970 to February 1974.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision from the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) that denied entitlement to TDIU. The Veteran appealed the January 2024 rating decision through the submission of a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, selecting the Direct Review docket.

Under the Direct Review docket of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Total disability will be considered to exist where there is present an impairment of mind and body that is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.340. Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation because of service-connected disabilities, provided that the Veteran meets the schedular requirements. Specifically, if there is only one such disability, the disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more; if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability that is ratable at 40 percent or more and enough additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

The Veteran is currently service connected for: major depressive disorder with a 70 percent disability rating from October 4, 2021; asthma with a 60 percent disability rating from July 31, 2013; bilateral shoulder osteoporosis with a 20 percent disability rating on each side from November 18, 2014; and erectile dysfunction with a noncompensable disability rating from September 26, 2023. Thus, the Veteran's combined (total) disability rating has been 80 percent from November 18, 2014, and 90 percent from October 4, 2021. As such, the Veteran has met the schedular criteria during the period on appeal.

"Substantially gainful employment" is that employment "which is ordinarily followed by the nondisabled to earn their livelihood with earnings common to the particular occupation in the community where the veteran resides." Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356, 358 (1991). "Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment." 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. 

In reaching a determination of entitlement to a TDIU rating, it is necessary that the record reflect some factor that takes the Veteran's case outside the norm with respect to a similar level of disability under the rating schedule. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.15. The fact that a claimant is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough. A high disability rating in itself is recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain or keep employment. The question is whether or not the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he or she can find employment. Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. at 363.

In determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims in Ray v. Wilkie directed the Board to consider the following factors: (1) the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; (2) whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and (3) whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue. 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). In determining whether unemployability exists, consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his or her age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

The responsibility for making the ultimate TDIU determination is placed on the adjudicator and not a medical examiner. See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013). A medical examiner's role is limited to describing the effects of disability upon the person's ordinary activity. See Floore v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 376, 381 (2013). 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran sought to have his wife certified as a caregiver during the period on appeal. While this was not granted, these records reflect the Veteran to report that he requires the help of a caregiver at times. The Board notes that these needs are based, in part, on symptoms for which the Veteran is not service connected, such as pain in the Veteran's back and stomach. The Board may consider only service-connected disabilities when considering the Veteran's TDIU claim. Therefore, while such records have been contemplated within the totality of the evidence, they bare minimal relation to the Veteran's TDIU claim.

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran was precluded from securing and following substantially gainful employment due to service-connected disabilities. The reasons follow.

Initially, the Board recognizes that the Veteran's claims are subject to a level of subjectivity, dependent on an accurate reporting of facts and relevant symptomology. To that end, it is important that the Veteran's lay statements are accurate and credible. However, the record demonstrates significant contradictions in the Veteran's reporting of relevant facts over time, which has damaged his overall credibility, particularly relating to his work history and the reasons that he stopped working. For example, the Veteran's assertions as to his 2015 work cessation, when the Veteran was last documented to have worked, have changed. In December 2015, the Veteran submitted an initial VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. The Veteran reported that he had stopped working two weeks earlier in December 2015, the same date that he reported that he became too disabled to work, after more than a decade of working full time as a Machine Tech for Campbell's Soup. The Veteran wrote that he "had to stop working at Campbell Soup because of my service connected asthma."

However, on a subsequent VA Form 21-8940, submitted in July 2022, the Veteran reported that he last worked full time in November 2007, the same date that he became too disabled to work. The record is replete with evidence that the Veteran continued working full time for many years after 2007 and, additionally, that asthma was not the cause of the Veteran's 2015 work cessation. The record also contains other evidence of the Veteran's inconsistent statements as to why he stopped working. Notably, VA treatment records in June 2017 note that the Veteran reported that he was fired from his job for smoking marijuana about two years ago and that he has not been employed since. On a July 2023 private evaluation, the Veteran reported that he was fired from his last job. While such evidence refutes the Veteran's prior claim that he was forced to stop working due to his asthma, the record does not support that the Veteran stopped working due to either asthma or marijuana use. 

Rather, contemporaneous records support that the Veteran simply retired as planned at the age of 65. An October 2013 VA treatment records documents that the Veteran "enjoys his workplace" and that he had been employed at Campbell's for 15 years. Recurrent VA treatment records from 2015 specifically reflect the Veteran's intention to retire that year. A May 2015 VA treatment record stated that the Veteran is "planning on retiring this year." An August 2015 record states that the Veteran "planned to retire" and is "exploring options to keep himself busy." On several subsequent treatment records, including VA examination reports, the Veteran characterized his work cessation as a retirement. During private treatment in November 2018, the Veteran reported "he had last worked two years ago and had retired" following 18 years of employment at Campbell's. At a January 2019 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had worked as a machine operator for 15 years until he retired in 2016. On VA examination in December 2021, the Veteran reported that he had been retired for about five years.  

The Board is aware that the reason one leaves a job does not have to be the same reason one cannot subsequently secure or follow substantially gainful employment. Here, however, the Veteran claimed it was service-connected disabilities that caused him to stop working in 2015, but that is not supported by contemporaneous records or the Veteran's subsequent reporting. In other words, the Veteran's claims that service-connected disabilities caused his 2015 work cessation are not credible. 

These inconsistencies are central to the Veteran's TDIU claim and significantly hinder the Veteran's credibility and the probative value of his lay statements, as well as the findings of examiners who make conclusions based on the Veteran's self-reporting. As such, corroborating evidence of the Veteran's functioning and the severity of his service-connected disabilities is of particular significance.

The Veteran claims that his service-connected psychiatric disorder renders him unable to sustain gainful employment and adversely impacts his motivation, sleep, concentration, memory, relationships, and ability to manage stress. Additionally, the Veteran has stated that his bilateral shoulder disability and asthma impact his ability to perform physically laborious work.

Following the Veteran's retirement, the record shows that he engaged in recurrent mental health counseling, both at VA and with a private provider, reporting a range of depressive and anxious symptoms. Mental status examinations generally showed the Veteran to be alert, fully oriented, cooperative, and appropriately groomed, with coherent thought content, goal-directed speech, no perceptual abnormalities, and no suicidal ideation. The Veteran reported that he was active in his church and enjoys doing yardwork. He characterized his past experience with individual and group therapy as good. The Veteran underwent an initial psychiatric assessment with private psychiatrist H. Jabbour, M.D., in November 2018 and continued with Dr. Jabbour for periodic counseling in the following years. However, the Board notes again that the Veteran was not service connected for his psychiatric disorder until October 2021. 

The Veteran underwent a VA psychological examination in December 2021. The Veteran was noted to experience depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, impaired judgment, disturbances in motivation and mood, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. The Veteran reported being married for 43 years and that his marriage has ups and downs. He reported that he is irritable and has a hard time socializing; however, he reported that he is active in his church and in ministries at the church. The Veteran was found to be alert, oriented, cooperative, and well-groomed, with goal-directed speech, clear thought process, fair insight and judgment, average intellectual abilities, and no suicidal ideation. The examiner found the Veteran's condition to result in occupational and social impairment with reduced productivity and reliability. 

The Veteran is shown to have seen Dr. Jabbour approximately twice annually for follow-up on depression and anxiety during the period on appeal, during which time he generally denied new problems, despite continued symptomology. The Veteran reported his marriage as good. The Veteran was not prescribed psychotropic medication and did not require urgent treatment for any exacerbations of symptomology. Mental status examinations continued to reflect the Veteran to be alert, fully oriented, cooperative, and appropriately groomed, with coherent thought content, goal-directed speech, no perceptual abnormalities, and no suicidal ideation.

In July 2023, Dr. Jabbour completed an examination in assessment of the Veteran's ability to sustain gainful employment. Dr. Jabbour noted the Veteran's report that he has been unemployed since 2019, which the Board notes is inconsistent with prior reporting as to the Veteran's work history, and that the Veteran "stopped working because of physical nad mental issues." Dr. Jabbour stated that, in his opinion with reasonable medical certainty, the Veteran is not capable of sustaining gainful employment. 

In support of this opinion, Dr. Jabbour noted the Veteran to have many symptoms that impair his ability to perform the minimum functions of gainful employment. Based on the Veteran's reporting, Dr. Jabbour stated that the Veteran's depressive and anxious symptoms prevent him from working with and communicating effectively with others; sustaining attention and concentration; and sustaining sufficient energy and motivation to complete a workday. Notably, Dr. Jabbour found the Veteran to have significant difficulty functioning around other people, or accepting supervision, with the Veteran reporting "I cannot tolerate people around me, and I was fired from my last job." 

The Board does not find Dr. Jabbour's opinion to be probative. The symptoms and associated occupational limitations described by Dr. Jabbour appear to be based on the Veteran's lay statements, which lay statements the Board has not found to be credible. Notably, this report reflects the Veteran's assertion that he was fired from his last job to support the opinion that the Veteran cannot sustain gainful employment and that he cannot socialize appropriately with others. The record supports that the Veteran held his last job for more than a decade, that he enjoyed his work environment, and that he retired in 2015. Thus, Dr. Jabbour's assessment is shown to be based on a false factual premise. The Veteran's report that he was fired from his last job on this evaluation is contradicted by Dr. Jabbour's prior treatment records that reflect the Veteran's report that he had retired from his last job. Dr. Jabbour does not reconcile these inconsistencies. The July 2023 report reflects the Veteran's reports of past social difficulties and substance abuse, stating that it has "always been hard for me to hold down a job." However, the record supports that the Veteran held one job, which he enjoyed, for over a decade prior to his retirement and immediately prior to that, maintained his previous job making glass doors for 15 to 16 years. Thus, the record establishes that the Veteran consistently sustained full-time gainful employment with only brief work cessations over a span of approximately 30 years, contrary to assertions contained in the July 2023 evaluation. 

Additionally, the severity of symptoms reported by the Veteran during the July 2023 evaluation are inconsistent with Dr. Jabbour's own treatment records over the course of several years, which show that, despite symptoms of irritability and social isolation, the Veteran routinely exhibited appropriate and cooperative behavior with the ability to communicate effectively, intact cognition, and a good marriage. The record generally reflects stable functioning during the period on appeal. Dr. Jabbour also makes no mention of evidence that refutes the severity of social dysfunction portrayed in the July 2023 evaluation, such as the Veteran's ongoing involvement in an outreach program within church and the local community. The record does not support contentions that the Veteran has been unable to tolerate other people, either during or prior to the relevant period. For these reasons, the Board does not find Dr. Jabbour's assessment to accurately reflect the Veteran's overall functioning, and affords it minimal probative value. 

The Veteran underwent another VA psychological examination in January 2024. The Veteran reported some marital difficulties. He reported having some friends and relationships with family members. He stated that he continued to be an active member of his church and that he was involved in an outreach program within his church and local community. He was noted to experience depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation or mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. The Veteran was alert, oriented, cooperative, and well-groomed, with goal-directed speech, clear thoughts, fair insight and judgment, and no suicidal ideation. The Veteran's condition was found to result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 

Regarding the Veteran's physical disabilities, the Veteran underwent a VA respiratory examination in January 2019, which indicated that shortness of breath limits his capacity for heavy physical work, especially over time. An x-ray of the Veteran's lungs showed no acute pulmonary process and pulmonary function testing revealed minimal obstructive lung disease. Despite the Veteran's condition, the Veteran has retained the capacity to smoke, which he has done for more than 50 years. Physical examination findings in 2023 continued to show the Veteran had non-labored respirations and that he continued to enjoy working in his yard. His condition is managed with the use of an inhaler, which he reported using approximately every other day with activity. In December 2023, he reported that he can walk at least 100 yards before needing a break.

The Veteran underwent a VA shoulder examination in August 2019, which found that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder condition results in pain and guarding with range of motion, which affects the Veteran's capacity for lifting/carrying heavy loads for prolonged periods. A December 2020 VA shoulders examination found that the Veteran's shoulders result in problems lifting and raising his arms above his shoulders.

As to the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, the record does not support, nor does the Veteran contend, that this condition inhibits his capacity to sustain substantially gainful employment. 

Regarding the Veteran's education, training, skills, and work history, the Veteran completed an associate's degree in business in 1978. Following service, the Veteran reported that he held several jobs as a salesman, worked in a clothing store as a manager for approximately five years, worked for a metal company making aluminum doors for approximately 15 years, and last worked for Campbell's for over a decade before retirement. The Veteran's work and educational history demonstrates a capacity for learning, training, and adaptation that are not significantly hindered by his service-connected disabilities based on the Veteran's intact cognitive and social functioning. These attributes would facilitate the Veteran's return to substantially gainful employment.

As to the Veteran's physical ability to perform substantially gainful employment, he experienced pain and reduced mobility in the shoulders due to his service-connected disabilities, with a decreased capacity for sustained exertional activity. However, the Veteran has maintained the capacity for self-care, community engagement, light yardwork, and walking at least 100 yards at a time before needing rest. The totality of the evidence shows that the Veteran is capable of performing work at least at the sedentary exertional level, which would not require prolonged exertional activities or regular overhead lifting/reaching. 

The Department of Labor's Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) defines sedentary work as exerting up to 10 pounds of force occasionally (i.e., up to one third of the time), and/or a negligible amount of force frequently (i.e., from 1/3 to 2/3 of the time) to lift, carry, push, pull, or otherwise move objects, including the human body. According to DOT's definition, sedentary work involves sitting most of the time, but may involve walking or standing for brief periods of time. Jobs are sedentary if walking and standing are required only occasionally and all other sedentary criteria are met. The Board finds no prejudice to the Veteran in considering this definition for purposes of deciding the Veteran's claim. The longitudinal record indicates that the Veteran was capable of sedentary work. Accordingly, the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran was physically capable of performing substantially gainful employment.

As to the Veteran's mental ability to perform substantially gainful employment, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has reported a range of psychiatric symptoms as discussed above, primarily manifesting in depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, interpersonal difficulties, cognitive deficits, mood disturbances, and social isolation. However, the record does not support that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder causes him significant functional deficits that would preclude his ability to secure or follow substantially gainful employment. As explained above, the record does not support that the Veteran stopped working due to psychiatric disorder or other service-connected disabilities in 2015. Despite reports of irritability and social difficulties, he has consistently demonstrated appropriate behavior and is generally described as cooperative, neatly groomed, fully alert, and oriented, with an organized and goal-directed thought process, fair insight and judgment, no delusions or hallucinations, and no suicidal ideation. Despite the Veteran's symptoms, he has maintained a marriage of more than 40 years, has friends and relationships with family, and has continued to engage in community outreach through his church where he is active in the ministries. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder could be reasonably accommodated by limiting him to work involving routine, repetitive tasks, and only superficial interaction with others, so as to limit stress and reduce potential exacerbations of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms. As such limitations would not preclude the Veteran from all forms of substantially gainful employment, the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran is mentally capable of performing substantially gainful employment.

Based on the above assessments of the Veteran's physical and mental abilities with consideration of his education, training, skills, and work history, the Board finds that the Veteran is capable of work that would result in income at the level of substantially gainful employment. For example, the evidence supports that the Veteran would be capable of jobs such as a telemarketer, where the employee performs routine, repetitive tasks, such as making or taking calls and reading from a script, which does not require extensive training or experience, would require minimal exertional activity. Similarly, a customer service agent interacts with customers to handle complaints, process orders, and answer questions. These positions are sedentary in nature and require only superficial interaction with others. The Veteran's cognitive function and education history supports that he remains capable of the simple tasks required by such occupations. 

Additionally, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would not preclude him from working as a parking lot or toll booth attendant, which jobs would entail activities such as collecting payment, and providing customers with instructions for parking and locating vehicles. Such positions are sedentary in nature, involving routine, repetitive tasks and only superficial interaction with others. Furthermore, the Veteran is capable of performing certain cashier positions, or work as a library, theater, or museum attendant, positions that could predominantly be performed while seated and would involve only simple and repetitive tasks, and superficial communication. These are not occupations utilizing specialized skills requiring vocational experience, but simple skills possessed by most entry-level workers and individuals who have completed high school with additional military experience. These examples are not exhaustive but are merely illustrative of potential occupations that the Veteran could perform. This is evidence against a finding that the Veteran was precluded from all forms of substantially gainful employment.

For all the reasons described above, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran is precluded from all forms of substantially gainful employment due to service-connected disabilities and, therefore, is not entitled to a TDIU rating. The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, it is not applicable where, as here, there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Accordingly, entitlement to a TDIU rating is denied.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wonderling, Gabriel N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.