Citation Nr: A25033652
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240827-467431
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to individual unemployability based upon total disability (TDIU) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disabilities (specifically major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, without psychotic features with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)) have been shown to be of such severity so as to preclude substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to individual unemployability based upon total disability (TDIU) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from May 1977 to May 1981.  

An August 2023 rating decision continued a 70 percent disability rating for his psychiatric disabilities (noted therein as major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, without psychotic features with posttraumatic stress disorder) and denied entitlement to TDIU.  In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the August 2023 rating decision as to the denial of TDIU.  A December 2023 HLR decision identified a duty to assist error in the prior decision and processed this matter as a supplemental claim for TDIU benefits.  The identified development was completed and in June 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the rating decision on appeal which found that new and relevant evidence had been received to reconsider the Veteran's claim but continued the prior denial of TDIU benefits.  In the June 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ considered the evidence of record as of that date.   

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), appealing the June 2024 rating decision, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to individual unemployability based upon total disability (TDIU)

The Veteran seeks a TDIU, contending that because of his service-connected psychiatric disabilities, he was forced to retire from his past work as a police officer near the end of July 2016.  See February 2023 VA Form 21-8940; March 2023 VA Examination.  After reviewing the evidence, the Board finds that TDIU is warranted, for the reasons set forth herein. 

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. A total disability will be considered to exist when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. A total disability may or may not be permanent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.340 (a).

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities provided that if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and that, if there are two or more such disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. For the purpose of one 60 percent or one 40 percent disability in combination, disabilities resulting from a common etiology, or a single accident will be considered as one disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).   

Here, the Veteran has the following service-connected disabilities:  psychiatric disabilities (noted specifically as major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, without psychotic features with posttraumatic stress disorder), rated at 70 percent as of June 23, 2022; and tinnitus, rated at 10 percent as of March 31, 2022.  Based on the forgoing, the Board finds that as of June 23, 2022, the Veteran has met the schedular rating for TDIU and may consider the claim on a schedular basis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

With the threshold requirements satisfied, the Board turns to the question of whether the Veteran is unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment. In determining whether the Veteran is capable of obtaining and maintaining gainful employment, the Board must consider the Veteran's work history, education, and any special training.

The central inquiry with regard to TDIU entitlement is "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). There are two components to consider in determining whether a claimant is unable to secure and/or follow a substantially gainful occupation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16, an economic component and a non-economic component. The United States Court of Appeals (Court) has defined "substantially gainful employment" as encompassing both an economic and a noneconomic component. The economic component means "an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person," while the noneconomic component requires consideration of a veteran's ability to secure or follow that type of employment. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).

The Court set forth a number of factors to consider in making the latter determination, including the following: the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; his or her physical abilities, including any audio or visual limitations, as well as limitations in lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching; and his or her mental ability, including limitations in memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity.  Id. 

The Board notes that the ultimate question of whether a Veteran is capable of substantially gainful employment is not a medical one; that determination is for the adjudicator. Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Thus, the VA examiners' conclusions are not dispositive.  However, the observations of the examiners regarding functional impairment due to the service-connected disability go to the question of physical or mental limitations that may impact his or her ability to obtain and maintain employment.

Turning first to the economic component, the Veteran indicated in his February 2023 VA Form 21-8940 (Application for Increased Compensation Based Upon Unemployability) that he stopped working at the end of July 2016 as a police officer due to his service-connected disabilities.  Social Security Administration (SSA) Records show that as of the time that he was awarded Social Security Disability Benefits in 2019, the Veteran had not been working since 2019.  Further, there was no evidence in the file to suggest that at any time during the relevant period, the Veteran was working.  Therefore, the Board finds that the economic component has been met.  

Satisfied that the Veteran has not been involved in substantially gainful employment during the relevant period on appeal, the remaining issue is whether the service-connected disabilities precluded such employment.  The Veteran's employer's February 2023 response to the AOJ's inquiry regarding employment confirmed that the Veteran had retired in 2016 due to illness, without specifying the nature of the illness(es).  The Board further acknowledges that SSA found the Veteran was disabled under their program guidelines based upon primarily physical limitations in functioning associated with diabetes mellitus and disorder of muscle ligament and fascia, non-service-connected conditions.  See SSA Records.  However, the SSA determinations as to disability or the basis thereof are not binding on the Board.   Further, this does not preclude a finding that his psychiatric disabilities, when considered separate and apart from his physical limitations, would likewise preclude employment.  As previously noted, the issue is not what impairments actually resulted in the work cessation, but rather "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  Thus, we must consider the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and the limitations therefrom, in the context of his ability to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment.  

The Veteran has diagnoses of PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder, recurrent, without psychotic features, noted at multiple VA examinations.  See July 2022, October 2022, March 2023, and June 2023 VA Examinations.  His symptoms included depressed mood; anxiety; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  See July 2022, October 2022, March 2023, and June 2023 VA Examinations.  At multiple VA examinations, the Veteran reported difficulty adapting to stress, chronic irritability, conflict with family, limited ability to work as a team member, problems with authority, and asserted that he could not tolerate being around other people in any setting for more than a few minutes.  See id.  He noted problems sleeping, resulting in chronic fatigue; trouble remembering and following instructions; difficulty with maintaining concentration and focus over time; and impaired task persistence and completion.  Id.   The various VA examiners collectively found that the Veteran's occupational and social functional impairments resulted in deficiencies in most areas, including work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  Id.  In the most recent VA opinion, in June 2023, the VA examiner noted that because of his psychiatric conditions the Veteran avoided crowds and general social interactions, had problems with sleep and concentration, and had difficulty experiencing positive emotions, opining that such symptoms often lead to occupational difficulties due to problems relating to co-workers and employers. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms and behaviors often occur in occupational impairments that often lead to firings or quitting jobs.

Although the Board acknowledges that the Veteran is also service connected for tinnitus, after a review of the evidence, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that a TDIU is warranted based solely on his service-connected psychiatric disabilities.

In reviewing the evidence, the Board notes that the Veteran's documented social limitations, irritability, proclivity towards conflict, and difficulty adapting to stress would likely significantly limit his abilities to appropriately and efficiently interact with supervisors, co-workers and the public, as would be expected in a work environment, especially in a work environment of a police officer.  Further, the stress associated with negative social interactions would likely compound any baseline difficulties with focus, concentration, memory, and task completion that would already be attributable to depressive symptoms and sleep disturbances.  This combination of problems with respect to social interactions, reliability, quality, productivity, and pace is significant enough that it would likely preclude any type of employment in a competitive workplace, commensurate with his job skills as a police officer.  

Given the forgoing, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disabilities preclude him from the ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with the Veteran's education, skills, training, and work history as a police officer or any other competitive employment.  Accordingly, a TDIU is warranted.

The duty to maximize a claimant's benefits includes consideration of whether disabilities establish entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114. See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011). SMC at the housebound rate is payable where a veteran has a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent and: (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems, or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (i). Importantly, the Court has determined entitlement to TDIU for a single disability constitutes a 100 percent rating for a single service-connected disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s). See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 292 (2008). Here, the evidence does not show additional service-connected disabilities, separate from the psychiatric disabilities which are independently ratable at 60%.  Therefore, while the Board has considered the applicability of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, such benefit cannot be applied in this case.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disabilities (major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, without psychotic features with PTSD) preclude him from the ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with his education, skills, training, and work history, entitling him to a grant of TDIU for the period on appeal.

 

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fuller, L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.