Citation Nr: A25033142
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240505-437645
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity carpel tunnel syndrome (CTS), is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity CTS is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. There is no probative evidence that the Veteran's left upper extremity CTS was incurred in service, is due to service, or was diagnosed within the presumptive period after discharge.

2. There is no probative evidence that the Veteran's right upper extremity CTS was incurred in service, is due to service, or was diagnosed within the presumptive period after discharge.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for left upper extremity CTS are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for right upper extremity CTS are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 2003 to September 2008. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 supplemental statement of the case (SSOC) by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

This matter was most recently before the Board in September 2023, on appeal from an October 2018 decision under the older Legacy appeal system. At that time, the Board remanded the matter for further development. To the extent that the directed VA examination opinions have been provided, substantial compliance with the Board's remand directives pertaining to such claim has been accomplished. Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268, 271 (1998).

After completing the required development, the AOJ issued a supplemental statement of the case (SSOC) in March 2024. The Veteran opted her claim into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), by submitting a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, identifying the March 2024 SSOC as the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400.  The Board notes that prior attempts to opt-in to the AMA in 2021 were unsuccessful.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 SSOC. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. No evidence submitted after the AOJ issued the March 2024 SSOC will be considered by the Board in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for right and left upper extremity CTS, claiming the onset of her symptoms began while in service. 

To establish an entitlement to service connection, the Veteran must establish (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) an in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Some chronic diseases may be presumed to have been incurred in service, if they manifest to a degree of ten percent or more within the applicable presumptive period. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101(3), 1112(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a). A showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection, with a presumptive period of one year from separation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). CTS is considered an organic disease of the nervous system, and so is a listed condition, with a presumptive period of one year following separation from service. 

To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In support of her claim, the Veteran points to her service treatment records (STRs), particularly from February 2006, to show CTS symptoms started in service. The Veteran's STRs show two entries from February 2006 relating to her right arm and hand. On February 6, 2006, the Veteran complained of intermittent pain and numbness in her right arm and reported that her "hand feels tingly and arm feels weak." The provider assessed the condition as possible medial epicondylitis, a type of tendonitis. In a February 16, 2006 STR, the Veteran complained of right hand numbness and tingling, as well as arms falling "asleep" at night; the provider noted subjective numbness and tingling in the right hand without symptoms at the time of the visit. The Veteran was advised to increase exercise frequency and modify sleep positions. 

In a March 2005 STR post deployment assessment, the Veteran checked off that she experiences numbness or tingling in hands or feet, without further clarification. In a February 2007 STR, the Veteran complained of right thumb pain without numbness or tingling due to possible overuse; the provider noted the right thumb showed signs and symptoms of extensor tendonitis.  STRs contain no further notation or complaint of right or left hand or wrist conditions. 

In April 2018, the Veteran submitted a lay statement where she reported that she experienced her arm falling asleep at night, where she would be unable to "wake it up." She noted that she visited onboard medical who suggested adding more cardiovascular exercised, and she said, "the issue seemed to become manageable." The Veteran stated that she continues to have left and right arm pain throughout the day, which she believes worsened since separating from service. 

In the October 2018 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran stated that she had bilateral upper extremity discomfort noted in her STRs, and after discharge, she completed college "using a computer" and "this is when the pain and numbness resurfaced and remained."

In a February 2021 lay statement, the Veteran stated that her "first complaint of pain, stiffness, numbness, tingling, paralysis, loss of sleep and ability to complete work duties on a keyboard or console for lengthy or continuous amounts of time begins in service 06Feb2006 documented in underway record 03Feb07." The Veteran asserts that her symptoms were consistent with activities performed and the treatments and suggested reliefs are also the same as the current complaints causes and treatment plans. The Veteran alleges the gap in medical records relating to CTS is not related to "inconsistence in occurrence of symptoms," but instead with inconsistent healthcare. When she began being seen by VA in 2013, her regular problems began being recorded. 

However, VA treatment records from May 2013 show no neurological condition, including CTS. Moreover, in VA treatment records from May 2013 and November 2013, the Veteran denied numbness and tingling. An October 2019 treatment record includes the first notation that bilateral CTS was suspected, which was several years after separation from service. In October 2019, the Veteran was referred for a nerve conduction study, which was completed in February 2020.

The Veteran had her first VA examination for peripheral nerve condition in October 2018. The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with any peripheral nerve condition for either the left or right side. The Veteran reported symptoms of intermittent bilateral arm pain and numbness, which was aggravated by typing. No treatment for these symptoms were indicated. The examiner noted mild intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right and left upper extremities. Muscle, reflex, and sensory examinations were all normal, along with negative results for Phalen's and Tinel's signs. The examiner noted no functional impact. 

In the January 2021 VA examination for peripheral nerves, the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral CTS. The Veteran reported that her condition began in 2006, where her right and left arms would "painfully 'go to sleep'" stating that the symptoms when the condition started were "extreme paralyzation and numbness along with tingling." The Veteran reported the current use of braces and ice. The examiner noted mild intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right and left upper extremities. Muscle and reflex examinations were normal. However, decreased sensation in the hands/fingers was found bilaterally along with positive results for Phalen's and Tinel's signs. Functional impact was noted as not being able to lift more than 20 pounds during flare ups. The examiner provided negative nexus opinions for the right and left upper extremity, which was found inadequate in the September 2023 Board remand.

In October 2023, an addendum medical opinion was provided as to the right and left upper extremity conditions. The examiner determined that it is less likely than not that any claimed peripheral condition in the upper extremities had its nexus in service. The examiner provided a lengthy rationale that discussed the Veteran's medical history as well as her lay statements as to her condition. The examiner stated that there were no objective findings that supported a diagnosis of CTS in the October 2018 VA examination, including the Tinel's and Phelan's tests. As such, the examiner indicated that because the Veteran did not meet the objective criteria for a peripheral nerve diagnosis of either the right or left upper extremity at the time of the DBQ in 2018, the Veteran could not have had CTS in-service. The examiner explained, that though the Veteran's MOS and keyboard use could cause CTS over time, had the veteran developed CTS, it would have been self-evident, and the symptoms and findings would have progressed naturally over the ensuing 10 years, almost certainly resulting in objective findings substantiating the diagnosis by 2018. Moreover, the examiner indicated that "[n]atural progression alone and the absence of any objective findings in 2018 make the veteran's claim medically implausible, if not impossible." 

The examiner stated that although the Veteran had numbness in the right arm and hand in 2006 and right thumb pain in 2007, these incidents do not suggest onset in service. Rather, the medical evidence, including sensory findings and change in the Tinel's and Phalen's results, indicates likely onset of the condition was between the 2018 and 2021 VA examinations.

The Board finds the VA addendum opinion highly probative, as the examiner provided a clear timeline, acknowledged medical evidence as well as lay evidence, and clearly explained why the Veteran's condition less likely than not had its onset in service. 

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's lay statements in conjunction with the medical evidence she highlighted from her STRs. While the medical evidence indicates some right upper extremity pain and other symptoms, it is completely silent as to any condition affecting the left upper extremity. The Veteran's lay statements of numbness, tingling, pain, "falling asleep" or other claimed symptoms of the left hand and/or wrist are not supported by the contemporary medical evidence. Moreover, the February 2006 and February 2007 STRs include notations of mild tenderness, along with mixed reports of tingling and numbness which do not support the Veteran's 2018 and 2021 reports of pain, stiffness, numbness, tingling, and "extreme paralyzation." As such, the Board finds the Veteran's lay statements about her in-service symptoms have little probative value, as they conflict with the medical evidence of record. 

After a thorough review of the evidence, the Board finds the Veteran's claim for a right and left upper extremity condition, including CTS, is not supported by the record. Contemporary STRs only indicate complaints relating to the right upper extremity, specifically, right side tendonitis was indicated in both the February 2006 and February 2007 STRs. Nothing in the record indicates a left upper extremity condition while in service. Moreover, no medical evidence even suggests the Veteran experienced "extreme paralyzation" of either her right or left side while in service, which she reported in her January 2021 VA examination. No probative evidence suggests that the condition manifested within the applicable presumptive period nor is there probative evidence to support finding that there has been continuity of symptomatology. No medical professional has indicated even a possible link between the current disability and the applicable period of service, including the presumptive period.

The Veteran has submitted no probative medical evidence or information linking service to her current bilateral CTS condition. The Veteran believes her current disability is related to her time on active service, linking her current disability to a claim of experiencing pain or arms "falling asleep" while in service. However, while she may believe a connection to service exists, as a layperson, the Veteran lacks the competence to render a nexus opinion on such a complex medical question. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011). An opinion of that nature requires medical expertise that is outside the realm of common knowledge of a layperson, and the Veteran does not have relevant medical training, experience, or education. 

The persuasive evidence is against the Veteran's claim for service connection for right and left upper extremity conditions, claimed as CTS. Accordingly, the claim for service connection for either a left or right upper extremity condition, is not warranted.  

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the persuasive evidence of record is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection, that doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch supra.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Lyons

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.