Citation Nr: A25033951
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-436743
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hyperthyroidism is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is denied.

Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression prior to May 2, 2023, is denied. 

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 70 percent, but no more, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression on and after May 2, 2023, to June 4, 2023, is granted. 

Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 70 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression on and after June 5, 2023, is denied. 

Entitlement to specially adapted housing is denied. 

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant is denied. 

Eligibility for financial assistance for automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hyperprolactinemia is remanded. 

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for a left shoulder strain (non-dominant), is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a right wrist condition, status post fracture repair (dominant), is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating prior to June 5, 2023, and a rating in excess of 10 percent on and after June 5, 2023, for a left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI, is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy and complex regional pain syndrome type 1, with involvement of the upper radicular nerve group, the middle radicular nerve group, and the lower radicular nerve group (non-dominant), is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a current disability of hyperthyroidism, or any other thyroid condition, and has not had one at any time during the appeal.

2. The Veteran does not have a current disability of obstructive sleep apnea and has not had one at any time during the appeal.

3. Prior to May 2, 2023, the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression manifested by symptoms that more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

4. On and after May 2, 2023, to June 4, 2023, the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression manifested by symptoms that more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood. 

5. On and after June 5, 2023, the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression did not manifest by symptoms that more closely approximated total occupational and social impairment. 

6. The Veteran does not have a disability rated permanent and total that causes loss or loss of use of both upper extremities or loss or loss of use of both of his lower extremities, one lower extremity together with the residuals of organic disease or injury, or one lower extremity together with one upper extremity, any of which preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; nor does he have service-connected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk, or loss of use of one lower extremity with blindness in both eyes resulting in only light perception.

7. The Veteran does not have a permanent and total service-connected disability which includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, or that is due to burn injuries or residuals of an inhalational injury, nor does he have a service-connected disability due to blindness in both eyes, with corrected central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye.

8. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in permanent impairment of both eyes, severe burn injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ankylosis of a knee or hip, or loss or loss of use of a hand or foot such that no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump at the site of election below the elbow or knee with the use of a suitable prosthetic appliance.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a hyperthyroidism are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 4.119.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 4.97.

3. Prior to May 2, 2023, the criteria for entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.125, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9440.

4. On and after May 2, 2023, to June 4, 2023, the criteria for entitlement to a disability rating of 70 percent, but no more, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.125, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. 

5. On and after June 5, 2023, the criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.125, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.  

6. The criteria for eligibility for assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.809.

7. The criteria for eligibility for a special home adaption grant are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.809(a).

8. The criteria for eligibility for financial assistance for automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only, are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.808, 3.350(a)(2).

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2007 to July 2008, August 2008 to September 2009, and December 2012 to December 2022. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on an appeal from March 2023, October 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. The appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for hyperthyroidism 

The Veteran contends that his hyperthyroidism is related to his military service. See VA Form 10182. The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability of hyperthyroidism. 

The Board finds that the Veteran does not have currently diagnosed disability of hyperthyroidism and has not had a diagnosis at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

In his June 2023 claim, the Veteran indicated he was filing a claim for hyperthyroidism and stated it was caused by various injuries and exposures during his service. See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ. No additional statements were provided regarding his initial or recurrent symptoms or circumstances of service in support of his claims.  

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) indicate no abnormalities of his thyroid during multiple medical appointments and laboratory results in July 2019, August 2020, September 2021, and January 2022 were normal. See June 2022 STRs. His VA medical records indicate normal thyroid in June 2023 laboratory results. See September 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records. 

In an August 2023 VA examination for thyroid conditions, the Veteran reported that when he went in for treatment for erectile dysfunction, he was told that he had hyperthyroidism. His current symptoms included lack of sex drive and inability to get an erection but he stated he was not currently treating the condition. The examiner opined that the Veteran did not have a thyroid condition as he did not have any findings, signs or symptoms of the condition that would support a diagnosis. Id. Of note, the Veteran is already in receipt of service connection for erectile dysfunction.

Although the Veteran reported that being told that he had a diagnosis of a thyroid disorder in 2017, and while he may provide lay evidence regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to offer an opinion regarding the diagnosis of a complex medical condition that is not subject to general lay knowledge, nor is he competent to provide an opinion regarding etiology of the condition. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2007). He is competent to report what a doctor told him. Id. 

The evidence of record demonstrates persuasively that the Veteran did not have a disability of hyperthyroidism, or any other thyroid condition, at any time during the pendency of the claim or proximate to the filing of the claim. The Veteran's STRs and VA medical treatment records indicate a normal thyroid during physical examinations and normal laboratory results between 2019 through 2023. See June 2022 STRs and September 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records. The August 2023 VA examiner opined the Veteran did not have any findings, signs or symptoms of a thyroid condition. See August 2023 VA Examination. Moreover, the lay observable symptoms reported by the Veteran were separately service-connected as a different disability. To the extent that the Veteran was told by a competent doctor in 2017 that he had a thyroid disorder, that is outweighed by the more recent evidence that he does not have such a disorder. As the Board finds the Veteran does not currently have a thyroid disability for VA purposes, the claim for entitlement to service connection for a thyroid disability, including hyperthyroidism, must be denied. 

The Board finds the evidence fails to support that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, or any other thyroid disability, at any time during the pendency of the claim or proximate to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)

The Veteran contends that his obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is related to his military service. See VA Form 10182. The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has currently diagnosed disability of OSA. 

The Board finds that the Veteran does not have currently diagnosed disability of OSA and has not had a diagnosis at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. See Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294; McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321.

In his June 2023 claim, the Veteran indicated he was filing a claim for OSA and stated it was caused by an in-service event, injury, or exposure. See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ. No additional statements were provided regarding his initial or recurrent symptoms or circumstances of service in support of his claims.  

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for diagnosis or treatment of OSA. See June 2022 STRs. His VA medical records indicate he underwent a July 2023 sleep study after reporting snoring, fragmented sleep and daytime fatigue. The examiner opined the sleep study indicated severe insomnia with difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep, however there was no evidence of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome or parasomnias. See August 2023 VA Examination.

The Veteran underwent an August 2023 VA examination for OSA and reported difficulty sleeping. The examiner noted the July 2023 sleep study was negative for OSA and opined the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of OSA as he did not have any findings, signs or symptoms of the condition that would support a diagnosis. Id. 

Although the Veteran reported that he had difficulty sleeping and daytime fatigue, and while he may provide lay evidence regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to offer an opinion regarding the diagnosis of a complex medical condition that is not subject to general lay knowledge, nor is he competent to provide an opinion regarding etiology of the condition. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1375. As demonstrated by the record, even clinicians require sleep studies to diagnose sleep apnea and do not rely on a lay person's self-reported symptoms. The Veteran has not offered lay testimony that a competent medical professional did diagnose him with OSA. Thus, the Board finds the Veteran has not offered competent lay evidence of a diagnosis.

The evidence of record does not support that the Veteran had a diagnosis of OSA at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. The Veteran's a sleep study in his VA medical treatment records indicated insomnia but not a diagnosis of OSA. See August 2023 VA Examination. The August 2023 VA examiner opined the Veteran did not have any findings, signs or symptoms to support a diagnosis of OSA. Id. As the Veteran does not currently have a disability for VA purposes, the claim for entitlement to service connection for a OSA must be denied. 

The Board finds the evidence fails to support that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of OSA at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294; McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321. The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted considering the entire recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the viewpoint of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

In all increased rating claims, staged ratings must be considered for the entire period on appeal. A staged rating is appropriate when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings under the applicable diagnostic code(s). Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007), Fenderson v. West, 12?Vet. App.?119 (1999). 

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. A Veteran may have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred if the claim is received within one year from such date. Otherwise, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

However, if a claimant continuously pursues a claim or issue by timely filing an administrative review option, including a supplemental claim, request for higher level review, or an appeal to the Board, that will preserve the effective date of the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2500(c). If a supplemental claim is received within one year of a rating decision, VA will readjudicate the claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured and may assign an effective date as early as the date of receipt of the initial claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2500(c), 3.2501. Relevant evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

1. Prior to May 2, 2023, entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression is denied.

2. On and after May 2, 2023, to June 4, 2023, a rating of 70 percent, but no more, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression is granted.

3. On and after June 5, 2023, a rating in excess of 70 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to higher disability rating for his adjustment disorder with anxiety and depression. The Veteran currently is assigned a 30 percent disability rating prior to June 5, 2023, and a 70 percent disability rating on and after June 5, 2023. 

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).

The Veteran's adjustment disorder with anxiety and depression has been evaluated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440 prior to June 5, 2023, and DC 9400 on and after June 5, 2023, both which are rated in under the same criteria in accordance with the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Under DC 9440 and 9400, a 30 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

a) Prior to May 2, 2023

During a May 2021 behavioral health evaluation, the Veteran reported being frustrated with a current situation at work, but denied anxiety or depression and stated that overall, he was trying to "stay positive" regarding the situation. See July 2021 STRs. His depression screening was negative, he was cooperative, calm, made eye contact, had appropriate dress and hygiene, insight was good, judgement was fair, and this thought process was linear and goal directed. In a June 2021 medical appointment, the Veteran's depression screening was negative but he did report chronic sleep issues. See July 2021 STRs. 

During an August 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported depression, low motivation, anxiety and poor concentration. He reported he was still on active duty, that he made friends easily, was a "happy go lucky" kind of person. He was married and divorced twice, but stated he had several friends and good social support. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression. The stated he did not meet the DSM-5 criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD. They stated the condition caused occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. His symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbance of mood and motivation. The Veteran denied current suicidal ideation, delusions, and visual and auditory hallucinations. The examiner noted during the examination that the Veteran was engaged, cooperative, speech was normal, mood was "low", insight and judgment were fair, cognition was intact and thought process was linear. Id. 

The Board finds that prior to May 2, 2023, the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The Veteran reported symptoms including depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbance of mood and motivation. See August 2021 VA Examination. However, he was still on active duty, maintained friendships, had social support, his thinking was linear, judgment was fair, and he was engaged and cooperative with the examiner. The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms do not warrant a rating in excess of 30 percent as the evidence fails to support that the Veteran had social and occupational impairment with reduced reliability and productivity prior to May 2, 2023. 

b) On and after May 2, 2023

On June 5, 2023, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for an increased disability rating for his adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression. See June 5, 2023, Fully Developed Claim.

In a May 2, 2023, patient questionnaire for depression, the Veteran's depression severity was rated severe, and he reported little interest in doing activities, fatigue, trouble concentrating, depression, trouble sleeping, poor appetite, and that the symptoms made it very difficult for him to work and to get along with other people. See June 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records. 

During a June 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported his mental health issues started during the military and had continued since that time. He was not employed due to multiple medical issues. The examiner confirmed the diagnosis of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. They stated the condition caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. His symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, difficulty in maintaining work and social relationships, and disturbances of mood and motivation, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control. The examiner noted during the examination that the Veteran was oriented to time, place, and person, but appeared dysthymic, and his mood was congruent to the situation. Id. 

The Board finds that on and after May 2, 2023, the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood. The Veteran reported symptoms including depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, difficulty in maintaining work and social relationships, and disturbances of mood and motivation, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control and stated his symptoms made it difficult to get along with other people. See June 2023 VA Examination and June 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records. However, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms do not warrant a rating in excess of 70 percent as the evidence fails to support that the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment, on and after May 2, 2023.

The Board finds that based upon the evidence of record, May 2, 2023, is the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in the Veteran's disability occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also See June 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records.

On and after May 2, 2023, to June 4, 2023, the evidence supports that a rating of 70 percent, but no more, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression, is warranted, and the claim is granted. On and after June 5, 2023, the evidence fails to support that the Veteran meets the criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression and the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.130, 4.3.

4. Entitlement to specially adapted housing 

5. Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant

The Veteran has asserted that he meets the criteria for the award of specially adapted housing or a special home adaptation grant.

Statute provides for two different "housing" benefits by way of separate subsections. Assistance in the acquisition of housing with special features is provided for by 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a) and implemented by the regulation 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 in which it is referred to as specially adapted housing. Assistance in adaptations to the residence of a veteran is provided for by 38 U.S.C. § 2101(b) and implemented by the regulation 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a in which it is referred to as special home adaptation grant.

Specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who has a permanent and total service-connected disability. This permanent and total service-connected disability must either be amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) rated as 100 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017, or must be due to:

(1) the loss or loss of use of both lower extremities, such as to preclude locomotion without the use of the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; 

(2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; 

(3) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the use of the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; 

(4) the loss or loss of use one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the use of the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; 

(5) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbow; or 

(6) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk. 

38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b), (d).

The phrase "preclude locomotion" is defined as the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or canes as a normal mode of locomotion, although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c). The term "loss of use" in the context of specially adapted housing claims means "a deprivation of the ability to avail oneself of the anatomical region in question. It is a general term, one that can readily accept additional specificity in various circumstances. Adjacent modifiers and, in the case of [special monthly compensation], regulatory efforts create that specificity." Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78 (2017).

Four elements that must be satisfied to establish entitlement to such benefit: "That individual must (1) have a permanent and total disability (2) due to a disorder that (3) involves both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices." Jensen, 29 Vet. App. at 79.

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities throughout the appeal include adjustment disorder with anxiety and depression rated at 70 percent, effective June 5, 2023, headaches rated at 30 percent, effective December 27, 2022, a left shoulder strain rated at 20 percent, effective December 27, 2022, a cervical spine condition, status post C6-C7 disc replacement, rated at 20 percent, effective December 27, 2022, three scars associated with his cervical spine surgery, rated at 20 percent, effective December 27, 2022, left upper extremity radiculopathy, rated at 20 percent, effective December 27, 2022, a right wrist condition, rated at 10 percent, effective December 27, 2022, a lumbosacral strain, rated at 10 percent, effective December 27, 2022, bilateral knee strains, each rated at 10 percent, effective December 27, 2022, tinnitus rated at 10 percent, effective December 27, 2022, cholecystectomy rated at 10 percent, effective December 27, 2022, a left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI rated at 10 percent, effective June 5, 2023, bilateral dry eye syndrome rated at 10 percent, effective June 5, 2023, and erectile dysfunction, residual scar from a right wrist surgery, and scars from a cholecystectomy with noncompensable ratings, effective December 27, 2022.

The Veteran had a total disability rating effective June 5, 2023, and special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, subsection (k) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a) on account of loss of use of a creative organ, effective December 27, 2023.

As an initial matter, the Veteran does not have an amputation of either lower extremity, amputation of an upper extremity, blindness in either eye, or burn scars.

With regard to whether the Veteran's service-connected disability of the left shoulder results in loss of use, the Veteran has undergone multiple examinations for his service-connected shoulder disability. These examinations have consistently shown that the Veteran does not require assistive devices and his function is not so diminished that amputation with prosthesis would equally serve the Veteran. See August 2021 and 2023 VA Examinations. 

With regard to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities of the lower extremities result in loss of use, the Veteran has undergone multiple examinations for his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities. These examinations have consistently shown that the Veteran does not require assistive devices to ambulate and his function is not so diminished that amputation with prosthesis would equally serve the Veteran. See August 2021 and 2023 VA Examinations. 

The Veteran does not contend, and the evidence does not support, that the Veteran uses orthopedic or prosthetic appliances or that he is unable to ambulate without assistance. With regard to functional limitation of the lower extremities, the Veteran reported symptoms of constant throbbing pain and limited mobility. However, the examiner noted that while he had pain with movement of the knee joint, his range of motion was normal and there was no evidence of ankylosis, muscle atrophy, or joint instability. See August 2023 VA Examination. 

While the Veteran has reported pain and limited mobility, the evidence of record, including clinical examination results, persuasively shows that his service-connected disabilities do not preclude locomotion. See August 2023 VA Examinations. Based on the foregoing, eligibility for specially adapted housing must be denied.

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran may qualify for a grant for necessary home adaptations if he has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees (such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature); a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b).

Here, there is no probative evidence of record to show that he has anatomical loss or loss of use of an upper or lower extremity. Additionally, his service-connected disabilities do not include burn injuries, an inhalation injury, or loss of vision. He is therefore also ineligible for a special home adaptation grant.

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claims for entitlement to specially adapted housing or a special home adaptation grant. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claims, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021) (en banc); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

6. Eligibility for financial assistance for automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only

The Veteran has asserted that he meets the criteria for the award of financial assistance for automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only.

Financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only. 38 U.S.C. § 3902(a)(b). Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted where one of the following exists as the result of injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active service: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, meaning central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury precluding effective operation of an automobile; (5) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); or, (6) for adaptive equipment only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. 38 U.S.C. § 3901; 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.

The term "loss of use of a hand or foot" is defined as existing when "no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump at the site of election below the elbow or knee with the use of a suitable prosthetic appliance." For example: (a) Extremely unfavorable complete ankylosis of the knee, or complete ankylosis of two major joints of an extremity, or shortening of the lower extremity of 3 1/2 inches or more, will constitute loss of use of the hand or foot involved, and; (b) Complete paralysis of the external popliteal nerve (common peroneal) and consequent footdrop, accompanied by characteristic organic changes including trophic and circulatory disturbances and other concomitants confirmatory of complete paralysis of this nerve, will be taken as loss of use of the foot. 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(2).

The Board finds the Veteran eligibility fails to meet any of the required eligibility criteria under 38 U.S.C. § 3902 for financial assistance for automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only, and therefore, the claim must be denied.

As an initial matter, the Veteran does not contend, and the evidence does not support, that he has an amputation of either lower or upper extremity, or that his function is so limited he would be equally served by amputation of an extremity, blindness in either eye, or burn scars or has been diagnosed with ALS. See A December 2023 VA Form 21-4502, December 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records, and August 2023 VA Examinations. 

In December 2023, the Veteran requested his physician assist him with forms for VA vehicle and home grants. See December 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records. He stated he was having issues getting around because he lived on his own and the grant would help him "get on his feet" because he was currently relying on Uber and Lyft for rides and those services were costly and unreliable. Id. 

While the Veteran is service connected for a bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder condition, the lay and medical evidence fail to support that he requires assistive devices or that function is so limited in his upper or lower extremities that he would be equally well-served by an amputation stump with a suitable prosthetic appliance. See August 2021 and August 2023 VA Examinations. In addition, while he has painful motion of his joints, there is no lay or medical evidence that supports he has loss of use of his hands or feet as defined by the rating criteria. 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(2). Further, neither the medical record nor his statements indicate that he has met any of the other criteria set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 3901 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.808, including service-connected permanent impairment of both eyes, severe burn injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ankylosis of a knee or hip.

Therefore, the Board finds the evidence fails to support that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet the criteria for basic eligibility for financial assistance for automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only, under 38 U.S.C. § 3902. Accordingly, his claim for such must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that his chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is due to service. See June 2023 Fully Developed Claim. He stated that his symptoms included difficulty sleeping, daily fatigue and overall lack of energy, and it prevented him from driving and being able to work. See August 2023 VA Examination. 

The Board finds an additional medical opinion is necessary to determine whether the Veteran's claimed CFS meets the criteria for a Medically Unexplained Chronic Multi-Symptom Illness (MUCMI). A MUCMI is a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, or disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii); Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383, 391 (2018). The determination of whether a condition is a MUCMI must be based on an individual veteran's circumstances rather than the illness as it is understood in the general public. Stewart, 30 Vet. App. at 391.

During an August 2023 VA examination for chronic fatigue syndrome, the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping, daytime fatigue and lack of energy. The examiner stated that he did not have a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome because there was no evidence to support a diagnosis of CFS. Id. 

The Board finds the August 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate. The August 2023 examiner stated there were no signs or symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome to warrant a diagnosis.  However, his reported symptoms, including sleep disturbances and daytime resulting in the inability to drive or work, in addition to medical evidence indicating the presence of muscle weakness, pain, and headaches, are specifically listed as signs and symptoms that may represent a MUCMI. To simply assert that he does not have a diagnosed condition and then to disregard his reported symptoms as though they have been addressed through his medical examinations is not sufficient to respond to the regulatory requirement that there be both an at least unique circumstances. Stewart, at 391. Indeed, this rationale attempts to disregard the Veteran's individual circumstances. 

In addition, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that, when a veteran submits a claim for compensation with evidence of a disability and evidence of a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active military service and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, VA shall provide the veteran with a medical examination under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d) and obtain a medical opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168. The PACT Act further provides that, when providing a medical opinion under this provision, the health care provider shall consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. Id. Such a requirement is not meant to be construed as requiring the health care provider to consider the synergistic, combined effect of each of the substances, chemicals, and airborne hazards identified in the list VA is required to establish and maintain in collaboration with the Department of Defense as specified in what will be codified in 38 U.S.C. § 1119(b)(2). Id. Thus, an appropriate medical examination should be obtained as to the likelihood of a nexus between the Veteran's claimed conditions and the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities in service.

The Board finds there is a deficiency in the record that existed prior to the decision on appeal, VA's failure to provide the Veteran with adequate VA examinations prior to the rating decision and to comply with current regulations. Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hyperprolactinemia is remanded.  

The Veteran contends that his hyperprolactinemia is due to head injuries while in service, or in the alternative, secondary to his service-connected headaches. 

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b). Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted). Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id. 

During a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran stated he was first diagnosed with hyperprolactinemia in 2020 when he was being evaluated for erectile dysfunction and his hormone levels were tested. The examiner confirmed the diagnosis of hyperprolactinemia and opined that the condition was not secondary to his service-connected headaches because there was no medical research that linked headaches as a direct cause of hyperprolactinemia. Id. 

The Board finds the February 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate. First, the examiner failed to provide an opinion whether the Veteran's hyperprolactinemia was the result of head injuries that occurred during military service. Second, while the examiner opined the condition was not directly caused by the Veteran's service-connection headaches, they failed to provide adequate rationale in support of their decision and failed to provide an opinion whether his hyperprolactinemia was aggravated by his headache condition. Therefore, the Board finds the medical opinion in inadequate and remand for a new VA medical examination is warranted before the claim can be adjudicated on its merits. See Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1365; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (holding that a medical report cannot merely draw conclusions from data; it should include "a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"), see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). 

Further, as the Veteran participated in a TERA and as explained above, the PACT Act requires an appropriate medical examination should be obtained as to the likelihood of a nexus between the Veteran's hyperprolactinemia and the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities in service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

The Board finds there is a deficiency in the record that existed prior to the decision on appeal, VA's failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate VA examination prior to the rating decision and to comply with current regulations. Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

3. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee strain is remanded.

4. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee strain is remanded.

5. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for a left shoulder strain (non-dominant), is remanded.

6. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a right wrist condition, status post fracture repair (dominant), is remanded.

7. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating prior to June 5, 2023, and a rating in excess of 10 percent on and after June 5, 2023, for a left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI, is remanded. 

8. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy and complex regional pain syndrome type 1, with involvement of the upper radicular nerve group, the middle radicular nerve group, and the lower radicular nerve group (non-dominant), is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an increased disability rating for his bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder conditions, left muscle strain and left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy due to the severity of his symptoms. See May 2024 Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. 

During an August 2023 VA examination for knee conditions, the Veteran reported that he had constant throbbing pain in his knees that felt like it was in the bone and the condition limited his mobility. He reported taking naproxen, Percocet and Marinol to treat the condition. The examiner confirmed his diagnosis of a bilateral knee strain and opined the condition did not cause functional impact. Id. 

During an August 2023 VA examination for wrist conditions, the Veteran reported sharp right-hand pain and limited range of motion with the wrist. He stated it was his dominant hand and the condition made it difficult to do anything with his right hand. He reported treating the condition with Gabapentin, Celebrex and Marinol. The examiner confirmed his diagnosis of a right wrist status post fracture repair and opined the condition impacted his ability to perform simple activities including lifting, tying, writing, pinching, and gripping. Id. 

During an August 2023 VA examination for shoulder conditions, the Veteran reported constant pain, spasms, tingling and burning in his left shoulder. He reported treating the condition with a TENS unit and Marinol. The examiner confirmed his diagnosis of a left shoulder strain and left shoulder impingement syndrome and opined the condition impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks due to limitations with lifting heavy items and raising his arm above the shoulder, above his head, or across his body or back. Id. 

During an August 2023 VA examination for muscle injuries, the Veteran reported a constant burning sensation on his entire left side and muscle spasms. He stated the pain caused him not to want to participate in activities and was causing issues with his family. He reported treating the condition with Naproxen, Celebrex and currently, Marinol. The examiner confirmed his diagnosis of a left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI and opined the condition did not cause any functional impairment. Id. 

During an August 2023 VA examination for peripheral nerve conditions, the Veteran reported numbness on the left side of his body that would radiate into his hand and prevented him from lifting his arm. He stated the pain prevented him from being able to work and it was painful to lie flat on his back. He reported treating the condition with a TENS unit, alpha stim and Marinol. The examiner confirmed his diagnosis of left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy and complex regional pain syndrome type 1, with involvement of the upper radicular nerve group, the middle radicular nerve group, and the lower radicular nerve group, and opined the condition did not cause functional impairment. Id. 

While the August 2023 VA examiners noted the Veteran was currently taking medication to treat his bilateral knee, right wrist, left shoulder conditions, left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI and left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, it is unclear whether they considered the ameliorative effects of the medication on his symptoms including pain, limitation of motion and the frequency and severity of his flare-ups. The Veteran's bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder conditions are musculoskeletal conditions and are rated under DCs 5260, 5215, and 5201, respectively, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. The Veteran's left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI is a muscle injury and is rated under DC 5321, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.73. The Veteran's left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy is a neurological condition and is rated under DC 8513, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. None of the respective rating criteria accounts for the use of medication. Therefore, the VA examiner may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. Jones v. Shinseki,?26?Vet. App.?56?(2012), see also Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, U.S. App. Vet. Claims, (2025).

Therefore, the Board finds the August 2023 VA examinations are inadequate because the examiner failed to provide an opinion regarding the current severity of the Veteran's symptoms due to his bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder conditions, left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI and left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, including pain and limitation of motion, without the ameliorative effect of medication. Therefore, the Board finds a new VA opinion is warranted for the Veteran's bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder conditions, left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI and left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy before the claim can be adjudicated on its merits. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (holding that a medical report cannot merely draw conclusions from data; it should include "a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"), see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). 

The Board finds there is a deficiency in the record that existed prior to the decision on appeal, VA's failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate VA examination prior to the rating decision and to comply with current regulations. Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination from an appropriate clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's reported CFS. After a complete review of the case file, the examiner must: 

a.	Provide an opinion whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of CFS. If the examiner opines the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of the condition, opine whether the reported symptoms including sleep disturbances and daytime fatigue can be attributed to the Veteran's other diagnosed conditions. 

b.	If the Veteran is diagnosed with chronic fatigue, provide an opinion whether the condition was caused by, or is related to, his active service.

c.	Provide an opinion whether his chronic fatigue is 1) part of a diagnosed disability; 2) an undiagnosed illness; or 3) a MUCMI.

d.	If his chronic fatigue is part of a diagnosed disability or a MUCMI, is the etiology of the disorder in this Veteran 1) inconclusive or 2) at least partially understood?

e.	If his chronic fatigue is part of a diagnosed disability or a MUCMI, is the pathophysiology of the disorder in this Veteran 1) inconclusive or 2) at least partially understood?

This determination must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

For the purposes of this opinion, the examiner is advised that pathophysiology is defined as the physiology of abnormal states; specifically: the functional changes that accompany a particular syndrome or disease.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical opinion from a new and appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hyperprolactinemia. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review. After reviewing the record, the examiner is asked to:

a.	Provide an opinion whether the Veteran's hyperprolactinemia 1) began during service; or, 2) was caused by, or is related to, any incident of the Veteran's service. The examiner must discuss the Veteran's statements that he was diagnosed with the condition during service and that it was caused by multiple head injuries during service.  

b.	Provide an opinion whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected headaches, he would not have a current disability of hyperprolactinemia.

c.	Whether the Veteran's hyperprolactinemia would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected headache condition. 

If the examiner opines that the hyperprolactinemia would result in less functional impairment but for the headache condition, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board, including citation to any supporting medical treatises.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a physician to determine the current symptoms, level of severity, and functional impairment associated with his bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder conditions, left muscle strain involving muscle group XXI and left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy and complex regional pain syndrome type 1, with involvement of the upper radicular nerve group, the middle radicular nerve group, and the lower radicular nerve group. The claims file should be made available for review, and the examination report should reflect that such review occurred. Following the review of the record, the examiner should: 

a.	Provide an opinion for the period of appeal regarding the severity of the Veteran's bilateral knee, right wrist and left shoulder conditions, left muscle strain and left upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, specifically discussing his symptoms, including range of motion, without the ameliorative effect of medication. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so. 

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board, including citation to any supporting medical treatises. 

4. Obtain a toxic exposure risk activity medical opinion pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168. The clinician should be advised of all toxic exposure risk activities that the Veteran is known to have engaged in during his military service and the conditions for which service connection is being sought. After reviewing the file, the examiner should:

a.	Opine whether there is a nexus between chronic fatigue syndrome and the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity.

b.	Opine whether there is a nexus between hyperprolactinemia and the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity.

The opinion must address "the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran," which in this case means exposure to toxic chemicals and inhalation of toxic fumes. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(2)(B).

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board, including citation to any supporting medical treatises.

 

 

J. B. FREEMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Aubee, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.