Citation Nr: A25033400
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-472937
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1994 to February 1998.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As noted, the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2), an appellant may modify a Notice of Disagreement to change the Board docket being requested.  The time limit for such modification is within one year from the date the notification of the decision on appeal is sent or within 60 days of the date that the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  The Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).

Here, as the claim is being remanded, and the additional evidence can be considered, the Board finds that proceeding is not prejudicial to the Veteran.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for OSA contending his service-connected insomnia caused him to gain weight which led to his OSA.  The Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error related to the claim.

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a service-connection claim, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

While the Veteran was afforded an October 2023 VA examination, the examiner did not provide a secondary service connection opinion, though one was requested.

Here, the examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's service connected acquired psychiatric disorder, including depression and insomnia, caused or worsened his OSA which does not permit the Board to make an informed decision and renders the opinion inadequate.  See Miller v Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).  

Moreover, the Veteran submitted a statement in support of his June 2023 claim which specifically stated his obesity served as an intermediary step between his service connected acquired psychiatric disorder and his OSA.

Finally, the Veteran also submitted a June 2023 private opinion which addressed studies on the connection between insomnia and OSA.  However, the examiner did not address the medical evidence of record related to other causes of his weight gain.  Specifically, September 2023 VA treatment records reflect other non-service-connected conditions including achilles surgery and back pain and which the Veteran has stated caused significant weight gain.  Here, because the examiner did not address other factors of record related to his weight gain, the rationale is incomplete which does not permit the Board to make an informed decision and renders the opinion inadequate.

Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an opinion to determine the etiology of his OSA and address whether his obesity served as an intermediary step between his service connected acquired psychiatric disorder and his OSA.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to a VA examiner for an addendum opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current sleep apnea was caused or worsened by his service connected acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression and insomnia.

The examiner is also asked to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, including depression and insomnia, caused or worsened his obesity and, if so, whether such obesity is a factor in the Veteran's sleep apnea

In offering their opinion, the examiner is asked to consider the June 2023 medical opinion submitted by the Veteran regarding the relationship between insomnia, obesity, and OSA.

A rationale for all opinions is requested.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Miller, Associate Counsel