Citation Nr: A25033786
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210311-161371
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity disability as secondary to a neck disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity disability as secondary to a neck disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity disability as secondary to a back disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity disability as secondary to a back disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for ingrown facial hair is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from October 1996 to May 1999.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2019 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system applies.  In the March 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran listed the issue of bilateral shoulder pain on his March 2021 Notice of Disagreement.  However, the evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran has filed a claim for a bilateral shoulder disability.  Additionally, there are no rating decisions within the one year prior to the submission of the March 2021 Notice of Disagreement denying these issues.  As such, the issues of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shoulder disability are not on appeal before the Board at this time. To the extent the Veteran would like to establish service connection for a bilateral shoulder disability, he remains free to file a claim for such at any time.

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran has argued that he should be awarded service connection for a right dorsal foot rash and a bilateral hip disability.   See September 2024 Appellate Brief. However, the Veteran did not list these issues on his March 2021 Notice of Disagreement.  As such, they are not on appeal before the Board at this time.

As the Veteran has claimed multiple psychiatric disabilities, the Board has recharacterized the claim on appeal accordingly. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood 

The Veteran contends that he has an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, as a result of his service.

The Veteran's service treatment records show that in August 1998, he was diagnosed with alcohol abuse and enrolled in an alcohol abuse program.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records include private treatment records from February 2015 indicating that the Veteran saw a fellow servicemember commit suicide.

The Veteran was provided a VA mental disorders examination in May 2019 where he was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The VA examiner opined that this was less likely than not due to his service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder in service, but that he did not currently meet the criteria for an alcohol use disorder.  The Veteran was noted to have presented for mental health treatment in 2014 "related to difficulties adjusting to the death of his father, workplace stress, and relationship conflict."

In an October 2019 VA opinion, a VA examiner found that the Veteran's mental disorder was not at least as likely as not due to his service because the Veteran did not currently meet the criteria for an alcohol use disorder even though he was treated for such in service.  The Veteran's adjustment disorder was found to be "due to post-military relationship, employment, and family difficulties."

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the evidence of record prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal is insufficient to determine whether the in-service event the Veteran described transpired.  It does not appear that the AOJ did any development or made any formal findings to confirm the Veteran's alleged stressor regarding witnessing a fellow servicemember commit suicide.  The issue of entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal.  The issue should be remanded in order for the AOJ to make an attempt to verify the Veteran's reported stressor.

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran's in-service treatment records regarding an alcohol abuse program is not in the claims file.  As they may contain evidence that is relevant to the claim, the AOJ should attempt to obtain these records.

Furthermore, the May 2019 and October 2019 opinions did not consider this evidence or whether the death of a fellow servicemember by suicide in service could be related to his current adjustment disorder. Since the opinions are inadequate, another VA medical opinion is needed.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was provided with a VA mental disorders examination in January 2020.  However, the examination was obtained after the November 2019 rating decision on appeal and as it is outside the evidence review window, it may not be considered in this decision.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability 

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity disability as secondary to a neck disability

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity disability as secondary to a neck disability

5. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability 

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity disability as secondary to a back disability

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity disability as secondary to a back disability

The Veteran contends that he has a neck and back disability as a result of his service.  Specifically, the Veteran claims that his neck and back disabilities are the result of carrying heavy equipment while in service.  He claims that his disabilities began while in service and have continued to the present.  See August 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran also claims that he has bilateral upper extremity disabilities as a result of his neck disability and bilateral lower extremity disabilities as a result of his back disability.

The evidence of record includes a private December 2005 MRI report indicating that the Veteran has degenerative changes and disc herniation.  

VA treatment records from May 2010 indicate that the Veteran has chronic low back pain and mid thoracic pain.  He was noted to have injured himself after lifting a tray that had fallen on top of someone.  Since then, he complained of aches and pain in his neck and mid-thoracic area.  He was assessed with chronic low back pain and cervical thoracic pain.  

The issues of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability and back disability are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ did not obtain a VA examination prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal regarding whether the Veteran's neck or back disabilities are due to his service.  However, because the Veteran has alleged continuing symptoms of neck and back pain since his time in service, the Board finds that he should be provided with a VA examination in order to determine the nature and etiology of his neck and back disabilities.  

The issues of entitlement to bilateral upper extremity disabilities and bilateral lower extremity disabilities are inextricably intertwined with the issues being remanded herein. Accordingly, these issues must be remanded as well. 

8. Entitlement to service connection for ingrown facial hair 

The Veteran contends that he has ingrown facial hair that began while in service.  Specifically, he claims that his ingrown hairs are due to the forced shaving that was required in service.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for ingrown facial hair is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ did not obtain a VA examination prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal regarding whether the Veteran's claimed ingrown facial hair is due to his service.  As the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of ingrown facial hair, and he alleges this began while in service, the Board finds that he should be provided with a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his ingrown facial hair.

9. Entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability

The Veteran contends that he has a sinus disability that began while in service.

The Veteran's service treatment records include an October 1996 dental health questionnaire where he reported sinus problems in relation to colds.  In December 1996, the Veteran was diagnosed with tension headaches.  In February 1999, he reported sinus congestion and was diagnosed with a viral syndrome.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records include VA treatment records from September 2013 where he reported sinus problems.  He was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection.  

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ did not obtain a VA examination prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal regarding whether the Veteran's sinus disability is due to his service.  As the Veteran alleges his sinus issues began while in service, the Board finds that he should be provided with a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his sinus disability.

10. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability

The Veteran contends that he has a respiratory disability that began while in service.  Specifically, he claims that his exposure to the gas chamber led to his current disability.  See August 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ,

The Veteran's service treatment records include an October 1996 dental health questionnaire where he reported sinus problems and a cough in relation to colds. In January 1997, he complained of a cold with flu symptoms.  In February 1998 and December 1998, he was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection.  A September 1998 record shows he reported a one-day history of a cough.  In February 1999, he reported sinus congestion and was diagnosed with a viral syndrome.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records include VA treatment records from September 2009 where he reported a dry cough and some nasal congestion.  He was noted to likely have a viral upper respiratory infection with seasonal allergies.  VA treatment records from September 2013 show that he reported a cough with phlegm and sinus problems.  He was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection.  In February 2019, the Veteran reported having a cough, cold, sore throat, and runny nose.  He was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection, likely viral, which was noted to be off and on for years.  In March 2019, he reported a chronic cough for the past 10 years.  He was found to have a possible history of tuberculosis (TB) and was to undergo treatment for latent tuberculosis. 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ did not obtain a VA examination prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal regarding whether the Veteran's respiratory disability is due to his service.  As the Veteran alleges his respiratory issues began while in service, the Board finds that he should be provided with a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his respiratory disability.

11. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability 

12. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability

The Veteran contends that he has a bilateral foot disability as a result of his service.  Specifically, the Veteran claims that his bilateral foot disability is the result of carrying heavy equipment while in service.  He claims that his disabilities began while in service and have continued to the present.  See August 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Veteran's service treatment records show that upon enlistment into service, he was noted to have mild pes planus, asymptomatic.  See January 1996 enlistment examination.  In December 1996, the Veteran complained of bilateral foot pain.  He was diagnosed with tendonitis and plantar fasciitis.  In January 1997, he complained of left foot pain when striking and pushing off the deck.  He was noted to have TTP to the first metatarsal.  In September 1998, the Veteran complained of right foot pain secondary to a callous on his right great toe.  He was diagnosed with a right plantar wart.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records include VA treatment records from December 2011 where he complained of bilateral foot pain across the plantar aspect of the foot.  In January 2012, he complained of pain in his feet after wearing shoes for two hours.  He was diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis.

The Veteran was provided with a VA foot conditions examination in July 2019 where he was diagnosed with bilateral metatarsalgia which the VA examiner found was less likely than not due to his service as there was no continuity of care. 

The same VA examiner that provided the July 2019 opinion provided an addendum medical opinion in October 2019 finding that the Veteran's bilateral foot disability, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was not aggravated beyond its natural progression because "the treatment rendered was not significant to qualify as permanent aggravation of pes planus and metatarsalgia."

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained July 2019 and October 2019 medical opinions prior to the November 2019 rating decision on appeal.  However, the opinions do not address the Veteran's diagnosis of plantar fasciitis either in service or after service.  Therefore, the Board finds that an addendum medical opinion should be obtained in this case. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was provided with a VA foot conditions examination in January 2020.  However, the examination was obtained after the November 2019 rating decision on appeal and as it is outside the evidence review window, it may not be considered in this decision.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The Veteran should be asked to provide more detailed information about the fellow servicemember who died by suicide in service, to include the name and time period of his death. Steps should be taken to corroborate the death. 

2. Obtain the records associated with the Veteran's substance abuse treatment he received in service in August 1998 at The Community Counseling Center at Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas, and any counseling he may have received elsewhere.

3. After the above is completed, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

Does the Veteran have an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, that is related to his service?

In so opining, the examiner should consider any corroborated death of a servicemember in service.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of his neck disability.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

Is the Veteran's neck disability related to his service?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of his back disability.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

Is the Veteran's back disability related to his service?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

6. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of his claimed ingrown facial hair.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

Does the Veteran have ingrown facial hair that is related to his service?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

7. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of his sinus disability.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

Is the Veteran's sinus disability related to his service?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

8. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of his respiratory disability.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

Is the Veteran's respiratory disability related to his service?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

9. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's left and right foot disabilities.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  

The examiner should provide an opinion on the following:

a) Was the Veteran's pre-existing left foot disability aggravated (i.e., permanently worsened beyond the natural course of the disease) during service?

b) Was the Veteran's pre-existing right foot disability aggravated (i.e., permanently worsened beyond the natural course of the disease) during service?

In so opining, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's service treatment records showing a diagnosis for plantar fasciitis in December 1996 as well as his post-service treatment records showing a diagnosis for plantar fasciitis in January 2012.

(Continued on the next page.)

?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Morrad, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.