Citation Nr: A25033133
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240923-476989
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tinnitus is related to her active duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§?3.159, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2001 to September 2002.

This appeal is from an October 2023 rating decision, which had a notification date of October 25, 2023.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board, asking for direct review.  This means that the record closed on October 25, 2023, and the Board's consideration of the evidence is restricted to that which was of record on that date.

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail in a service connection claim.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  When the evidence for and against the claim is in equipoise, by law, the Board must resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the appellant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  To deny a claim on its merits, the preponderance of the evidence must be against the claim.  See Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518, 519 (1996)

Tinnitus is defined as "a noise in the ears, such as ringing, buzzing, roaring, or clicking.  It is usually subjective in type."  Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 1956 (31st ed. 2007).  Because tinnitus is "subjective," its existence is generally determined by whether the veteran claims to experience it.  For VA purposes, tinnitus has been specifically found to be a disorder with symptoms that can be identified through lay observation alone.  See Charles v. Principi, 16?Vet. App.?370 (2002).  

The Veteran reports that her tinnitus began while she was on active duty due to traumatic noise exposure. The rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability, and noise exposure has been conceded.

The remaining inquiry is whether there is a relationship to service.

The January 2023 VA examiner opined against a relationship to service on the basis that she had a low likelihood of noise exposure.  She has been found to have been exposed to hazardous noise working in the area of food service.  The examiner noted that there was a slight threshold shift during service.  This opinion is not adequate because of the mistaken level of noise exposure, but the finding of a threshold shift is probative.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a private positive nexus opinion.  That examiner noted the Veteran's January 2023 report that the onset of her symptoms was intermittent low-pitched ringing.  She noted that the Veteran's STRs did not show tinnitus prior to active duty.  Indeed, at an April 2001 reference audiogram examination, just prior to active duty, the Veteran denied symptoms of tinnitus.  The examiner noted the Veteran's report of loud noise in the galley and that she was provided low-quality hearing protection.  

The examiner noted that current medical literature shows that many people with tinnitus present without atypical cochlear damage, which means that they exhibit normal hearing levels on audiograms.  She called this "hidden hearing loss" where normal hearing thresholds do not necessarily indicate the absence of damage.  People with this type of hearing loss have reduced neural output from the cochlea.  She further noted that tinnitus and sensitivity to noise can be present due to cochlear neuropathy.  She indicated that studies have shown that people with tinnitus but otherwise normal hearing have reduced Wave I potentials, which originate from the primary auditory nerve, leading to the conclusion that tinnitus is caused by reduced neural output from the cochlea.  That is, there is cochlear damage but not the type that is shown on an audiogram, and it is caused by noise exposure.

The examiner concluded that it was as likely as not that the Veteran's tinnitus incepted as a result of noise exposure during service, and cited to numerous medical articles supporting the presence of tinnitus with normal hearing.

The October 2023 VA examiner opined against service connection, opining that the Veteran's description of the onset of her symptoms was not tinnitus but rather brief spontaneous tinnitus or transient ear noise.  She opined that the Veteran's current tinnitus is likely from more recent noise exposure because there is no delayed onset of tinnitus after noise exposure.  She did not address the private medical opinion, which was error.

However, based on the above evidence, the Board finds that reasonable doubt has been raised as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to her service.  The January 2023 VA examiner conceded a slight threshold shift during service, and the private examiner explained that tinnitus is possible without a significant threshold shift due to noise-induced cochlear neuropathy.  The record shows the Veteran did not have tinnitus prior to active service.  She initially reported she was not sure when her tinnitus began but later indicated that she thought it began during her active service, as a mild and intermittent noise that has increased in severity.  Her initial report is the only thing that contradicts her second report, and even that is not in direct opposition.  She was exposure to traumatic noise.  

Accordingly, in resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection is warranted.  

 

 

Nathaniel J. Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gibson, Amanda

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.