Citation Nr: A25033924
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250129-515083
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease (CAD) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease, left leg (claimed as blood vessel in left leg requiring stents), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease, right leg (claimed as blood vessel in right leg requiring stents), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left leg, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right leg, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a CAD disability is present. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a CAD disability are not met. 38 U.S.C.                §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1971 to November 1973. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2024 higher-level review rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In an earlier, August 2024 rating decision, the reviewer found that a duty to assist error had occurred with respect to the initial July 2024 rating decision, as the RO had not associated all the Veteran's available treatment records with his claims file. 

As a preliminary matter, in January 2025 the Veteran filed two VA Form 10182 Notices of Disagreement. The Veteran signed the first Notice of Disagreement, which listed three claims decided by the RO in the December 2024 rating decision. The Veteran did not sign the second Notice of Disagreement, which listed the five other claims that the RO denied in the December 2024 rating decision, which are the claims included in this appeal. Following receipt of the Notices of Disagreement, in January 2025 the Board notified the Veteran that it could not accept his unsigned Notice of Disagreement and that he would have to submit another signed VA Form 10182 if he wished to proceed with the appeal of the claims herein. 

In February 2025 the Veteran submitted another, signed VA Form 10182 covering the five claims herein. However, instead of combining all the issues raised in the Veteran's two VA Form 10182 Notices of Disagreement in one appeal, as the Veteran's appeals have been advanced on the docket, the Board proceeded with bifurcating the Veteran's appeal of the five claims herein in the separate Docket No. 250129-515083, and the Veteran's other three appealed claims will be adjudicated in Docket No. 250129-504382.

In the signed February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With respect to the denied claim, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

For the remanded claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R.                                  § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Further, the Board acknowledges that the time to request a docket switch has not yet elapsed. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Under 38 C.F.R.               § 20.202(c)(2) a docket switch is precluded if the Veteran has submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303. While the Veteran did not request a hearing and has not submitted additional evidence pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 or 20.303, in February 2025 the Veteran's representative submitted an Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP). In this instance, the Board interprets the Veteran's advanced on the docket status, along with the Veteran's representative submitting an IHP, as the Veteran's desire to have the Board proceed with deciding his appeal without any further delay. Accordingly, the Board will proceed with deciding this appeal. 

As an additional, preliminary matter, the December 2024 rating decision denied service connection for the claims set forth above, as the evidence submitted was not new and relevant. While the RO found new and relevant evidence had not been submitted, the RO then went on to readjudicate the Veteran's claims. As such, the Board finds the RO made an implied favorable finding that new and relevant evidence had been received with respect to the claims herein and readjudicated the matters on the merits. As there is not clear and unmistakable error in these findings, the favorable findings made by the RO are binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). As such, the Board will proceed to the merits.

Service Connection

VA provides compensation for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. This is referred to as "service connection." 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, to establish service connection there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999). When these elements are satisfied, service connection may be granted on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for CAD is denied.

In the Veteran's May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation, the Veteran wrote that he suffered from CAD that first developed in 2014. In the February 2025 IHP, the Veteran's representative did not address the issue of whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of CAD, only arguing that the Veteran's claimed conditions were related to his toxic exposure risk active (TERA) of being exposed to herbicide agents while serving in Guam.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the "current disability" requirement is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time of filing the claim or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability has since resolved. McLain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).

In both the June and September 2024 VA examinations, the examiners found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of CAD. The Board has again reviewed the medical evidence of record and cannot find competent, probative medical evidence of record that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a CAD disability, or had symptoms of such, for any time during the pendency of his claim. 

While the VA examiners found diagnoses for the Veteran's other claimed conditions herein (discussed below), which are supported by the Veteran's medical records, there is no diagnosis of CAD, which is a distinct disability. The threshold consideration for any service connection claim is the existence of a current disability. In the absence of proof of a present disability, there is no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). 

In a May 2024 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran wrote that he suffered from CAD. However, as a lay person, the Veteran is not competent to render expert opinions or diagnoses of complex medical conditions such as whether he is diagnosed with CAD. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Additionally, although the Veteran never introduced evidence along with his claim of a CAD diagnosis or symptoms related to CAD, the RO still afforded the Veteran two VA examinations, with both examiner's opining that the Veteran is not diagnosed with CAD. 

The evidence does not show a current CAD disability. In fact, the evidence weighs heavily against such contention. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied, as the Veteran has not met the first element of service connection. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease, right leg (claimed as blood vessel in right leg requiring stents), is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease, left leg (claimed as blood vessel in left leg requiring stents), is remanded.

In the Veteran's May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation, the Veteran claimed that his bilateral lower extremity peripheral arterial disease was secondary to his CAD, which, in turn, was due to exposure to Agent Orange while serving in Guam. 

As the Veteran is not service connected for the alleged primary disability of CAD, the RO denied the Veteran's secondary service connection claim in the December 2024 rating decision on appeal.  

However, in June 2024 the RO issued a TERA memorandum for the Veteran, which conceded presumptive exposure to herbicide agents while serving in Guam and probable asbestos exposure while serving onboard the USS Hunley. Accordingly, the RO found that the additional theory of whether the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral arterial disease was related to the Veteran's TERA exposure was raised by the record. 

In a June 2024 VA examination, the examiner acknowledged that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral lower extremity peripheral arterial disease. As to the second element of service connection, TERA exposure in the form of herbicide agents was conceded, along with a probable exposure to asbestos. 

As the first two elements of service connection are met, the Board next turns to the evidence concerning whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral arterial disease and his TERA exposure.

 In a September 2024 VA nexus opinion, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral arterial disease was not due to the Veteran's TERA exposure as reported in the June 2024 TERA memorandum. This examiner reasoned that peripheral arterial disease is usually caused by atherosclerosis, with other possible causes being inflammation of the blood vessels, injury, or radiation exposure. The examiner further stated that there was no positive, scientific evidence of an association between peripheral artery disease and the hazardous exposures as reported on June 2024 TERA memorandum. 

When the Secretary undertakes to provide a Veteran with a VA medical examination or opinion, it must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Additionally, the examiner is required to not only render a clear conclusion on the relevant medical question but to support that conclusion "with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions." Stefl v Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding that "a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to the doctor's opinion"). Accordingly, absent a sufficient rationale, a medical opinion has no probative value. See Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240-42 (2012) (stating that under caselaw "an unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context").

The September 2024 examiner stated that peripheral arterial disease is usually caused by atherosclerosis, with one other possible cause being inflammation of the blood vessels. The examiner then concluded that there was no scientific evidence demonstrating a relation between the Veteran's TERA and his peripheral arterial disease. However, the examiner did not discuss whether there is a relationship between the Veteran's TERA and atherosclerosis or inflammation of the blood vessels which, in turn, caused the Veteran's peripheral arterial disease. Accordingly, the rationale provided is insufficient, and the opinion is inadequate. 

In the February 2025 IHP filed by the Veteran's representative, the representative stated that the Veteran disagrees with the scientific research that does not show a correlation between the Veteran's lower extremity peripheral arterial disease and his exposure to herbicide agents. However, as a lay person, the Veteran is not competent to render expert opinions of complex medical conditions such as whether this condition to related to the Veteran's TERA. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

As the only medical nexus opinion of record is inadequate, which is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, remand is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Thus, entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral arterial disease is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left leg, is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right leg, is remanded.

In the Veteran's May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation, the Veteran claimed that his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was due to exposure to Agent Orange while serving in Guam. 

In a June 2024 VA examination, the examiner confirmed a diagnosis of bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. As discussed above, in June 2024 the RO issued a TERA memorandum for the Veteran, which conceded presumptive exposure to herbicide agents while serving in Guam and probable asbestos exposure while serving onboard the USS Hunley. Accordingly, the first two elements of service connection are met. 

Turning to the third element of service connection, in July 2024, the RO obtained VA nexus opinions. While the examiner marked that she was providing positive nexus opinions, she then went on to state that the Veteran's left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was less likely than not due to TERA exposure, which she only cited as Agent Orange exposure. The only rationale provided by the examiner was a quote from a medical journal that "Agent Orange exposures may have increased the risk for later development of peripheral or central nervous system (CNS) degeneration."

The Board finds this opinion inadequate. First, the Board cannot determine if the examiner is providing an opinion for or against a nexus. However, even if the intent of the examiner was to provide a positive nexus opinion, just one quote from a medical journal without any other discussion constitutes an insufficient rationale. Further, if interpreted as a positive nexus opinion, the opinion is speculative, as a reported correlation, increased risk, or association does not rise to the level of causation needed for service connection. Moreover, if the intent was to provide a negative nexus opinion, the examiner failed to discuss all the Veteran's TERA and limited the opinion to just Agent Orange. As discussed above, the June 2024 TERA memorandum found it probable that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos while serving onboard the USS Hunley. Thus, this opinion is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claims.

In September 2024 the RO obtained additional nexus opinions. This examiner concluded it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy were caused by the Veteran's TERA exposure. The examiner explained that peripheral neuropathies stem from a variety of origins, including metabolic, systemic, and toxic causes. However, the examiner asserted that there is no positive, scientific evidence of an association between late onset lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and the hazardous exposures as reported in the Veteran's June 2024 TERA memorandum.

The Board also finds the September 2024 nexus opinions inadequate. First, while the examiner cites that peripheral neuropathies can stem from toxic causes, the examiner did not indicate the toxic exposures that do cause peripheral neuropathies, which prevents the Board from fully assessing the opinion. Additionally, while stating there was no scientific evidence of an association between late onset peripheral neuropathy and the Veteran's hazardous exposures, the examiner did not discuss the medical journal article cited by the July 2024 VA examiner, with the quote: "Agent Orange exposures may have increased the risk for later development of peripheral or central nervous system (CNS) degeneration."

In the February 2025 IHP filed by the Veteran's representative, the representative stated that the Veteran disagrees with the scientific research that does not show a correlation between the Veteran's lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and his exposure to herbicide agents. However, as a lay person, the Veteran is not competent to render expert opinions of complex medical conditions such as whether this condition to related to the Veteran's TERA. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

As the only medical nexus opinions of record are inadequate, which is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, remand is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Thus, entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain addendum nexus opinions from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed left and right lower extremity peripheral arterial disease and his left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. The examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, as set forth in the June 2024 VA TERA memorandum. On review of the complete record (including this remand), the consulting provider must opine on the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and right lower extremity peripheral arterial disease was incurred in or are otherwise related to his active service? In answering this question, as stated, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all his toxic exposure risk activities.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was incurred in or are otherwise related to his active service? In answering this question, as stated, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all his toxic exposure risk activities.

All opinions must be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner must identify and specifically cite each reference material used and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history. The examiner must also specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with the findings.

If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, the examiner must comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

In considering the lay statements of record, the examiner must note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner must provide a fully reasoned explanation.

  

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.M. Winchell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.