Citation Nr: A25033032
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 200512-86978
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, effective August 10, 2022, is granted.  This issue is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cataracts, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, prior to the PACT Act effective date of August 10, 2022, is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Pursuant to The PACT Act of 2022, the Veteran's hypertension is presumptively related to exposure to herbicide agents during service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for hypertension pursuant to the PACT Act, as of August 10, 2022, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1113, 1116; Pub. L. 117-168, Section 404; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 20.902.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1969 to July 1970.  

This appeal comes before the Board from a January 2020 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  On a March 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  On March 11, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, regarding the claims on appeal, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2020 AOJ decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or the representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the hearing request withdrawal, the Board did not consider that evidence in this decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider with regard to those claims will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran filed claims for service connection for sleep apnea and neuropathy of the upper extremities; and claims for higher initial ratings for peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities in June 2019.  A rating decision was issued in August 2019 and the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement in May 2020, electing the hearing docket.  However, in March 2024, the appellant withdrew the request for an optional hearing before the Board.  Those claims will be addressed in a different Board decision under another docket number.

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for service connection for sleep apnea in October 2020.  A rating decision was issued in January 2021 and the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement in March 2021, electing the hearing docket.  However, in April 2024, the appellant withdrew the request for an optional hearing before the Board.  That claim will be addressed in a different Board decision under another docket number.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted effective August 10, 2022, pursuant to The PACT Act of 2022.

The Veteran seeks service connection for hypertension.  The Veteran contends that a hypertension disability diagnosed during the evidentiary period should be granted pursuant to the Veteran's service in Vietnam.  

Service connection will be established if the evidence shows that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) medical evidence of an etiological relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be established for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In certain instances, service connection will be awarded on a presumptive basis for a disability resulting from exposure to herbicide agents.  A Veteran who, during active service, served in the Republic of Vietnam between January 9, 1962, and May 7, 1975, shall be presumed to have been exposed during that service to  herbicide agents, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any herbicide agents.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1113, 1116; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii).  The diseases that will be presumed to be related to service as a result of exposure to herbicides are specifically enumerated in VA's regulations, and include hypertension.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).

A January 2020 VA medical examination report shows that the Veteran has a diagnosis of hypertension during the evidentiary period.  The Veteran was also shown to have had active service in Vietnam and, thus, is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents. 

The PACT Act added hypertension to the list of disabilities presumptively linked to in-service herbicide exposure.  Pub. L. 117-168, Section 404(c).  Here, the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypertension.  Accordingly, service connection for hypertension under the auspices of the PACT Act is granted, effective August 10, 2022, the date of the enactment of the law.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for cataracts, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded.

In an October 2019 VA eye examination report and opinion, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed cataracts disability was not as likely as not related to the service-connected diabetes mellitus disability.  In explaining that opinion, the examiner stated that, although cataracts could be caused by diabetes, the Veteran's cataracts were age-related.  The examiner did not offer any clinical reasoning for the finding that the cataracts were caused by the Veteran's age rather than service-connected diabetes.  Moreover, the examiner did not provide any opinion as to whether the cataracts were aggravated by the service-connected diabetes disability.  Therefore, the examiner's opinions are inadequate and are of limited probative value in determining the etiology of the claimed disability.  The Board finds that the examiner not providing adequate opinions was a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Therefore, remand is necessary to schedule additional examination.   

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, prior to the PACT Act's effective date of August 10, 2022, is remanded.

Prior to the enactment of the PACT Act, hypertension was not a disease presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents.  Therefore, the effective date for the award of service connection based on the PACT Act will be no earlier than August 10, 2022, the date of the enactment of the law.  Because the Veteran filed the claim for service connection for hypertension in September 2019, the Board must still consider entitlement to service connection for hypertension on other bases prior to August 10, 2022.

In an October 2019 VA medical examination report and opinion, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was not as likely as not related to service-connected diabetes mellitus.  In explaining the opinion, the examiner stated that the service-connected diabetes mellitus did not cause the claimed disability.  The examiner did not provide any opinion as to whether hypertension was aggravated by service-connected diabetes.  The Board finds that the examiner not providing an opinion regarding aggravation was a pre-decisional error.  Therefore, remand is necessary to schedule additional examination.

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction is remanded.

The Veteran's diabetes mellitus is rated under the criteria of Diagnostic Code 7913.  38 C.F.R. § 4.119.  Under those criteria, a 20 percent rating is assigned for symptomatology more nearly approximating diabetes requiring one or more daily injection of insulin and a restricted diet, or requiring the usage of an oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet.  A 40 percent rating is assigned for symptomatology more nearly approximating diabetes requiring one or more daily injection of insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities.  The term regulation of activities is defined in the criteria for a 100 percent rating as avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.   

The Veteran, contends that VA should rate diabetes mellitus as 40 percent disabling, because the disability requires one or more daily injection of insulin, a restricted diet, and a regulation of activities.  

In a July 2019 VA diabetes examination report, a VA examiner stated that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus did not require a regulation of the Veteran's activities.  However, in an October 2019 VA diabetic peripheral neuropathy examination report, a VA examiner, in listing evidence reviewed prior to performing the required examination, included texts from various VA treatment records.  In one record, most likely from 2016, a VA examiner diagnosed non-obstructive coronary artery disease, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and type 2 diabetes-mellitus; and stated that the Veteran was to continue taking aspirin and other medication, and continue with lifestyle modifications, including a healthy diet; exertion; and abstaining from tobacco, alcohol, or drug use.  The Veteran contends that the inclusion of that record in the October 2019 VA diabetic peripheral neuropathy examination report indicates that the Veteran had to restrict activities, to include avoiding any unnecessary exertion, due to the service-connected diabetes mellitus.  The Board notes that the treatment record cited in the October 2019 VA diabetic peripheral neuropathy examination report appears to concern the Veteran's heart disability, but also notes that the author of the record did not specifically indicate whether the Veteran needed to avoid exertion due to a heart condition, and also did not specify the nature of exertion that needed to be avoided.  Because of that ambiguity, the Board finds that the October 2019 VA examination report lacks probative value in rating the Veteran's diabetes disability.  The examiner not providing an adequate examination report is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Therefore, remand is necessary to schedule an additional examination.

The VA treatment records currently in evidence contain notations indicating that a VA employee scanned medical records into a VA hospital imaging system, but do not contain any copies of the scanned records.  The Board notes that includes both VA treatment records that were created prior to the issuance of the January 2020 rating decision and records submitted by the Veteran during the 90-day period following VA's receipt of the Veteran's March 11, 2024, withdrawal of the hearing request.  Any treatment records scanned into a VA hospital's imaging system are within VA's constructive possession and are considered potentially relevant to the issues on appeal.  Remand is required to allow those records to be added to the claims file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the outstanding VA treatment records.  Specifically, obtain records noted as having been scanned into the Vista imaging system by VA Medical Center personnel, as noted in the VA treatment records in evidence, dated May 11, 2022; May 19, 2021; January 25, 2021; October 22, 2015; and September 28, 2011.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the current severity of service-connected diabetes mellitus.  In reviewing the file, the examiner should note the July 2019 VA diabetes examination report and the October 2019 VA diabetic peripheral neuropathy examination report.  The examiner specifically should note the excerpts from an earlier treatment record included in the October 2019 VA examination report, in which an examiner indicated that the Veteran should continue with lifestyle modifications, including a healthy diet; exertion; and abstaining from tobacco, alcohol, or drug use.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for rating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  The examiner should specifically consider whether the Veteran's diabetes mellitus disability has necessitated a regulation of activities, defined as avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities.  If so, the examiner should state when that regulation of activities was first required.  The examiner should discuss the significance of a report, possibly from 2016, cited in an October 2019 VA examination regarding the Veteran undertaking lifestyle modification, to include exertion, and should state whether that indicated a need for regulation of activities at that time.  The examiner should opine whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran has any other disability that is due to, the result, of caused by diabetes mellitus, to include right or left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an eye examination to determine the nature and etiology of any current eye disability, to include cataracts.  The examiner must review the entire claims file, including a copy of this remand.  In reviewing the file, the examiner should note the service medical records; the post-service treatment records; any treatise evidence submitted by the Veteran; and the lay evidence regarding symptoms during and since service, to include any submitted lay statements.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, with all findings made available to the requesting examiner prior to the completion of the report, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.  A complete rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.  The examiner must consider the lay statements provided by the Veteran regarding symptoms during and since service.  The examiner must note that, in providing the required opinions, that a mere conclusion, offered without any reasoning for that finding or discussion of clinical evidence, will be considered inadequate.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) Diagnose any current eye disability.  The examiner should specifically note whether any eye disabilities have been diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal, beginning in approximately September 2019.  If the examiner finds that any previously diagnosed disabilities are no longer present or disagrees with any prior diagnoses, the examiner should note those diagnoses and offer clinical reasons for that finding.

(b.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that each diagnosed eye disability, to include cataracts, is etiologically related to service, or any incident that occurred during a period of service, to include presumed herbicide agent exposure.  

(c.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that any eye disability, to include cataracts, is due to, the result of, or caused by service-connected diabetes mellitus or any treatment for diabetes mellitus, to include medications.

(d.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that any eye disability, to include cataracts, has been aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected diabetes mellitus or any treatment for diabetes mellitus, to include medications.  Aggravation need not be permanent.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the etiology of hypertension.  The examiner must review the entire claims file, including a copy of this remand.  In reviewing the file, the examiner should note the service medical records; the post-service treatment records; any treatise evidence submitted by the Veteran; and the lay evidence regarding symptoms during and since service, to include any submitted lay statements.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, with all findings made available to the requesting examiner prior to the completion of the report, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.  A complete rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.  The examiner must consider the lay statements provided by the Veteran regarding symptoms during and since service.  The examiner must note that, in writing the required opinions, a mere conclusion, offered without any reasoning for that finding or discussion of clinical evidence, will be considered inadequate.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension disability is etiologically related to service, or any incident that occurred during a period of service.

(b.) Opine whether it is it as likely as not that hypertension (1) began during active service from March 1969 to June 1970, (2) manifested within one year after the June 1970 separation from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.

(c.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that hypertension is due to, the result of, or caused by the service-connected disabilities, to include prostate cancer, diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction, bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, a heart disability, and a right great toe disability, or any treatment for the service-connected disabilities, to include medications.

(d.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that hypertension has been aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected disabilities, to include prostate cancer, diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction, bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, a heart disability, and a right great toe disability, or any treatment for the service-connected disabilities, to include medications.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gillett, Todd M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.