Citation Nr: A25033753
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240514-440178
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, for the grant of service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than March 2, 2023, for the grant of service connection for erectile dysfunction is denied. 

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, for the grant of individual unemployment (TDIU) is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, for basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance based on permanent and total disability status is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than March 2, 2023, for the award of special monthly compensation (SMC) based on loss of use of a creative organ is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 70 percent for service-connected PTSD is denied. 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for service-connected erectile dysfunction is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran submitted a VA Intent to File in November 2022; the first complete claim for benefits after this filing was one for entitlement to service connection for headaches in January 2023. The next Intent to File was submitted on January 27, 2023, followed by a formal claim for PTSD.

2. The August 2023 rating decision, which assigned an effective date of January 27, 2023, for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction, involved clear and unmistakable error (CUE) by failing to apply the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5110 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 in light of the pertinent facts and evidence of record.

3. The Veteran's TDIU award was based exclusively on the disabling effects of his service-connected PTSD. 

4. The Veteran's award of DEA benefits was based exclusively on the award of TDIU. 

5. The grant of SMC(k) was predicated on the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction, effective March 2, 2023, 

6. The Veteran's PTSD has not manifested total social and occupational impairment. 

7. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction warrants a noncompensable rating.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, for the grant of service connection for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

2. The August 2023 rating decision, which assigned an effective date of January 27, 2023, for service connection for erectile dysfunction, contained CUE. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5109A, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).

3. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to January 27, 2023, for the award of TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2)(i).

4. The criteria for an effective date prior to January 27, 2023, for basic eligibility for DEA under Chapter 35 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3500, 3501, 5113; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 3.807, 21.3020, 21.3021.

5. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to March 2, 2023, for the award of special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.156, 3.400.

6. The criteria for a rating higher than 70 percent for service-connected PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

7. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for erectile dysfunction have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.10, 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1974 to February 1976.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board and requested the direct review appeal lane. Under the AMA, the Board's review of evidence is limited to the evidence before the AOJ decision in February 2024. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges that the present appeal as docketed includes the issue of entitlement to service connection for a headache disability. That issue stems from a January 2023 formal claim. Upon evidentiary development, the AOJ denied the claim by way of an August 2023 rating decision. In September 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review. In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ identified a duty-to-assist error during the higher-level review process. Accordingly, further adjudication of the issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches was deferred and was not decided as part of the February 2024 rating decision. Because this claim was not adjudicated at the time the rating decision on appeal was issued, it was not legally appealed pursuant to claims processing rules, and it is not properly before the Board. See Shipley v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 458, 461-62 (2011) (finding that a deferred decision does not constitute an adjudicative decision from which a Notice of Disagreement may be filed because it is not a final decision). The Board acknowledges that after the current appeal was docketed before the Board, the AOJ adjudicated the issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches. See July 2024 Rating Decision. Should the Veteran be dissatisfied by the findings in that decision, he is free to appeal or file a Supplemental Claim pursuant to the proper procedural rules.

Earlier Effective Date

The effective date of an evaluation and grant of compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. The effective date for a grant of service connection is the day following the date of separation from active service or the date entitlement arose, if the claim is received within one year after separation from active service; otherwise, date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2)(i).

For claims prior to March 24, 2015, a "claim" is a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a benefit. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p). Any documented communication from, or action by, a veteran indicating intent to apply for a benefit under laws administered by VA may be considered an informal claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b). To determine when a claim was received, the Board must review all communications in the claims file that may be construed as an application or claim. See Quarles v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 129, 134 (1992).

Effective March 24, 2015, a change in regulation requires claims be filed on standard forms, eliminating constructive receipt of claims and informal claims.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(p), 3.151, 3.155. Instead of informal claims, the new regulation provides that a claimant may request an application for benefits, upon receipt of which, the Secretary shall notify the claimant of the information necessary to complete the application form or form prescribed by the Secretary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(a). Non-standard narrative communications/submissions previously construed as informal claims will be considered a request for an application for benefits. See Standard Claims and Appeals Forms, 79 Fed. Reg. 57660, 57661 (Sept. 25, 2014) (where a claimant submits an informal claim, VA will deem it a request for an application for benefits). The amendments also eliminate the constructive receipt of VA reports of hospitalization or examination and other medical records as informal claims to reopen under 38 C.F.R. § 3.157. See id. 

The amended regulation also allows a claimant to submit an "intent to file a claim," which operates similarly to the informal claim process. Specifically, 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b) provides that, if VA receives a complete application form within one year of the receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date of the intent to file a claim was received. There are three ways in which a claimant may submit an intent to file a claim: (i) by electronically initiating and saving a benefits application in a claims-submission tool with a VA web-based electronic claims application system; (ii) by submitting a written intent, signed and dated on the intent to file a claim form prescribed by the Secretary; or (iii) by orally communicating intent to designated VA personnel that is subsequently recorded in writing and documented in the claimant's records. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).

Factual History

The Veteran is seeking earlier effective dates for the grant of service connection for PTSD and erectile dysfunction, TDIU, DEA, and special monthly compensation for loss of use of a creative organ. Specifically, the Veteran contends that these claims stem from an Intent to File received in November 2022. See VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and Correspondence received May 14, 2024.

Turning to the facts of the case, in February 1992, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for various acquired psychiatric disorders, to include bipolar disorder and major depression. In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted private treatment records documenting inpatient treatment for bipolar disorder and major depression with psychotic features. In a lay statement received in February 1992, the Veteran indicated that he was unable to work due to his psychiatric disorders. In a September 1992 rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's service connection claim. The Veteran did not appeal and did not submit new and material evidence within one year. Thus, that decision became final.

In November 1996, the Veteran submitted an informal claim to reopen the issue of entitlement to service connection for a "nervous disorder," along with additional treatment records documenting in-service treatment. Upon consideration of the additional evidence, the AOJ found that new and material evidence had not been submitted, thus denying the Veteran's claim. See March 1997 Rating Decision. The Veteran submitted a timely Notice of Disagreement, appealing the denial. See Statement in Support of Claim received March 25, 1997.

In April 1997, the AOJ issued a Statement of the Case, affirming the finding that new and material evidence had not been received to reopen the claim for service connection for a nervous condition. The Veteran did not formally appeal but submitted additional medical evidence to support his claim.

In September 2000, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for bipolar disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). In an October 2000 Notification Letter, the AOJ informed the Veteran that the appeal period for his prior claim had expired, and he needed to submit new and material evidence in order for his new claim to be reopened and adjudicated. In September 2001, the AOJ issued a rating decision indicating that the issue of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, stemming from the November 1996 claim, was still pending since he submitted additional evidence within the requisite appeal period after the issuance of the SOC. The rating decision also discussed all the evidence of record and continued the denial of service connection. The AOJ also issued a Supplemental Statement of the Case (SSOC), dated September 2001, denying the claim. The Veteran did not appeal or submit any additional evidence.

In July 2015, the Veteran submitted a formal service connection claim for hearing loss and tinnitus. Along with his formal claim, he submitted additional medical treatment records related to his continued treatment for various acquired psychiatric disorders. However, in Correspondence received October 29, 2015, the Veteran explicitly indicated that he did not wish to pursue a service connection claim for his acquired psychiatric disabilities.

Subsequently, VA received a VA 21-0996 Intent to File a claim for compensation in November 2022. The Form stated that if VA received a completed application for the selected general benefit (in this case, compensation) within one year of receiving the Intent to File, it would consider the completed action filed as of the date the Intent to File was received. However, the form also stated that only the first completed application for each selected general benefit received after receiving the Intent to File would be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the Intent to File. In January 2023, about two months later, VA received a complete claim identifying the sole issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches. 

Subsequently, in January 2023, the Veteran submitted another Intent to File a claim for compensation. Again, this Intent to File form indicated that only the first completed claim received within one year of VA's receipt of the Intent to File would be considered a completed action filed as of the date the Intent to File was received. In March 2023, about two months later, the Veteran submitted a formal claim for the issue of entitlement to service connection for PTSD. This claim led to the August 2023 rating decision, which granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a compensable rating, effective January 27, 2023, the date the second Intent to File was received.

Thereafter, in March 2023, VA received the Veteran's third Intent to File form, which again indicated that the first completed action received within one year of VA's receipt of the Intent to File would be considered a completed action filed as of the date the Intent to File was received. In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a Fully Developed Claim for service connection for erectile dysfunction.

Shortly after, in June 2023, the Veteran submitted another Intent to File form, which again indicated that the first completed action received within one year of VA's receipt of the Intent to File would be considered a completed action filed as of the date the Intent to File was received. About a week later, the Veteran submitted a formal VA 21-8940 Application for TDIU. In the August 2023 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for erectile dysfunction, effective January 27, 2023. The same rating decision granted TDIU based on his service-connected PTSD, and granted DEA benefits, both effective January 27, 2023.

In September 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, seeking, in relevant part, earlier effective dates for the grants of service connection for PTSD and erectile dysfunction, TDIU, DEA and SMC for loss of use of creative organ. 

Upon review, the AOJ issued the February 2024 rating decision on appeal. In that decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, for the grants of service connection for PTSD, TDIU, and DEA benefits. The AOJ also found clear and unmistakable error in the effective date assigned for service connection for erectile dysfunction and the grant of special monthly compensation for loss of use of a creative organ, and assigned a later effective date of March 2, 2023, for each benefit. The Veteran appealed to the Board.

Service Connection for PTSD

Based on the above facts, the Board finds that an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, the date VA received the second Intent to File, is not warranted. In so finding, the Board acknowledges the 1992 and 1996 formal claims for service connection for acquired psychiatric disorders. However, the evidence fails to establish, and the Veteran does not contend, that an effective date based on either of these claims is warranted. The formal claim filed in February 1992 was denied by way of a September 1992 rating decision. The Veteran was appropriately notified of this denial and did not appeal or submit new and material evidence (the legal standard at that time) within one year of the notice of denial. Thus, that decision became final and cannot serve as a basis for an earlier effective date.

The Veteran's November 1996 claim was also denied by way of a March 1997 rating decision. While the Veteran did appeal that decision, the AOJ continued to deny the claim by way of an April 1997 Statement of the Case and September 2001 Supplemental Statement of the Case. The Veteran did not appeal his claim to the Board; thus, the March 1997 rating decision is final.

The Board also notes that after the March 1997 rating decision became final, the Veteran continued to receive treatment for his acquired psychiatric disabilities. However, the Board finds that the medical evidence of record is not sufficient to establish an earlier effective date for service connection. The mere existence of such records generally cannot be construed as an informal claim; rather, there must be some intent by the claimant to apply for a benefit. See Criswell v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 501, 504 (2006). Furthermore, in the absence of a sufficient manifestation of intent to apply for benefits for a particular disease or injury, a document providing medical information which refers to a disability in and of itself is not an informal claim for VA benefit. Ellington v. Nicholson, 22 Vet. App. 141, 145-46 (2007). In addition, a Veteran's attempt to obtain treatment does not comprise a claim. Dunson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 327, 330 (1993).

Here, prior to March 24, 2015, there was no evidence in the medical record sufficient to establish an informal claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder. To the extent the Veteran may have received treatment for various psychiatric disabilities prior to March 24, 2015, at no point in the record did the Veteran explicitly state that he intended to apply for benefits related to this disability. After review of the Veteran's medical records during the time period prior to March 24, 2015, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements to physicians over the years cannot be construed as an informal claim. For the period beginning March 24, 2015, claims for compensation benefits must be filed on a standard form. Therefore, as there were no formal or informal unadjudicated claims for service connection for a psychiatric disorder prior to November 2022, an effective date earlier than November 2022 is not warranted. 

To that end, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted an Intent to File in November 2022, within one year prior to the date he filed his formal service connection claim for PTSD. However, the Veteran filed a complete claim for entitlement to service connection for headaches between the first Intent to File and either the second Intent to File or the formal service connection claim for PTSD. As each Intent to File can only preserve an earlier filing date for a single complete claim, and the Veteran's complete headaches claim was submitted prior to his PTSD claim, the November 2022 Intent to File does not preserve an earlier effective date for the PTSD claim. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2) preclude the November 2022 Intent to File as applying to claims following the completed headache application. Therefore, the earliest possible effective date for the grant of service connection for PTSD is the date of the second Intent to File, which is January 27, 2023. Entitlement to an earlier effective date is denied.

Service Connection for Erectile Dysfunction

The Board also finds that an effective date earlier than March 2, 2023, is not warranted for the grant of service connection for erectile dysfunction. As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges that the RO revised the effective date for the grant of service connection for erectile dysfunction on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE). Under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a), previous determinations that are final and binding will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE. However, where evidence establishes such error, the prior rating decision will be reversed or amended. For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).

The Board is cognizant that the August 2023 rating decision, which assigned an effective date of January 27, 2023, was not final at the time CUE was found. However, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims found that a Regional Office could reverse or revise a rating decision currently on appeal based on clear and unmistakable error (CUE). Young v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 51, 56 (2019); Westervelt v. Collins, U.S. Vet. App. No. 23-0024 (April 8, 2025). See also, 38 C.F.R. § 20.2600.

As previously noted, in this case, by way of a February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ determined there was CUE in the August 2023 rating decision because the effective date assigned was based on the January 2023 Intent to File rather than the March 2023 Intent to File.

CUE is established when the following conditions are met: (1) either (a) the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or (b) the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error must be "undebatable," not merely "a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated"; and (3) the commission of the alleged error must have "manifestly changed the outcome" of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time that decision was rendered. See Hime v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 1, 8 (2016); Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 185 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992).

As previously noted, effective dates for service connection based on an Intent to File are assigned pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. To preserve an effective date, an intent to file a claim may be submitted to VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b). If VA receives a complete application form prescribed by the Secretary, appropriate to the benefit sought, within one-year of receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received. Id. 

Based on the law as applied to the facts, the Board finds that clear and unmistakable error was made in the August 2023 rating decision when the AOJ assigned an effective date of January 27, 2023. In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ incorrectly applied the relevant statue and regulation pertaining to effective dates based on an Intent to File. Two months after the Veteran submitted the January 2023 Intent to File, he filed a formal claim for a single disability: PTSD. That claim was granted and service connection for PTSD was effective January 27, 2023. Although the Veteran's June 2023 formal service connection claim for erectile dysfunction was received within one year of the January 2023 Intent to File, this Intent to File cannot preserve the effective date for two separate claims, as stipulated on the form. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2). Thus, the earliest effective date available for service connection for erectile dysfunction was March 2, 2023, the date the next Intent to File was received.

For the same reasons, the November 2022 Intent to File cannot serve as the basis for an effective date for service connection for erectile dysfunction. The first claim the Veteran filed after he submitted the November 2022 Intent to File was a service connection claim for a single disability: headaches. Again, although the Veteran's June 2023 formal service connection claim for erectile dysfunction was received with one year of the November 2022 Intent to File, this intent to file can only preserve the effective date for the first completed application for benefits received within one year. As the Veteran filed multiple claims for compensation after the November 2022 Intent to File, this Intent to File did not preserve the effective date for service connection for erectile dysfunction. 

Accordingly, the August 2023 rating decision made a clear and unmistakable error when it assigned an effective date of January 27, 2023, for the grant of service connection for erectile dysfunction and associated SMC for loss of use for a creative organ. The February 2024 rating decision, which assigned an effective date of March 2, 2023 for those disabilities, was proper. The claim is denied.

Entitlement to TDIU

The Veteran seeks an effective date earlier than January 27, 2023, for the grant of TDIU. As previously noted, with regard to the effective date assigned to increased disability compensation ratings, to include the TDIU benefit, governing regulation provides that the effective date will be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred if the claim is received within one year from such date, otherwise the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

In terms of TDIU, a precedent Court opinion raises another potential theory to support an earlier effective date. When the claimant or the record reasonably raises the question of whether the Veteran is unemployable due to the disability for which an increased rating is sought, then part and parcel to that claim for an increased rating is whether a total rating based on individual unemployability is warranted as a result of that disability. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). In other words, if the Veteran had an earlier claim for an increased rating which implicated unemployability, then the effective date for a grant of TDIU could be as early as the date of the increased rating claim.

Total disability will be considered to exist where there is present any impairment of mind and body that is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.340. Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that the veteran meets the schedular requirements. If there is only one service-connected disability, this disability should be rated at 60 percent or more; if there are two or more disabilities, at least one should be rated at 40 percent or more with sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combination to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Substantially gainful employment is defined as work which is more than marginal, and which permits the individual to earn a living wage. Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991). In determining whether unemployability exists, consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but it may not be given to his age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

Turning to the facts of this case, the record reflects that the Veteran has a long history of unemployment. In September 1991, the Veteran received inpatient care at a psychiatric hospital. At that time, he indicated that he felt "very stressed" at his job and had been off from work for about two weeks. At the February 1997 VA examination, the Veteran reported being unemployed since 1991 due to "medical problems;" no further detail was provided. 

The evidence establishes that the Veteran has been unable to work due to his acquired psychiatric disability. As noted above, TDIU was granted by way of an August 2023 rating decision. In that decision, the AOJ found that TDIU was effective January 27, 2023, the effective date for service connection for PTSD. The effective date for a TDIU cannot be earlier than the effective date of service connection for the underlying disability upon which TDIU is based. See Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 232, 236 (2019). The evidence fails to establish that the Veteran was unemployable due to any other service-connected condition. Because the evidence reflects, and the AOJ found, that the Veteran's PTSD alone rendered him unable to secure substantially gainful employment, and because the Veteran did not meet the schedular criteria for TDIU prior to January 27, 2023, the effective date for TDIU can be no earlier than the effective date of service connection for PTSD, which is January 27, 2023. Accordingly, the claim is denied.

DEA Benefits

The issue of entitlement to an earlier effective date for DEA benefits pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is dependent on the effective date of the permanent total service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.807(a). Based on the above decision, TDIU is granted effective January 27, 2023. It follows that the DEA benefits should also be granted as of January 27, 2023. Therefore, the claim for an earlier effective date for DEA is denied.

SMC Loss of Use of a Creative Organ

SMC is a special statutory award granted in addition to awards based on the schedular evaluations provided by the diagnostic codes in VA's rating schedule. Claims for SMC, other than those pertaining to one-time awards and an annual clothing allowance, are governed by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) through (s) and 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350 and 3.352.

The pertinent issue for the consideration of an earlier effective date for SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, is the effective date of the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction. The award of SMC based on loss of use of creative organ comes from the grant of service connection for erectile dysfunction. The herein decision has determined that an effective date prior to March 2, 2023, for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction is not warranted. Therefore, there is no legal basis for assignment of an earlier effective date for the grant of SMC for loss of use of a creative organ. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994). Accordingly, the claim for an effective date prior to March 2, 2023, for SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ is denied.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

PTSD

The Veteran's PTSD is currently rated 70 percent disabling under DC 9411. All psychiatric disorders are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Under the general rating formula, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

Finally, a total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Further, "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Thus, "[a]lthough the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Id. at 118.

As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment associated with the rating code to determine whether an increased evaluation is warranted.

Turning to the facts of the case, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for PTSD in January 2023. In contemporaneous treatment records, the Veteran described a recent road rage incident where he verbally confronted a driver who blocked him at the gas station. He indicated that the other driver deescalated the altercation, and the Veteran left scene. At the time of evaluation, the Veteran endorsed hypervigilance and short-term memory issues but denied suicidal or homicidal ideations and hallucinations. In a later treatment record, the Veteran indicated that his anxiety was "up a little," but denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation. His mental status was within normal limits. While he presented as anxious and his speech was rapid at times, his thought process was logical, goal oriented, and clear. He was not delusional or psychotic. He continued to take his medication. See VA Treatment Records and CAPRI Records received February 22, 2023.

In February and March 2023 private treatment notes, the Veteran reported depressed mood, anxiety, angry outbursts, flashbacks, and sleep disturbances, along with irritability, negative world view, and hypervigilance. Socially, he was separated from his wife and had strained relationships with his children and grandchildren. Upon mental status examination, the Veteran was oriented in all spheres. His appearance, dress, and behavior were all appropriate. While his mood was irritable, his speech, insight, judgement, memory, and concentration ranged from poor to normal. He did endorse persecutory delusions. See Private Treatment Records received April 6, 2023.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a Disabilities Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) completed by his psychologist. At that time, Dr. M.J.C. diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD and bipolar disorder with psychotic features. Both diagnoses resulted in irritable behavior, angry outbursts, and reckless/destructive behavior, while PTSD included feelings of detachment and estrangement from others. Socially, the Veteran was separated from his wife. His condition prevented him from maintaining consistent employment due to interpersonal relational problems. His angry outburst occurred with little to no provocation and were expressed as verbal and physical aggression toward people and objects. His other symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and weekly panic attacks, along with chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and near continuous panic or depression affecting his ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively. The Veteran also endorsed disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation. The examiner found that the Veteran was a persistent danger of hurting himself or others and he had intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintaining minimal personal hygiene. Upon mental status examination, the Veteran presented with good hygiene and appropriate dress. He was cooperative; however, his mood was irritable and his affect at times was constricted. While judgement and insight were moderately impaired, his speech and motor activity were within normal limits. He remained competent to manage his financial affairs. The examiner found that the Veteran's diagnoses resulted in total occupational and social impairment.

In a lay statement received March 2023, the Veteran described the severity of his PTSD. He described experiencing depressed mood, poor decision making, and diminished focus and concentration. He stated that he had panic attacks nearly every day and avoided interactions with other people whenever possible. He described himself as "a loner" with no friends other than his dog. He was married but lived separately from his wife due to his verbal aggression. In addition, to experiencing agitation and insomnia, he thought about committing suicide at least every other day. He also described having "low energy," and on most days he had trouble getting out of bed. See also, Lay Statement from Wife, received March 1, 2023.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023. At that time, the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, impaired memory, suicidal ideation, difficulty establishing and maintaining relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, along with disturbances in motivation and mood, and grossly inappropriate behavior. The Veteran lived separately from his wife "for her own safety." He did not have any close friends other than his family, nor did he engage in any hobbies. Upon mental status examination, the Veteran presented as well groomed, alert, and oriented on all spheres. His speech was clear and coherent. However, his mood was described as anxious and depressed, and his affect was irritable and angry. He denied any suicidal ideations and auditory or visual hallucinations. The examiner found that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

In subsequent treatment records, the Veteran continued to endorse sleep disturbance with nightmares four to five nights per week. He continued to describe periods of anger and depression, particularly after his dog died, along with some fleeting suicidal ideation but no intent or plan. He denied homicidal ideation and hallucinations. He remained oriented on all spheres. His mood was agitated, and his speech fluctuated with his mood. However, his thought process remained logical, goal oriented, and clear. He was not delusional or psychotic. He continued to take his medication, and his PTSD was noted as "stable." See VA Treatment Records received June 10, 2023.

At the outset, the Board recognizes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with bipolar disorder which is not formally recognized as a service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder. VA rates mental disorders under a General Rating Formula and assigns one rating regardless if there is one or more diagnosed disorders. Here, the Board attributes all psychiatric symptoms and psychiatric impairment as being part of the service-connected PTSD. See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998) (prescribing that, under such circumstances, the reasonable doubt doctrine dictates that all psychiatric symptoms be attributed to the service-connected disability).

Based on the above, the Board finds that a higher rating of 100 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's PTSD, as the frequency, duration, and severity of his symptoms does not more nearly approximate that which is contemplated by total occupational and social impairment. The Board notes that the words "total" and "persistent" are not specifically defined in the regulation. The word "total" is defined as "absolute, utter." https://merriam-webster.com/dictionary/total. The word "persistent" is defined as "continuing to exist despite interference or treatment." www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/persistent. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD has been manifested by anxiety, depression, suicidal ideation, irritability, and isolative behavior. He described having difficulty maintaining relationships with other people, including his family. However, the Veteran has remained oriented on all spheres. While the Veteran demonstrated some irritability, his behavior does not establish that he is a persistent danger to himself or others. He denied violent thoughts or homicidal ideations. Furthermore, while he did have some anger, he has always denied the presence of psychoses. While he endorsed persecutory delusions in February 2023, most often he denied experiencing delusions of any kind throughout the appeal period. His thought processes, judgement, communication, and insight have ranged but have remained intact. The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms are adequately contemplated by the currently assigned 70 percent rating.

In so finding, the Board acknowledges the February 2023 private DBQ, in which the Veteran's psychologist opined that his psychiatric disabilities resulted in total occupational and social impairment. Even though the Veteran endorsed some symptom delineated under the 100 percent criteria during this examination, the Board finds that this DBQ is insufficient to support a 100 percent rating for the entire appeal period. Notably, the examiner found that the Veteran was a persistent danger to himself and others and demonstrated physical aggression. However, this finding is not supported by the evidence of record, to include the DBQ itself. While the Veteran was subject to angry outbursts and irritability, he always described his altercations with others as verbal; at no point during the appeal period has the Veteran displayed violent behavior toward others or endorsed homicidal ideation. In regard to posing a danger to himself, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's frequent suicidal ideation; however, he has always denied any plan or intent. 

Similarly, while the February 2023 DBQ indicates that the Veteran endorsed intermittent inability to attend to activities of daily living, to include maintenance of minimal hygiene, the Board again finds that this finding is not supported by the evidence of record. The Veteran presented to the February 2023 examination and all other examinations and consultations appropriately dressed with no deficits in his hygiene or personal maintenance. Without more detail, this finding is not sufficient to support a higher 100 percent rating. 

The February 2023 DBQ also cited the Veteran's inability to maintain employment as a basis for the finding of total impairment. However, evidence of inability to maintain employment is not sufficient to support a 100 percent rating. The Board is cognizant of the difference in criteria for a 100 percent rating that is set forth by the rating schedule under DC 9411, see supra, and the requirements for entitlement to a TDIU. Entitlement to a TDIU requires the presence of impairment so severe that it is impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation; a 100 percent PTSD rating involves a showing of total occupational and social impairment based on enumerated symptoms. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16, cf. § 4.130, DC 9411. Thus, marginal, sheltered, or failed employment does not necessarily equate to total occupational and social impairment. In this regard, the evidence addressing the Veteran's unemployability is not probative evidence showing that the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment as unemployability does not equate total impairment.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the frequency, duration, and severity of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms are adequately contemplated by the currently assigned 70 percent rating. Entitlement to a 100 percent rating for PTSD is denied.

Erectile Dysfunction

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction, which has been service-connected effective March 2, 2023. Effective November 14, 2021, Diagnostic Code 7522 provides a noncompensable rating for erectile dysfunction with or without penile deformity. 86 Fed. Reg. 54081 (Sept. 30, 2021).

(continued on the next page)

The Veteran's award of SMC for loss of use of a creative organ adequately contemplates his complained loss of reproductive functioning throughout the duration of the appeal. Moreover, the amount of special monthly compensation for loss of use of a creative organ is a non-variable amount and is set by statute. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k). The criteria of DC 7522, however, deems erectile dysfunction as not warranting a compensable rating. As such, the claim for a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction is denied. 

 

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Orie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.