Citation Nr: A25033583
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453858
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities caused or aggravated his lumbosacral strain.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1995 to August 1999.

The Veteran applied for service connection for lower back pain in a February 2023 application. This claim was denied in a July 2023 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran then submitted a Supplemental which was again denied in an October 2023 AOJ rating decision. The Veteran appealed that decision in a July 2024 notice of disagreement, and elected the Direct Review Docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities is granted.

The Veteran contended in his claim applications and a September 2023 statement that his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities caused or aggravated his lower back disability. In a July 2024 filing, the Veteran's representative argued that the evidence is in approximate balance and so establishes that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's knee disabilities caused or aggravated his lower back pain.

Factual Background

The Veteran's May 1995 entrance exam and report of medical history make no note of any then-current nor historical back issues. The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints of back pain, and his separation exam is not of record. 

The first record of a complaint of lower back pain in the Veteran's post-service VA treatment record is from May 2008. Low back pain was still listed as an active problem of the Veteran's as of January 2022. 

Entries in the Veteran's VA medical center records show his gait as normal in July 2008, July 2017, November 2018, December 2019, January and July 2020, January 2022, and April and September 2023.

In a February 2023 statement, the Veteran claimed that his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities caused him to walk unevenly which exacerbated his low back pain which in turn caused him to limit his activities, and to miss about a week of work in the year previous.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his low back claim in May 2023. That examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's low back pain was proximately due to his service-connected knee disabilities because the knees and back are unrelated anatomical and physiological systems. This exam did not address the Veteran's specific contentions, nor potential aggravation of the back issue due to the knee disabilities.

In the July 2023 rating decision denying the Veteran's claim, the AOJ made the favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of lumbosacral strain, and his bilateral knee disabilities are service-connected. 

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion which stated it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities caused or aggravated his lower back pain because the knee disabilities caused an altered gait in the Veteran, which contributed to his lower back pain. The opinion applies this Veteran's circumstances to information from included medical studies to arrive at the conclusion that the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities aggravated or were otherwise related to his lower back diagnosis. 

The same month, the Veteran was provided with a new VA examination for his claimed lumbosacral strain. This examiner opined that the Veteran's low back disability was less likely than not caused by his service-connected knee disabilities because lumbosacral strain is caused by overuse, because the knees and back are separate systems, and because the Veteran's medical records show that he goes to the gym, works, and his gait is normal. The opinion did not address potential aggravation. 

Analysis

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Secondary service connection may be found in certain instances in which a service-connected disability aggravates another condition. Any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease, will be service connected. However, VA will not concede that a nonservice-connected disease or injury was aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury unless the baseline level of severity of the nonservice-connected disease or injury is established by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of the nonservice-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110, from which 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) is derived, establishes a "but for" causation standard, rather than one involving proximate cause. The Federal Circuit also invalidated that portion of the regulation referencing consideration of the "natural progress" of the disability.

An adequate opinion must provide a rationale and not be conclusory, must consider the Veteran's relevant lay statements, and cannot be based on an inaccurate factual premise. Id.; Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993). 

For an opinion on secondary service connection to be adequate, it must address the question of aggravation of the claimed disability by a service-connected disability, as well as direct causation by the service-connected disability. See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 91 (2018) (holding that aggravation of a condition by a service-connected disability must be considered independently of direct causation, and medical examinations must provide adequate reasoning and conclusions on both points); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (holding that medical opinions addressing the issue of secondary service connection are inadequate when they fail to adequately encompass the question of aggravation).

The AOJ has made the favorable findings that the Veteran's claimed primary disabilities are service-connected, and that the Veteran has a diagnosis of a lower back disability. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the only question remaining for the Board is whether the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities caused or aggravated his lumbosacral strain. 

The three medical opinions provide mixed evidence as to whether such a nexus can be established. Both VA examiners found that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's knee disabilities caused his lower back pain. However, these exams are of diminished probative value. First, the May 2023 exam only provides a conclusory statement that the Veteran's knee disabilities did not cause his lower back pain. The opinion only states that these are separate systems and so must be unrelated, and does not address the Veteran's contention that his knee disabilities caused an altered gait. Further, the opinion uses the incorrect "proximate cause" standard. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023). 

Because the May 2023 exam used the wrong standard, did not address the Veteran's lay contentions of an altered gait, and provided a conclusory rationale, it is inadequate and so of no probative value. 

The September 2023 VA examination is also of diminished probative value. First, this exam also uses the proximate cause standard, and not the lower bar of but-for causation. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023). Additionally, the opinion only addresses direct causation, and not aggravation. For these reasons alone, the exam might be deemed inadequate. Further, the opinion does not address the medical literature included in the private opinion, and instead focuses only on medical records showing a normal gait to undermine that opinion. However, the opinion's rationale is bolstered by the fact that it does address the Veteran's contention of an altered gait by reference to the Veteran's medical records and finds that there is no supporting evidence of a sustained change in the Veteran's walk sufficient to cause lower back pain, and describes other potential causes of the Veteran's low back pain such as work or exercise. Thus, although the exam taken as a whole is inadequate, it does not completely lack probative value as the rationale behind the direct causation opinion is sufficient to inform the Board's opinion. 

Weighed against the minimal probative value of the September 2023 VA examiner is the September 2023 private medical opinion. This private opinion is not inadequate but is also of somewhat diminished probative value. The private opinion properly addresses both direct causation as well as aggravation, and its rationale sufficiently addresses the Veteran's contentions and ties the Veteran's particular circumstances to the medical literature included with the opinion which show a clear relationship between knee issues and lower back pain. This is the only opinion which addresses aggravation and so should be dispositive as to that issue. However, the opinion does suffer because it does not address the Veteran's medical records which show only a normal gait and do not record any sort of change in steps caused by the Veteran's knee disabilities and instead takes the altered gait as established by the Veteran's February 2023 lay statement. 

Based on their deficiencies, the probative values of the September 2023 VA and private opinions may be said to be in roughly approximate balance. In this case, the Board would give the benefit-of-the-doubt to the Veteran and find that the probative shows it is at least as likely as not that his bilateral knee disabilities have caused or aggravated his lower back disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

However, applying the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine also allows the Board to resolve the ambiguity around the Veteran's claim of an altered gait in the Veteran's favor.

First, the Veteran has described developing an altered gait in response to his bilateral knee disabilities, which in turn aggravated his lower back pain. The Veteran has not been shown to possess the requisite medical training, expertise, or credentials needed to render a diagnosis or a competent opinion as to medical causation. Nothing in the record demonstrates that the Veteran received any special training or acquired any medical expertise in evaluating disabilities, and so his opinion as to causation is not competent medical evidence and lacks probative value. He is competent only to report his symptoms. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

The Board also notes that the Veteran's report of an altered gait is not reflected in the medical records, and this was relied on by the second VA examiner. However, it is possible that at the times of these notations the Veteran's steps were unaltered but that at other times outside of VA medical centers he did have an altered gait to compensate for knee pain and the Veteran is competent to report a changed walking pattern. While it is unclear whether the September 2023 private medical opinion was based only a file review or included an in-person examination, that opinion describes the Veteran as having an antalgic gait. This examiner is competent and credible. Further, the examiner relies on medical studies to show that an altered gait is a common response to knee disabilities.

Thus, the Board believes the evidence as to an abnormal gait is in an approximate balance, and so finds it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran does have an altered gait. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

With this finding, the probative value of the private opinion increases because its rationale is based on the contention that the Veteran has developed an altered gait in response to his bilateral knee disabilities, though still somewhat diminished because it does not address the negative indications of an altered gait in the Veteran's VA medical records. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Thus, the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities caused his low back pain, and the private opinion - resting largely on the fact, as described above, that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has an altered gait - is the only probative evidence as to whether the Veteran's knee disabilities aggravated his lower back pain. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). Based on the foregoing, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities caused or aggravated his lumbosacral strain, and the claim is granted.

 

 

Thomas H. O'Shay

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Kronick

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.