Citation Nr: A25033340
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241007-480963
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 100 percent disability rating for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with generalized anxiety disorder, panic attacks, and major depressive disorder (MDD) (hereinafter psychiatric disorder) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for generalized seizure disorder is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from June 2014 to January 2019.

In September 2024, the Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision which addressed the above-noted issues.  Thereafter, in October 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), wherein he sought to appeal the claims in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) System.  He elected the evidence submission lane.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  

However, because the Board is remanding the above-referenced seizure disorder claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  In particular, 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement (NOD) within one year from the date the RO mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later; unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in?38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302?and 20.303, or the appellant or their representative has requested a?waiver?of the right to request to switch dockets during this timeframe. See?Williams?v. McDonough,?37?Vet. App.?305?(2024).  

Because the Veteran has requested his case be advanced on the docket, the Board finds he has implicitly waived his remaining time to switch dockets in this case.  As such, the Board will proceed with a decision in this matter.

FINDING OF FACT

During the entire period on appeal, the occupational and social impairment from the Veteran's psychiatric disorder has most nearly approximated total.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 100 percent for ADHD with generalized anxiety disorder, panic attacks, and MDD have been met for the entire period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

Duty to Assist

As explained below, the Board has determined the evidence currently of record is sufficient to substantiate the Veteran's claim for entitlement to a 100 percent schedular rating for his psychiatric disorder throughout the appeal period.  Therefore, with respect to this claim, no further development is required under 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A or 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  

Burden of Proof

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  The Secretary shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Legal Criteria

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.

Where a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

It is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified; findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom are sufficient; and above all, a coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

Factual Background and Analysis

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted an intent to file a claim, which was followed by a claim for an increased disability rating for his psychiatric disorder, submitted the same month.  The Veteran has continuously pursued his claim since that time.  By way of a February 2024 rating decision, the RO increased the Veteran's disability evaluation to 70 percent throughout the entire appeal period.  The Veteran asserts a higher 100 percent disability rating is warranted.  

The Board initially observes that the rating criteria for a 70 percent evaluation for mental disorders indicates an array of symptoms, which are sufficient to cause impairment and deficiencies in most areas of life functioning, to include work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  Such symptoms need not rise to the level of activity preclusion, but rather negatively influence or impact upon most areas of life functioning.  A higher 100 percent rating is warranted when the evidence indicates total impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.103, Diagnostic Code 9411.

The symptoms considered in determining the level of impairment under the Rating Schedule are not restricted to the symptoms provided in the Diagnostic Code.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.  The Board has carefully reviewed the Veteran's treatment reports from the East Orange VA Medical Center.  The Board has also thoroughly reviewed the results of VA examinations conducted in November 2023, April 2024, and September 2024. 

Further, the Board has prudently considered the Veteran's own statements, as well as the reports from his private psychiatric providers.

In sum, those records show the Veteran received consistent mental health care throughout the period of this appeal.  In addition, the above-noted evidence shows the Veteran has experienced several significant symptoms and impairments, which include: near continuous depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, more than weekly panic attacks, memory loss, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, impaired work and social relationships, difficulty with stressful circumstances, an inability to maintain effective relationships, sleep disturbances, deficiencies in family relations, unprovoked hostility, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals, and a neglect of personal appearance.

The evidence further indicates the Veteran has experienced a sporadic work life, with several writeups, as well as a suspension after being deemed unfit for duty by his department psychologist.  Additionally, the Veteran has few family and friends he interacts with, and does not attend social gatherings.  The evidence also indicates the Veteran was hospitalized following a suicide event in February 2024.  He is divorced from his ex-spouse, and has experienced two relationship failures since that time.  Further, the Veteran has been in a physical altercation with his brother.

In this case, the copious evidence plainly establishes the Veteran's psychiatric manifestations have resulted in deficiencies in all applicable areas of life functioning.  Specifically, his symptoms have significantly impaired his ability to work or attend school, caused him marked social impairments, caused clear deficiencies in judgment, and resulted in severe mood and thinking impairments. As noted above, the 100 percent evaluation criteria does not indicate total occupational and social preclusion; rather, it merely states a veteran must have total impairment.  The Board again notes a 70 percent rating is warranted when psychiatric manifestations cause impairment in most areas of life functioning; however, this Veteran's psychiatric manifestations have very plainly resulted in impairments in all areas of life.  As such, the Board has afforded the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and finds his disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria necessary for a 100 percent rating for the entire period on appeal.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction for correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.

Under certain circumstances, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4) require VA to obtain a VA examination or obtain a medical opinion.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  The failure to provide the above-noted assistance constitutes a due process violation.

The Veteran has asserted his use of Adderall to treat his service-connected ADHD has resulted in his current seizure disorder.  In support of his claim, the Veteran provided a medical article in August 2024, which indicates seizures are a known long-term potential health consequence associated with the use of Adderall.  The Veteran was afforded a VA central nervous system examination in September 2024. 

Following his VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with generalized seizure disorder.  However, the examiner cursorily indicated the Veteran's seizure disorder was less likely than not due to or the result of his ADHD.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner stated there is "no physiological no pathological relation." 

Aside from the opinion's incomprehensible nature, the examiner also wholly failed to explain how and why he came to his conclusions.  He further failed to provide any medical literature to support his conclusions.  

Additionally, he failed to address the Veteran's contention that his medications taken for ADHD caused his seizure disorder, and failed to consider or discuss the medical article provided in support of the Veteran's contention.  To be considered adequate, medical examination reports must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Additionally, an opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  Further, the September 2024 VA examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's claimed seizure disorder was aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disorder, to include medications taken therefor.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a new VA examination and medical opinions are necessary.

Accordingly, this case is REMANDED for the following actions:

Afford the Veteran a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to address the etiology of the Veteran's claimed seizure disorder.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.

Following a review of the relevant records and lay statements, the examiner should state an opinion as to whether the Veteran's seizure disorder at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher):

a)  originated during his period of active service or is otherwise etiologically related to his active service;

b)  was caused by his service-connected psychiatric disorder, to include medications taken therefor; or

c) was worsened to any degree by his service-connected psychiatric disorder, to include medications taken therefor.

For these opinions, the examiner should note veterans are generally competent to attest to factual matters of which they have first-hand knowledge, including events and symptoms.  The examiner is asked to consider and expressly discuss the Veteran's reports relative to the nature and etiology of his claimed disability.  If the examiner finds any reports provided by the Veteran to lack reliability, the examiner should state why.  The examiner is also asked to consider and expressly discuss the medical article provided by the Veteran in August 2024, which purports to establish a relationship between Adderall use and seizure disorder development.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions offered.  If the examiner is unable to provide any requested opinion, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

T. REYNOLDS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fraser, Gordon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.