Citation Nr: A25033218
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-471929
DATE:  April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease with spinal stenosis, status post fusion surgery, is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a lumbar spine surgical scar is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service from December 1956 to June 1960. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On November 15, 2024, the Veteran withdrew his request for a hearing. Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence before the AOJ at the time of the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, and the evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Increased Ratings - Back and Lumbar Scar Disabilities 

The Veteran has asserted that he should have higher ratings for his back and lumbar scar disabilities as his symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned ratings.

In a May 2023 decision, the Board remanded the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for a back disability for the AOJ to obtain an addendum VA medical opinion and a new VA examination, if the addendum medical opinion could not be rendered without performing an examination. The record indicates the AOJ requested a lumbar spine disability examination and medical opinion, and the Veteran and the Veteran's representative were mailed a notification of appointment on June 2, 2023, for an examination scheduled for June 20, 2023. There is no indication in the record that this notification was returned as undeliverable, or that the Veteran and/or his representative did not receive the notification. The record indicates the examination was canceled due to the Veteran's failure to report for the examination. On June 29, 2023, the AOJ sent the Veteran and his representative a Subsequent Development Letter requesting the Veteran contact the AOJ to inform them if he was willing to report for a C&P examination. It does not appear the Veteran or the Veteran's representative responded to this letter. The next correspondence in the record is an August 2023 letter informing the Veteran that the AOJ had requested a record review examination, and the Veteran did not need to report for the examination. In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis, status post fusion surgery and lumbar surgical scarring. The AOJ evaluated the Veteran's disabilities based on the February 2017 VA examination and other evidence of record noting the Veteran failed to attend the scheduled VA examination, which could have provided useful evidence to evaluate the Veteran's disabilities.

Neither the Veteran nor his representative have provided information regarding whether the Veteran had good cause for failing to attend the scheduled VA examination; however, based on a review of the record and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the conflicting information about whether the Veteran needed to attend the examination in person constitutes good cause for his failure to report for an examination. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a) and (b). In this regard, the May 2023 Board remand requested an addendum medical opinion and an examination only if an opinion could not be rendered without an examination. The appointment notification and subsequent development letter informed the Veteran he needed to report for an examination, but a later letter stated he did not need to report for an examination. Given these facts, the Board finds there is a question as to whether the Veteran was afforded due process in being notified of the need to attend the scheduled VA examination in person. Further, the Veteran has demonstrated his willingness to comply with such requests, as he appeared for later examinations.

The Board notes that the duty to assist is not a one-way street, and the Veteran is responsible for actively pursuing his claim and providing evidence and information as necessary. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991); see also Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 68 (1993). When entitlement to an initial claim for compensation, claim for increase, or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination or reexamination, and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination or reexamination, action is to be taken in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, as appropriate, including the possible denial of a claim as a matter of law. 

Nevertheless, in providing the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that remand is necessary to provide the Veteran an opportunity for VA examinations in relation to the instant claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations to determine the level of severity of all impairment resulting from his service-connected back and lumbar scar disabilities. Any indicated tests must be performed. The examiner must provide all information required for rating purposes. 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.J. Woodward, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.