Citation Nr: A25033899
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453831
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar degenerative disc disease/degenerative arthritis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbar degenerative disc disease/degenerative arthritis was not caused by nor incurred in service. 

2. The primary disability for which right lower extremity radiculopathy is claimed as secondary is not service-connected.

3. The primary disability for which left lower extremity radiculopathy is claimed as secondary is not service-connected.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for lower back disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy due to service or lower back disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy due to service or lower back disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1979 to April 1982. The Veteran then served in the Army Reserve from April 1982 to December 1996.

This matter comes to the Board as an appeal of a February 2024 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision from the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denying the Veteran's claims. This HLR rating decision was issued after the Veteran requested HLR of an August 2023 rating decision. The Veteran appealed the February 2024 rating decision via a July 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD), and elected the Direct Review docket. The Board notes that the Veteran submitted evidence with this NOD, but it was documents which had previously been submitted, so a docket clarification was not necessary.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

At the outset, the Board notes that VA's system indicates the Veteran is represented in this matter. However, in March 2025, the Veteran submitted a request that his Power of Attorney be revoked, and later that month, the Veteran's purported representative submitted a request to withdraw. Taken together, the Board believes that these documents manifest both the Veteran's and representative's intention that the listed representative be withdrawn from this representation for good cause - that being a deterioration in the attorney-client relationship. Because these meet the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 20.6, the withdrawal is granted.

1. Entitlement to service connection for lumbar degenerative disc disease/degenerative arthritis is denied.

The Veteran contends that he injured his lower back while in Reserve service. 

Factual Background

The Veteran's complete STRs are not of record, although several attempts were made to locate them and VA has found that further efforts to locate the records would be futile.

However, the Veteran's entrance exam is available and shows that in April 1979 the Veteran's spine and lower extremities were considered normal.

The Veteran's service records show that he was a member of the Army Reserve from April 1982 to December 1996 and he was called for duty several times during that period, though records of where exactly the Veteran spent any duty time in the Reserves are not available. 

The Veteran was awarded at least three commendations during his time in the Reserve service - twice in August 1995 and once in May 1996. These commendations were awarded in recognition of the Veteran's exemplary performance in laying blocks and excellent masonry skills during operations identified as CARES 93, CARIB 95, and New Horizons 96.  

The first record available showing a back-related complaint is a January 2003 private treatment record which shows the Veteran was given an MRI of his lumbar spine after complaining of bilateral hip and thigh pain lasting six months. There was no recorded history of trauma. 

Private treatment records show that the Veteran began treatment with a chiropractor for his lower back pain in February 2003. At his initial visit, the Veteran described having low back pain which began around July 2002. The record does not provide any details on what may have incited the Veteran's back pain around that time. 

A separate private treatment record from August 2004 noted that the Veteran had worked as a brick layer as well in a plant. 

In December 2007, the Veteran submitted a lay statement in which he claimed that his back injury began while in Honduras as part of his Reserve service. In a March 2009 NOD the Veteran again stated that his back injury began while he was in the Reserves as part of the 926th Engineers. 

A November 2013 private treatment record notes that the Veteran had back pain which had begun about 12 years previously, which would have been around 2001. These records also note the Veteran's occupation as an Equipment Operator/Brick Mason in November 2013, February 2014, December 2014, and March 2015. 

The Veteran submitted another lay statement in August 2015 in which he described injuring his back while laying blocks to build a school in Honduras during his Reserve service. He did not specify a date. He said that he sought treatment and was given pain medication and told that he did not break anything but most likely strained his back. The Veteran said that the pain worsened on his return home and prevented him from doing his job as a Brick Mason.

In August 2015, the Veteran was given a VA examination for his claimed back disability. The Veteran reported to the VA examiner that he had injured his back in 1993 while serving in Honduras. The examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability was less likely than not incurred in service because the Veteran's reports of back pain did not begin until February 2003 when he described his pain as beginning in 2002, which was supported by a later statement by the Veteran in 2013 that his back pain had begun about 12 years earlier. Although the examiner did not consider the Veteran's time in the Reserves, she noted the delayed onset of complaints of back pain as well as the Veteran's post-service occupations as a brick layer and laborer in a factory as her rationale for rejecting service connection. 

In a December 2018 statement, the Veteran again repeated the contention that his back disability began during his time in the Reserves when he was left alone to lift and lay blocks and that this should have been done by a multi-person team. 

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted an affidavit in which he again claimed that his back pain began while he was working as a mason during his service in Honduras building structures. However, this affidavit makes no mention of the Veteran's Reserve service and instead claims that his back pain began and continued during his active service, which he describes in the affidavit as going from April 1979 to April 1982. 

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in May 2023 from a doctor that he first saw the month prior. The writer opines that the Veteran's back disability was caused by service because his back pain began - according to the Veteran - in service while working as a Carpentry and Masonry Specialist. 

In June 2023, the Veteran was given a new VA examination for his claimed back disability. At this exam, the Veteran claimed that his back pain began in 1995 while laying blocks in Honduras. The examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability was less likely than not caused by or incurred in service because of the delay in recorded complaints of pain from the time of Veteran's service to the first documented report in 2003. 

Analysis

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Generally, in order to qualify for VA benefits, a claimant must be a veteran. See Dingess v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 473, 484 (2006). One of the benefits administered by VA that is reserved specifically for veterans is disability compensation. Accordingly, in order to establish his entitlement to disability compensation benefits, he or she must first establish "veteran" status.

The term "veteran" is defined in 38 U.S.C. § 101(2) as "a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  The term "active military, naval, or air service" includes (1) active duty, (2) any period of ACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty, and (3) any period of INACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty. 38 U.S.C. § 101(24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a); see Biggins v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 474, 477-78 (1991).

When a claim is based on a period of Reserve or National Guard service, it must be shown that the individual concerned became disabled (or died) as a result of a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty (on Reserve ACDUTRA/INACDUTRA or during Federalized National Guard service). Otherwise, the period would not qualify as "active military, naval, or air service" and the claimant would not achieve "veteran status" for purposes of that claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 101(2)-(24).

Here, the AOJ has made the favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability of degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). This leaves the elements of in-service incurrence and a causal relationship to the Board. The threshold operative question for service connection - as well as for determining whether the Veteran's Reserve service qualifies as active duty - is whether the Veteran had an in-service injury. 

Unfortunately, the probative evidence does not establish an in-service incurrence or aggravation of the Veteran's lower back disability. The only available evidence to suggest an in-service incurrence of a lower back disability are the Veteran's lay statements that he injured his back laying blocks in Honduras. The Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and their time of onset. However, the Veteran's lay statements as to onset lack credibility and so are of no probative value. 

First, the Veteran did not report any back pain post-service until January 2003, roughly six years after the Veteran had left his Reserve service in December 1996. Further, when the Veteran did report his lower back pain at that time, he reported that the pain had begun around July 2002, and made no reference to his Reserve service or any incurred back pain from that time. 

Second, while the Veteran has consistently reported that his back pain began while in Honduras building a school during his reserve service, the details of this contention have been inconsistent, lessening its credibility. The Veteran reported to the August 2015 examiner that his back pain had begun in 1993. However, the Veteran then reported to the June 2023 examiner that his condition began in 1995. When the Veteran initially reported his back pain to private treatment providers, his period of Reserve service was not recorded at all.

Additionally, when the Veteran submitted a sworn affidavit in support of his claim in March 2023, he made no reference to his Reserve service. Instead, the Veteran swore to the dates of his active duty service from April 1979 to April 1982, but included no reference to his Reserve service. Thus, the affidavit seems to imply that the Veteran's work in Honduras and his alleged back injury during that time arose during his earlier active duty service, and not during his time in the Reserves. 

Thus, although the Veteran's commendations provide objective, credible evidence that the Veteran worked laying blocks, as he contends, during his time in the Reserves, there is no such evidence that the Veteran injured his lower back performing that service. 

The record also suggests, as noted by August 2015 examiner, that the Veteran worked as a brick layer after service and this was a potential intervening cause of the Veteran's lower back pain from his time in the Reserve service and the Veteran's reported onset in July 2002.

Finally, there are no service treatment records to support the Veteran's contention that he injured his back in service. The Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records have not been associated with the file, but VA made repeated efforts to obtain those records and notified the Veteran most recently in June 2023 of those failed efforts as well as their determination that further efforts to locate them would be futile. Because of these efforts, and the notice of them sent to the Veteran, failure to associate the Veteran's service treatment records was not a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1).

The Board finds, then, that there is no credible or probative evidence that the Veteran incurred or aggravated a lower back injury during service. This means that the record cannot establish one of the required Shedden elements outline above, and so the claim must be denied because all three elements must be met. It also means that the Veteran's back injury cannot now be connected to a period of active duty service. 

However, in the interest of completeness, the Board also notes that the probative evidence does not establish a causal relationship - a nexus - between the Veteran's service and his current lower back injury. Both VA examinations rejected a nexus because of the objective, credible indications of a delayed onset of the Veteran's low back disability as well as his intervening work which may have caused the claimed injury. Only the Veteran's private opinion makes a positive nexus determination, but this is based on the Veteran's non-credible lay statements that his low back pain began during his Reserve service. Thus, the probative value of that nexus opinion is greatly reduced and the weight of the probative evidence is against the claim. The Board notes that the VA exams do not address the Veteran's lay statements, but this is non-prejudicial to the Veteran because, as noted above, those lay statements lack credibility and probative value. Cf. McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15, 30 n.14 (2016) (noting that the Board had not made a credibility assessment of a Veteran's lay statement when finding the examiner should have addressed it). 

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran may entitled to presumptive service connection for a chronic disease - his diagnosed lower back arthritis - under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307. However, because the evidence does not show that the Veteran's lower back arthritis became manifest within a year of separation from service, this theory of entitlement is not available to the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(3).

Thus, for the above reasons the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and entitlement to service connection for a lower back disability is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). The claim is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy condition is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy condition is denied.

The Veteran contends that his lower extremity disabilities is secondary to his lower back disability. 

Factual Background

In a claim application submitted in April 2008, the Veteran claimed that his bilateral lower extremity pain was connected to his lower back pain. 

In January and February 2003, the Veteran reported to a private treatment provider that his lower extremity pain radiated from his lower back pain. 

In his August 2015 lay statement, the Veteran described injuring his lower back while in Reserve service, and only later developed lower leg pain. 

In a March 2023 affidavit, the Veteran only describes his back pain as being directly due to service, and describes his lower extremity issues as secondary to that lower back disability. 

Analysis

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

Neither the Veteran nor the record have reasonably raised the contention that these disabilities are directly due to service or eligible for direct service connection.  Nor does the record otherwise provide a basis for such a connection.  Thus, the only question before the Board is whether the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity disabilities are attributable to a service-connected lower back disability.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Because the Board has denied entitlement to service connection for a lower back disability, the claimed primary disability is not service-connected. The law is clear that there must be a primary service-connected condition for a claimant to establish entitlement to secondary service connection.  "At the time that any decision establishing entitlement to secondary service connection is rendered, there must be a primary service-connected condition."  Frost v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 131, 137-138 (2017).

Thus, for the above reasons the evidence is persuasively against the claims, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy disabilities is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). The claims are denied.

 

 

Thomas H. O'Shay

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Kronick

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.