Citation Nr: A25033747
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-451929
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected mental disability is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected headaches is denied. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left upper extremity radiculopathy is denied. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected cervical spine (neck) disability is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected thoracolumbar spine (back) disability is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left shoulder disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating of higher than 0 percent for the service-connected left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected right knee disability is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Erectile dysfunction is not related to service or a service-connected disability.

2. The service-connected mental disability is manifested by occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 

3. The service-connected headaches are manifested by prostrating attacks occurring less frequently than every two months. 

4. The service-connected left upper extremity radiculopathy is manifested by mild incomplete paralysis.

5. The service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy is manifested by mild incomplete paralysis.

6. The service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy is manifested by mild incomplete paralysis. 

7. The service-connected neck disability is manifested by painful, fatigued, and weakened motion, with forward flexion greater than 30 degrees and combined range of motion greater than 170 degrees. 

8. The service-connected back disability is manifested by painful, fatigued, and weakened motion, with forward flexion greater than 30 degrees.

9. The service-connected left shoulder disability is manifested by painful motion, with flexion and/or abduction that exceed 25 degrees from the side.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.310. 

2. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected mental disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.96, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9410.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected headaches are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

4. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left upper extremity radiculopathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8510.

5. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

6. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

7. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected neck disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243.

8. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected back disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242-5243.

9. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left shoulder disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a veteran (the Veteran) who had active-duty service from December 2000 to August 2023. 

This appeal comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the June 12, 2024, VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 19, 2023, agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board has considered whether the issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service connected disabilities (TDIU) is a component of the increased rating claims on appeal in accordance with Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) (where there is evidence of unemployability raised by the record during a rating appeal period, the TDIU is an element of an initial rating or increased rating). 

Here, the Veteran has not asserted that his service-connected disabilities have rendered him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, or that he is not employed in a substantially gainful occupation.

SERVICE CONNECTION-LAW AND REGULATIONS

VA law provides that, for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, in the active military, naval, or air service, during a period of war, or other than a period of war, the United States will pay to any veteran thus disabled and who was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable from the period of service in which said injury or disease was incurred, or preexisting injury or disease was aggravated, compensation, except if the disability is a result of the veteran's own willful misconduct or abuse of alcohol or drugs. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. 

Entitlement to service connection on a direct basis requires evidence of (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018). 

Service connection on a secondary basis requires (1) evidence of a current nonservice-connected disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) evidence establishing that the service-connected disability caused or aggravated the current nonservice-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998). 

For specific enumerated diseases designated as "chronic" there is a presumption that such chronic disease was incurred in or aggravated by service even though there is no evidence of such chronic disease during the period of service. In order for the presumption to attach, the disease must have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of separation from active duty. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a). 

Presumptive service connection for the specified chronic diseases may alternatively be established by way of continuity of symptomatology under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has held that the theory of continuity of symptomatology can be used only in cases involving those conditions explicitly recognized as chronic in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Generally, lay evidence is competent with regard to identification of a disease with unique and readily identifiable features which are capable of lay observation. See Barr v. Shinseki, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A lay person may speak to etiology in some limited circumstances in which nexus is obvious merely through observation, such as sustaining a fall leading to a broken leg. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir 2007). 

Lay persons may also provide competent evidence regarding a contemporaneous medical diagnosis or a description of symptoms in service which supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. However, a lay person is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions, i.e., those which are not capable of lay observation. Lay statements are not competent evidence regarding diagnosis or etiology in such cases. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (concerning rheumatic fever); Jandreau, at 1377, n. 4 ('sometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer'); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).

After the evidence has been assembled, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. 

A VA claimant need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence in order to prevail. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990). To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim. Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518, 519 (1996), Gilbert at 54.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction. 

Service treatment records reveal no complaints, treatments, or diagnoses pertinent to erectile dysfunction. 

A VA examination report dated July 25, 2023, includes no diagnosis. The Veteran reported 4-5 episodes of erectile dysfunction in the past 18 years. However, he denied any episodes in "numerous years." The examiner concluded that a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction was not appropriate and that the condition had resolved. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction are not met. 

Although the Veteran is competent to describe the condition at issue, the information he provided to the examiner indicates that he has not had the problem for numerous years. 

While the presence of a disability at any time during the claim process can justify a grant of service connection, even where the most recent diagnosis is negative, McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007), Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service-connection to cases where such in-service disease or injury has resulted in disability. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110. This is defined as any condition that results in functional impairment of earning capacity. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (2019); Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991). Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Here, the evidence does not support a finding of current disability upon which to predicate a grant of service connection during the period of this claims. Hence, there can be no valid claim for that benefit. See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

DISABILITY RATINGS-LAW AND REGULATIONS

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

A disability rating may require re-evaluation in accordance with changes in condition. Thus, it is essential that the disability be considered in the context of the entire recorded history when determining the level of current impairment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. See also Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). 

Nevertheless, where a veteran is appealing the rating for an already established service-connected condition, his present level of disability is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). However, when an appeal is based on the assignment of an initial rating for a disability, following an initial award of service connection for this disability, the rule articulated in Francisco does not apply. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). 

The rating must be based on the overall recorded history of a disability, giving equal weight to past and present medical reports. Id. Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased-rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Mental Disabilities--General Provisions

In the process of evaluating a psychiatric/mental disorder, VA is required to consider a number of pertinent factors, such as the frequency, severity, and duration of a veteran's psychiatric symptoms and the veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. After consideration of these factors and based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, VA must assign a disability rating that most closely reflects the level of social and occupational impairment a veteran is suffering rather than based solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination. When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

The VA Secretary, acting within his authority to adopt and apply a schedule of ratings, chose to create one General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; see 38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

By establishing one general formula to be used in rating more than 30 mental disorders, the VA Secretary anticipated that any list of symptoms justifying a particular rating would, in many situations, be either under- or over-inclusive. The use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms, particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation. This construction is not inconsistent with Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997). See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (1992). 

The schedular criteria incorporate the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125, 4.130. 

[Since August 4, 2014, VA has required a diagnosis of a mental disorder that conforms with the DSM-5. For claims prior to that date, VA required a diagnosis that conformed with the DSM-IV-TR. See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Mental Disorders and Definition of Psychosis for Certain VA Purposes, 79 Fed. Reg. 45,093, 45,093 -94 (Aug. 4, 2014 (amending 38 C.F.R. § 4.125)).]

The evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code. Instead, the rating specialist is to consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

If the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has embraced the Mauerhan interpretation of the criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities. Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Psychiatric disorders are to be rated on the severity, frequency, and duration their respective signs and symptoms. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected mental disability.

The current appeal arises from a service connection claim received at VA on May 16, 2023. In a September 19, 2023 rating decision, VA granted service connection for insomnia disorder with other specified anxiety disorder; assigned an initial disability rating of 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 9410; and assigned an effective date for the grant of service connection of September 1, 2023. 

Pertinent to the claim on appeal, the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provides the following ratings for psychiatric disabilities: 

A 100 percent rating contemplates total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

A 70 percent rating, may be assigned for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. The criteria for a 70 percent rating are met if there are deficiencies in most of the areas of work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood. Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1, 11-14 (2001). 

A 50 percent rating is warranted if it is productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to compete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 30 percent rating is warranted if there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 

A 10 percent rating is warranted if there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 

A review of the evidence includes a VA mental disorders examination report dated July 24, 2023, includes diagnoses of insomnia disorder and other specified anxiety disorder (panic disorder without cognitive symptoms of fear or worry about additional panic attacks or change in behavior). The examiner opined that a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication. The Veteran was divorced. He gets along with his two children. He did well in high school and had a few hours of college, but realized this was not for him and joined the military. He loved his job in the Air Force and reported no issues. He reported "While at work, it was ok, but at home, it was harder. I had trouble sleeping, when I did sleep, it didn't feel like I slept. I couldn't relax. I think I may have panic attacks, my heart would start racing, come out of blue, couldn't relax, it could vary how long, it could be just a few seconds or a minute. I would then get up, pet the dog, take a walk, and then it would go away." He reported current symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, and chronic sleep impairment. There were no other symptoms attributable to mental disorders. 

Psychological testing was completed during the evaluation and was scored and interpreted by the examiner. Testing included the PHQ-9, a self-report questionnaire of depression symptom severity over the previous two weeks and the GAD-7, a self-report questionnaire of anxiety symptom severity over the previous two weeks. The PHQ-9 score of 6 was in the mild range for depression symptoms; however no anhedonia or depression feelings were endorsed, only sleep, fatigue, concentration, and restlessness were endorsed. The GAD-7 score of 7 was in the moderate range for general anxiety symptoms.

Outpatient records show complaints regarding anxiety, racing heart, sleep impairment, and problems concentrating. These problems do not seem to affect his work "Reports he does well at work" but mostly revolve around sleep. Diagnoses include adjustment disorder with anxiety. However, on many office visits, the Veteran denied anxiety. He also denied receiving treatment. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected mental disability are not met. 

The criteria for a 30 percent rating are focused on deficiencies in work performance, i.e., work efficiency and performance of occupational tasks. These factors appear to be absent in the Veteran's case. While he has reported that sleep impairment can affect his concentration, he has generally reported good occupational function and a reduction in symptoms when working. The Veteran's occupational impairment is occasional and is more consistent with a decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, which is contemplated at the 10 percent level. 

The Board acknowledges that sleep impairment is included among the examples of symptoms that can support a 30 percent rating. However, these symptom examples are not the actual rating criteria. Rather, they represent examples of the type and degree of symptoms that may support a 30 percent rating if they are productive of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal). See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (1992). As discussed above, this is not shown in the Veteran's case. The Veteran's symptomatology is generally limited to feelings of anxiety and occasional panic as well as sleep impairment. In sum, the type of impairment contemplated for a rating of 30 percent are not present. 

The Board has considered whether the Veteran's symptomatology approximates the criteria for rating levels above 30 percent. However, occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, as contemplated for a 50 percent rating are also not evident in the record based on his generally good work performance. 

Occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood are also not approximated. The Veteran is not to have a deficiency in any area resulting from his anxiety. 

The Board also finds that the Veteran's symptoms do not approximate total occupational and social impairment. Accordingly, the Board finds that the criteria for a higher rating are not met and are not more nearly approximated than are the criteria for the current rating of 10 percent. 

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected mental disability is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371 (2017) (the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Neurological Disabilities-General Provisions

Neuralgia, cranial or peripheral, characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain, of typical distribution so as to identify the nerve, is to be rated on the same scale, with a maximum equal to moderate incomplete paralysis. See nerve involved for diagnostic code number and rating. Tic douloureux, or trifacial neuralgia, may be rated up to complete paralysis of the affected nerve. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124. 

The terms "mild," "moderate," moderately severe," and "severe," which are the basis for neurological ratings, are not defined. They are generic terms, which do not even have a generally accepted medical meaning. They simply quantify degree. The Board interprets these terms as synonymous with "low," "middle," and "high."

In the case of neurological disorders, medical examinations focus on several areas of neurological function. These include the strength, tone, and bulk of associated muscles, the ability to sense touch, vibration, temperature, and position, reflexes of associated joints, and overall impact on function, i.e., ambulation for the lower extremities, and manipulating objects for the upper extremities. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected headaches.

The current appeal arises from a service connection claim received at VA on May 16, 2023. In a September 19, 2023 rating decision, VA granted service connection for headaches; assigned an initial disability rating of 0 percent under Diagnostic Code 8100; and assigned an effective date for the grant of service connection of September 1, 2023. 

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, migraines are assigned a rating of 50 percent with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. A rating of 30 percent is assigned with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months. A rating of 10 percent is assigned with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over last several months. A rating of 0 percent is assigned with less frequent attacks. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. 

The rating criteria under Diagnostic Code 8100 are successive. A claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. The term "characteristic prostrating attacks" describes migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality. See Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 247 (2018). 

A review of the evidence includes a December 15, 2022, outpatient treatment note, which indicates the Veteran has headaches daily, that are mild, and that will increase with stressors. 

A VA examination report dated July 25, 2023, includes diagnoses of migraine and tension headaches. The Veteran experiences constant head pain and pain on both sides of the head. He experiences migraines approximately 2-3 times per year that last 12-24 hours. Symptoms include blurry vision, nausea, and sensitivity to light. Otherwise, he experiences tension headaches daily that last all day. He does not experience characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain. He does not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain. He has no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to a compensable disability rating for headaches are not met. 

The minimum compensable rating for headaches is 10 percent. However, this requires characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months. The Board finds that the Veteran's description of symptoms, to include blurred vision and nausea, would certainly cause impairment during migraines. However, the frequency of these attacks is less than one in two months. The rating of 0 percent contemplates such impairment if occurring less on average than one in two months. Accordingly, the criteria for a 10 percent rating are not more nearly approximated than the criteria for a 0 percent rating which fully contemplates the Veteran's symptoms. 

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected headaches is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53. 

The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left upper extremity radiculopathy.

The current appeal arises from a service connection claim received at VA on May 16, 2023. In a September 19, 2023 rating decision, VA granted service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy; assigned an initial disability rating of 20 percent under Diagnostic Code 8510; and assigned an effective date for the grant of service connection of September 1, 2023. 

Under Diagnostic Codes 8510, 8610, and 8710, paralysis, neuritis, and neuralgia of the upper radicular group (fifth and sixth cervicals) warrant a disability rating of 60 percent for the non-dominant arm if paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia is complete; all shoulder and elbow movements lost or severely affected, hand and wrist movements not affected. A rating of 40 percent is assigned for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is severe. A rating of 30 percent is assigned for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is moderate. A rating of 20 percent is assigned for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is mild. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8510. 

Although complete paralysis is defined under the rating schedule, "severe," "moderate," and "mild" incomplete paralysis are not defined. As these terms comprise a 3-tiered progression, the Board finds that "mild" represents symptomatic impairment at the lowest degree; "severe" represents symptomatic impairment at the highest degree short of complete paralysis; and "moderate" represents an intermediate level of impairment, or impairment with characteristics of the higher and lower levels. 

A review of the evidence includes a VA peripheral nerves examination report dated July 25, 2023, which provides a diagnosis of left upper extremity radiculopathy. There was no constant pain. There was mild intermittent pain. There were moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias. There was moderate numbness. Muscle strength in the left upper extremity was full without atrophy. Reflexes were normal. Sensation was normal. There were no trophic changes. Testing for left upper radicular group nerve pathology showed overall mild incomplete paralysis. All other nerve groups were normal. The Veteran does not uses/use assistive devices. There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms related to any diagnosed condition. Upper extremity EMG testing was normal. According to the examiner's assessment, there was no impact of the condition on the Veteran's ability to work.

Although prior to the period on appeal private evaluations on November 14, 2018, and March 9, 2017, note pain, numbness, and tingling in the right arm and hand, with no weakness, and essentially normal upper extremity examination results. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the left upper extremity radiculopathy are not met. 

In order to warrant assigment of a rating higher than 20 percent, the evidence would have to show moderate incomplete paralysis. Although certain symptoms were assessed as moderate, the September 2023 examiner assessed the overall level of incomplete paralysis as mild. 

Although the determination of the correct disability rating is an adjudicative matter to be based on all of the evidence, the opinion of a medical professional is probative evidence, and the Board attaches significant weight to this evidence here. Aside from his description of symptoms to the VA examiner, the Veteran has not provided lay evidence to counter the medical opinion evidence. The Notice of Disagreement does not contain any discussion of the Veteran's symptoms. The claim form simply notes numbness and tingling. This symptomatology was acknowledged by the VA examiner. 

Weighing against the Veteran's acknowledged numbness and tingling, the Board must consider the normal EMG results, the normal findings for sensation, reflexes, and muscle strength on the examination, and the absence of trophic changes. Thus, there is significant evidence of absent symptomatology or impairment associated with the service-connected left upper extremity radiculopathy. There are no characteristics of "severe" impairment. On balance, the Board finds that the "moderate" paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness are balanced by mild intermittent pain, absent constant pain, normal EMG results, normal sensation, reflexes, and muscle strength, and absent trophic changes. The Veteran's disability picture is consistent with the least level of impairment contemplated by the rating schedule.   

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left upper extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy.

The current appeal arises from a service connection claim received at VA on May 16, 2023. In a September 19, 2023 rating decision, VA granted service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy and for right lower extremity radiculopathy; assigned an initial disability rating of 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 8520 for each lower extremity; and assigned an effective date for the grant of service connection of September 1, 2023, for each lower extremity. 

Under Diagnostic Codes 8520, 8620, and 8720, paralysis, neuritis, and neuralgia are assigned a rating of 80 percent for complete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia of the sciatic nerve. This is defined as the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost. A rating of 60 percent is assigned for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is severe, with marked muscular atrophy. A rating of 40 percent is for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is moderately severe. A rating of 20 percent is assigned for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is moderate. A rating of 10 percent is assigned for incomplete paralysis/neuritis/neuralgia that is mild. 

Although complete paralysis is defined under the rating schedule, "severe," "moderately severe," "moderate," and "mild" incomplete paralysis are not defined. As these terms comprise a 4-tiered progression, the Board finds that "mild" represents symptomatic impairment at the lowest degree; "severe" represents symptomatic impairment at the highest degree short of complete paralysis; "moderately severe" represents an intermediate level of impairment with some characteristics of severe impairment, and "moderate" represents an intermediate level of impairment with some characteristics of higher and lower levels of impairment. 

A review of the evidence includes a VA peripheral nerves examination report dated July 25, 2023, which provides diagnoses of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and sciatica. There was no constant pain in either lower extremity. There was moderate intermittent pain in both lower extremities. There were mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias in both lower extremities. There was mild numbness in both lower extremities. Muscle strength in the lower extremities was full without atrophy. Reflexes were normal. Sensation was normal. There were no trophic changes. The Veteran's gait was normal. Testing for sciatic nerve pathology shows mild incomplete paralysis. Testing for all other nerve groups was normal. The Veteran does not uses/use assistive devices. There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms related to any diagnosed conditions. There was no impact of the condition on the Veteran's ability to work.

Although prior to the period on appeal a private evaluation for low back pain on March 9, 2017, notes occasional pain in the lower extremities, with no weakness or numbness, and essentially normal lower extremity examination results. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for higher ratings for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy are not met.

 

In order to warrant assigment of a rating higher than 10 percent, the evidence would have to show moderate incomplete paralysis. Although certain symptoms were assessed as moderate, the September 2023 examiner assessed the overall level of incomplete paralysis as mild. 

Although the determination of the correct disability rating is an adjudicative matter to be based on all of the evidence, the opinion of a medical professional is probative evidence, and the Board attaches significant weight to this evidence. Aside from his description of symptoms to the VA examiner, the Veteran has not provided lay evidence to counter the medical opinion evidence. The Notice of Disagreement does not contain any discussion of the Veteran's symptoms. The claim form simply notes bilateral lower extremity numbness and tingling. This symptomatology was acknowledged by the VA examiner. 

Weighing against the Veteran's acknowledged numbness and tingling, the Board must consider the normal findings for sensation, reflexes, and muscle strength on the examination, and the absence of trophic changes. Thus, there is significant evidence of absent symptomatology or impairment associated with the service-connected lower extremity radiculopathy. There are no characteristics of "severe" impairment. On balance, the Board finds that the "moderate" paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness are balanced by mild intermittent pain, absent constant pain, normal sensation, reflexes, and muscle strength, and absent trophic changes. The Veteran's disability picture is the least level of impairment contemplated by the rating schedule.

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against each claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371.

Musculoskeletal Disabilities--General Provisions

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection of parts of the musculoskeletal system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. The functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints, and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective innervation, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca, supra; see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). 

Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016). 

During the course of this appeal, the musculoskeletal ratings were amended effective February 7, 2021. Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both old and new rating criteria, and whatever criteria is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied. 

The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise. Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). However, the Board must consider the application of prior versions of the applicable regulation to the period on or after the effective dates of the new regulation if the prior version was in effect during the pendency of the appeal.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected neck disability.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected back disability.

The current appeal arises from a service connection claim received at VA on May 16, 2023. In a September 19, 2023 rating decision, VA granted service connection for a back disorder and a neck disorder; assigned an initial disability rating of 20 percent under Diagnostic Code 5242-5243 for the back disorder, and a rating of 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 5243 for the neck disorder; and assigned an effective date for the grant of service connection of September 1, 2023, for each. 

Effective February 7, 2021, degenerative arthritis, and degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome are to be rated under Diagnostic Code 5242.  A rating under Diagnostic Code 5243 for intervertebral disc syndrome is only to be assigned when there is disc herniation with compression of the adjacent nerve root.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 76464 (Nov. 30, 2020). These changes do not affect the ratings assigned, but simply affect the diagnostic code to be assigned. All disabilities of the spine are rated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine or the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes.

Disabilities of the spine are rated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (for Diagnostic Codes 5235 to 5243, unless 5243 is evaluated under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes). Ratings under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine are made with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease. 

A rating of 100 percent requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 

A rating of 50 percent requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 

A rating of 40 percent requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine; or forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 30 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 

A rating of 30 percent requires forward flexion of the cervical spine limited to 15 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine. 

A rating of 20 percent requires forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. 

A rating of 10 percent is assigned with forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.

Any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately, under an appropriate diagnostic code. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, Note (1). 

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the cervical spine is zero to 45 degrees, extension is zero to 45 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 45 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 80 degrees. Normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the cervical spine is 340 degrees and of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, note (2) (See also Plate V). 

In exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note (2). Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, note (3) 

For VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, note (5).

Disability of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments are to be evaluated separately, except when there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which will be rated as a single disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, note (6).

A review of the evidence includes a January 13, 2022, outpatient treatment note, which indicates the Veteran experiences back pain, chronic, which worsens after standing for multiple hours. Nothing improves the pain. He denied bowel or bladder issues or saddle anesthesia. X-rays showed degenerative disc disease. 

A VA back examination report dated July 25, 2023, includes diagnoses of degenerative arthritis and intervertebral disc syndrome. The Veteran reported experiencing flares consisting of a chronic dull ache that can turn sharp, sciatica, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, stiffness, and muscle spasms. These occur 2 to 3 times per week and last 6 to 12 hours. These are brought on by overuse, physical activity, bending, lifting, prolonged sitting, cold weather, prolonged standing, yardwork, and running. 

On examination, forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine was measured to 75 degrees; extension to 20 degrees; lateral flexion to 25 degrees, bilaterally; rotation to 25 degrees, bilaterally. All motion was painful. No limitation of motion was specifically attributed to pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination. Passive testing produced the same results as active testing. There was no ankylosis. Back pain was noted with weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, and with passive and active testing. After 3 repetitions of flexion, the measurement was unchanged. There was no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness. 

The low back was not being examined after repeated use over a period of time. The additional limitation of motion after repeated use over a period of time was estimated to result in forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, lateral flexion and rotation to 20 degrees, bilaterally. Factors causing functional loss after repetitive use over a period of time included pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance. The low back was not being tested during a flare. The additional limitation of motion during a flare was estimated to be the same as after repetitive use over a period of time. Factors causing functional loss during flares included pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance. 

Guarding was not present but muscle spasm was present and resulted in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. Additional factors contributing to disability included interference with sitting and standing, disturbance of locomotion, less movement than normal, and weakened movement. 

There were no neurologic abnormalities other than radiculopathy. There were no episodes requiring bed rest and treatment by a physician. The Veteran does not use assistive devices. There was no time off in the last 12 months due to low back pain; however, the Veteran has chronic dull ache that can turn sharp, sciatica, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, stiffness, muscle spasms, and frequent flare-ups after overuse, physical activity, bending, lifting, prolonged sitting, cold weather, prolonged standing, yardwork, and running.

A VA neck examination report dated July 25, 2023, includes diagnoses of cervical strain, intervertebral disc syndrome, and spondylolisthesis. The Veteran reported no symptom flares and no functional loss after repetitive use over a period of time. 

On examination, forward flexion of the cervical spine was measured to 40 degrees; extension to 40 degrees; right lateral flexion to 40 degrees; left lateral flexion to 35 degrees; rotation to 75 degrees, bilaterally. Passive testing produced the same results as active testing. There was no ankylosis. Motion was painful. Neck pain was noted with weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, and with passive and active testing. After 3 repetitions of flexion, the measurement was unchanged. 

The neck was not being examined after repeated use over a period of time. The additional limitation of motion after repeated use over a period of time was estimated to result in forward flexion to 35 degrees; extension to 35 degrees; right lateral flexion to 35 degrees; left lateral flexion to 30 degrees; rotation to 70 degrees, bilaterally. 

Guarding and muscle spasm were not present. Additional factors contributing to the neck disability included disturbance of locomotion and less movement than normal. The Veteran does not use assistive devices. There were no neurological abnormalities other than radiculopathy. The Veteran used no time off in the last 12 months for cervical pain; however, the Veteran has chronic cervical pain, stiffness, bilateral upper extremity radiculopathies. 

Although prior to the period on appeal a private evaluation for low back pain on March 9, 2017, notes low back pain with essentially normal cervical and lumbar spine examination results. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for higher disability ratings for the back and neck are not met. 

There is no 30 percent rating for the thoracolumbar spine. For the next higher 40 percent rating, the evidence would have to show that forward flexion is limited to 30 degrees or less, or that there is favorable ankylosis (fixation) of the thoracolumbar spine. Here, the evidence shows that forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is normally possible to 75 degrees. Even after repetitive use over a period of time and during flares, forward flexion is estimated to 70 degrees. 

While this joint disability includes symptomatology such as pain, weakness, fatigue, these symptoms do not result in functional impairment that would more nearly approximate the criteria for a higher rating. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995), and Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011). Service connection is already in effect for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. There are no additional neurological abnormalities associated with the back disability. 

Regarding the neck, the next higher rating of 20 percent requires limitation of cervical forward flexion to not greater than 30 degrees, or combined range of motion to not greater than 170 degrees. Here, forward flexion was measured to 40 degrees and combined range of motion was measured to 305 degrees. Even after repetitive use over a period of time, forward flexion is estimated to 35 degrees, and combined range of motion is estimated to 275 degrees. 

While this joint disability includes symptomatology such as pain, weakness, and fatigue, these symptoms do not result in functional impairment that would more nearly approximate the criteria for a higher rating. Service connection is already in effect for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy. There are no other neurological abnormalities associated with the neck disability. 

In sum, the evidence demonstrates greater range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine and cervical spine than is contemplated under the rating schedule for higher ratings. The Veteran has not identified symptomatology that support higher ratings for the back or neck. The Board finds that the criteria for a 40 percent or higher rating for the back are not more nearly approximated than are the criteria for a 20 percent rating. The Board finds that the criteria for a 20 percent or higher rating for the neck are not more nearly approximated than are the criteria for a 10 percent rating. 

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected back disability is not warranted, and that a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected neck disability is not warranted. In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against each claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left shoulder disability.

The current appeal arises from a service connection claim received at VA on May 16, 2023. In a September 19, 2023 rating decision, VA granted service connection for a left shoulder disorder; assigned an initial disability rating of 20 percent under Diagnostic Code 5201; and assigned an effective date for the grant of service connection of September 1, 2023.

Under Diagnostic Code 5201, limited motion of the shoulder is assigned a rating of 30 percent for the non-dominant arm with flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from the side. A rating of 20 percent is assigned with motion limited midway between the side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees), or limited at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees). 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

Under Diagnostic Code 5202, impairment of the humerus is assigned a rating of 70 percent for the non-dominant arm with loss of the humeral head (flail shoulder). A rating of 50 percent is assigned with nonunion of the humerus (false flail joint). A rating of 40 percent is assigned with fibrous union of the humerus. A rating of 20 percent is assigned with recurrent dislocation of the humerus at the scapulohumeral joint with frequent episodes and guarding of all arm movements, or with infrequent episodes, and guarding of movement only at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction at 90 degrees), or with malunion of the humerus with marked deformity or moderate deformity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5202.

Under Diagnostic Code 5203, impairment of the clavicle or scapula is assigned a rating of 20 percent for dislocation of either shoulder. A rating of 20 percent is assigned for nonunion of either shoulder with loose movement. A rating of 10 percent is assigned for nonunion of either shoulder without loose movement or for malunion of either shoulder. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5203.

A review of the evidence includes a VA shoulder examination report dated July 25, 2023, includes no specific diagnosis for the left shoulder. The Veteran is right handed. Neither shoulder was marked as undamaged. Current symptoms include left shoulder anterior pain/collar bone pain, stiffness, crepitus, weakness, and decreased range of motion. The Veteran reported no flares. 

Range of motion of the left shoulder was from 0 to 170 degrees flexion; 0 to 170 degrees abduction; 0 to 80 degrees internal rotation; 0 to 80 degrees external rotation. Passive range of motion was the same as active. Pain was present with passive and active range of motion and with weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, as well as at rest. After 3 repetitions, the results were unchanged. After repetitive use over a period of time, range of motion of the left shoulder was estimated to be from 0 to 165 degrees flexion; 0 to 165 degrees abduction; 0 to 75 degrees internal rotation; 0 to 75 degrees external rotation. Additional factors included disturbance of locomotion, less movement than normal, and weakened movement. 

There was no muscle atrophy. Testing for rotator cuff conditions was positive. Testing for shoulder instability, dislocation or labral pathology was positive. While testing for clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint and sternoclavicular joint conditions (cross-body adduction test) was positive, the examiner found that there was no such condition. There was no history of impairment of the humerus. No assistive devices were used. The Veteran had used no time off in the last 12 months due to shoulder pain; however, the Veteran has left shoulder anterior pain/collar bone pain, stiffness, crepitus, weakness, and decreased range of motion.

X-rays of the left shoulder and acromioclavicular joint in August 2023 were negative. 

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left shoulder disability are not met. 

In order to warrant a higher rating based on limitation of motion, the evidence would have to establish that flexion and/or abduction are limited to 25 degrees from the side. Here, the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran can flex and abduct his left shoulder to 170 degrees. Even after repetitive use over a period of time, he can attain 165 degrees. 

There is no humeral impairment to support a rating under Diagnostic Code 5202. The examination report also indicates that there is no clavicle, scapula, or acromioclavicular joint or sternoclavicular joint condition that would support a rating under Diagnostic Code 5203.

In sum, the evidence demonstrates greater range of motion of the left shoulder than is contemplated under the rating schedule for a higher rating, and that there is no other identified pathology that would support a separate rating. 

While this joint disability includes symptomatology such as pain, weakness, and fatigue, these symptoms do not result in functional impairment that would more nearly approximate the criteria for a higher rating. The Veteran has not identified symptomatology that support higher ratings for the left shoulder. The Board finds that the criteria for a 30 percent rating for the left shoulder are not more nearly approximated than are the criteria for a 20 percent rating. 

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that a disability rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected left shoulder disability is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected left knee disability.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 0 percent for the service-connected right knee disability.

The agency of original jurisdiction assigned a noncompensable rating based on the lack of sufficient limitation of motion to warrant a schedular rating and the lack of painful motion of the knee so as to warrant a minimum compensable rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. However, findings on the July 2023 VA examination report are mixed on the question of whether there is painful motion; moreover, it was specifically noted that x-rays revealed no arthritis. Noncompensable limitation of motion, even when accompanied by pain, typically remains noncompensable unless accompanied by arthritis.  The diagnosis applicable for the knees is "strain." The Board finds more information is needed to assess what is causing the knee strain if there is no arthritis in order to allow for a full and fair evaluation.

On examination there is objective evidence of pain and other impairment, just to a noncompensable level.  Also, there were references to complains of "stiffness, crepitus, occasional locking," along with pain, which may be consistent with the criteria for 38 C.F.R. § 4.71(a), DCs 5257 and 5258-9; yet there were no radiological studies conducted, such as an MRI, to detect whether such condition may exist, i.e., damage to the menisci, ligaments, or patella.

The failure to investigate whether knee pathology exists to provide a compensable rating under other potentially applicable diagnostic codes amounts to a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a supplemental VA examination to assess the nature of the Veteran's bilateral knee strain, to include whether there may be damage to the cartilage, ligaments or patella, so that the full range of rating codes applicable to the knee may potentially be applied. In this regard, the examiner is asked to review the Veteran's statements as listed above regarding stiffness, crepitus, occasional locking, pain with overuse, kneeling, and bending, and the findings of functional loss and disturbance of locomotion including increased pain with overuse, physical activity, walking, running, and bending/squatting. 

The examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is approximately as likely as not that the Veteran has any meniscal, ligamentous, or patellar pathology, and what impairments or functional loss is experienced by the Veteran, if any, as a result. 

Note: The term "approximately as likely as not" does not mean merely within the realm of medical possibility, but that the medical evidence for and against a conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of causation or worsening as it is to find against causation or worsening. The phrase "at least as likely as not" is not in conflict with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), and use of this standard will be considered to be in full compliance with the Board's remand instructions.

All opinions are to be accompanied by a rationale consistent with the evidence of record. A discussion of the pertinent evidence, relevant medical treatises, and generally accepted medical principles is requested. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner is asked to please provide complete explanations stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner is asked to explain whether any inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that the examiner has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

2. Readjudicate the remanded claims. 

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Cramp, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.