Citation Nr: A25033591
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 250101-504605
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has not been submitted to warrant readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease. Therefore, the Veteran's claim is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for isolated systolic hypertension (claimed as high blood pressure) associated with herbicide exposure is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent disabling for left shoulder arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent disabling for right shoulder arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for squamous skin cancer lower right jawbone is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New and relevant evidence has not been received since the August 2013 rating decision to warrant readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease.

2. To date, the medical evidence has not revealed isolated systolic hypertension manifested by diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more, or systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. New and relevant evidence has not been submitted to warrant readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103A, 5108; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.2501.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for isolated systolic hypertension (claimed as high blood pressure) associated with herbicide exposure have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1966 to June 1969 and in the United States Coast Guard from September 1974 to December 1991.  Service-related honors include the Vietnam Service Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, the Combat Infantryman Badge, and the Vietnam Campaign Medal

Review of the record indicates that the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim in June 2024. 

In the September 2024 rating decision, the RO determined that the Veteran had not submitted new and relevant evidence to readjudicate the claim.  That decision also granted service connection for isolated systolic hypertension and assigned an evaluation of 10 percent disabling, effective June 3, 2023.  The previously assigned rating for the Veteran's service-connected bilateral shoulder condition was continued at 20 percent disabling.  His claim for service connection for squamous skin cancer lower right jawbone was deferred.

Pursuant to an October 2024 Rating Decision, the Veteran's claim for service connection for squamous skin cancer lower right jawbone was denied.

In January 2025, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and requested Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.

Regrettably, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred regarding the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for his bilateral shoulder condition and for service connection for squamous skin cancer lower right jawbone.  Therefore, a remand is necessary as to the identified claims to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the appellant's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2020).

1. New and relevant evidence has not been presented to reopen the claim of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for ischemic heart disease. He further contends that new and relevant evidence has been submitted to warrant readjudication of his previously denied claim. As discussed in more detail below, the evidence weighs pervasively against his assertion.

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d). "Relevant evidence is evidence that "tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue." 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. As the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the evidence relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim; "new and relevant" evidence is a lower standard than the "new and material" evidence standard.

The RO initially denied service connection for ischemic heart disease pursuant to an August 2013 rating decision. That decision was based upon a July 2013 VA examination that found no evidence of a current diagnosis. An electrocardiogram, dated the same month, revealed normal findings.  A chest X-ray also documented normal findings.   

In May 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) in which he requested to re-open his previously denied claim.  The same month, additional medical evidence was associated with the record to include results of a heart rate monitoring study which found no evidence of atrial fibrillation in April 2024.  Two months later, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  Again, he requested to re-open his previously denied claim for service connection for a heart condition.  He further suggests a causal linkage between heart disease and his service-related exposure to herbicides or herbicidal agents.  Pursuant to a September 2024 Rating Decision, the RO determined that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted to warrant readjudication the Veteran's claim.  The decision was based upon a finding that although new evidence had been submitted, it was not relevant as there remained no evidence of a current diagnosis of ischemic heart disease.

Thereafter, in January 2025, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and requested Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.

On review of the record, the Board observes that the Veteran filed a request to reopen his previously denied claim. Attached thereto, he provided additional medical evidence indicating that pulmonary function testing and an Echocardiogram were performed in August 2023.  Normal findings were indicated.  No significant plaque or evidence of an aneurysm dilatation is present in the abdominal aorta or proximal common iliac arteries.  Further, there was no evidence of A-fib or hemodynamically significant valvular abnormalities. Similarly, an August 2023 family practice radiology report documented mild intimal wall thickening and plaque, no evidence of flow-limiting stenosis in the cervical carotid arteries. 

While the record confirms that the Veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam, and exposure to herbicides (or herbicidal agents) is conceded, the record is silent for any evidence of a confirmed diagnosis of a heart condition. 

Although the Board recognizes the above referenced evidence includes additional diagnostic findings, it nevertheless finds that while the above referenced evidence is new, it is not relevant to the issue on appeal in this case. Specifically, the new evidence is not relevant as it fails to show that a current diagnosis of a heart abnormality has been identified. 

As noted above, the Veteran's claim was previously denied based upon a finding that the relevant evidence failed to confirm a current diagnosis of a heart disability. While the Board recognizes the Veteran's subjective belief that he suffers from a heart condition, the medical evidence has consistently revealed no evidence of an active heart abnormality. The Board is aware that symptoms such as pain that result in functional impairment can establish a current disability. However, in this case, the medical findings have consistently found no functional impairment associated with the Veteran's subjective complaints.

Accordingly, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has not been presented to readjudicate the issue of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease. Therefore, as the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). The Veteran's claim must be denied.

2. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for isolated systolic hypertension (claimed as high blood pressure) associated with herbicide exposure

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher evaluation for his service-connected hypertension. As discussed in more detail below, the evidence weighs pervasively against his claim.

Review of the record indicates that his service-connected hypertension has been evaluated as 10 percent disabling pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101. 

Under Diagnostic Code 7101, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for (1) diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, (2) systolic pressure predominantly 160 or more, or (3) a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, requiring continuous medication for control. Under Diagnostic Code 7101, a 20 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more, or systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more; a rating of 40 percent is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 120 or more; and a rating of 60 percent is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 130 or more.

When a service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings during different periods, separate ratings may be assigned for those different periods. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 510 (2007). In other words, ratings may be "staged."

Review of the record indicates that blood pressure readings from August 2020 to August 2023, were recorded as 120/80, 120/70, 125/85, 130/80, 120/75, 122/82, and 120/75. 

In June 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  Therein, a current diagnosis of isolated systolic hypertension was indicated. Blood pressure readings were listed as 172/77, 176/88, and 170/89.  No other pertinent physical findings were indicated. No functional impact was identified.

During the appeal period, the medical evidence shows ten blood pressure readings for this Veteran. None of those readings support an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling.

In making all determinations, the Board has fully considered all medical evidence and the lay assertions of record.  It also acknowledges the Veteran's competence to report on observable symptoms and notes that such statements are generally deemed credible to the extent that they articulate the Veteran's belief that he is entitled to a higher rating.  In this case, however, the Veteran's lay assertions are outweighed by competent and credible medical evidence which evaluated the true extent of his hypertension to include consideration of his contentions as to worsening symptoms.  In this regard, the Board notes that the VA examiners have the training and expertise necessary to administer the appropriate tests for a determination of the type and degree of the impairment associated with the Veteran's complaints.  For these reasons, greater evidentiary weight is placed on the examination findings in regard to the type and degree of impairment.

Accordingly, as the medical evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran's diastolic pressure was predominantly 110 or more, or that his systolic pressure was predominantly 200 or more throughout the appeal period, a higher evaluation is not warranted. Therefore, as the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). The Veteran's claim must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent disabling for left shoulder arthritis is remanded.

See Below.

2. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent disabling for right shoulder arthritis is remanded.

Although the further delay entailed by remand is regrettable, current adjudication of the Veterans claims would be premature. Undertaking additional development prior to a Board decision is the only way to ensure compliance with the duty to assist, as required. 38 U.S.C. 5103A (2012); 38 C.F.R. 3.159 (2020).

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent disabling for bilateral shoulder arthritis.

Review of the record indicates that the Veteran continues to seek treatment for his bilateral shoulder arthritis.  A primary care treatment record dated September 2024, documented complaints of worsening shoulder pain.

The same month, the Veteran was afforded an updated VA examination.  The previous diagnosis of bilateral shoulder arthritis was noted. During the clinical interview, the Veteran reported receipt of a current diagnosis several years ago. Worsening intermittent symptoms occur periodically. The Veteran denied use of oral medications. Moderate flare-ups of pain impact the bilateral shoulders several times per day and last for hours after onset. No specific activities were listed as precipitating the symptom onset. Rest alleviates the Veteran's symptoms. A functional impact was described as an inability to rotate, use, or move either shoulder without pain. 

Range of motion testing revealed normal findings. Pain was observed with all range of motion in the right shoulder. In the left shoulder, pain impacted flexion only. There was also evidence of pain with active and passive motion, weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing. Pain caused functional loss. Although evidence of crepitus was noted, no localized tenderness or pain to palpation was documented. No additional loss of function was observed with repetitive use testing. However, during flare-ups, a loss of 10 degrees of flexion and abduction was observed, bilaterally. Pain caused functional loss with repetitive use and during flare-ups, bilaterally. No additional factors were listed as contributing to the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disability. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy or ankylosis. No rotator cuff conditions or pathology consistent with instability, dislocation, or a labral impairment was documented. There was also no evidence of mechanical symptoms or residuals of recurrent dislocation. No findings consistent with a clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular (ac) joint and sternoclavicular joint condition were observed, bilaterally. There was also no evidence of a condition or impairment impacting the humerus. No other pertinent findings were documented. The Veteran denied use of assistive devices. No diagnostic imaging was obtained in connection with this examination.

On review of the record, the Board observes that the Veteran was previously provided a VA examination in October 2019.  At that time, radiological imaging was obtained of the bilateral shoulders. 

Of note, the Veteran's September 2024 VA examination was conducted in the absence of obtaining updated radiological or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  In general, MRI scans are commonly used to diagnose arthritis or another joint disorder and stage symptom progression.  During the September 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported pain with all ranges of motion with an inability to rotate, use, or move either shoulder without pain.  Further a loss of 10 degrees of motion was observed with repetitive use testing during flare-ups.  Given the above, updated diagnostic imaging is necessary to adequately address the Veteran's complaints of worsening symptoms.

On review of the record, the Board finds that the September 2024 VA examination is inadequate. In particular, the Board notes neither radiological nor MRI imaging was obtained in connection with the most recent VA examination.  Given the Veteran's report of pain with all ranges of motion and documented loss of range of motion with repetitive use testing, the Board findings that updated imaging is required to adequately address the current severity of the Veteran's disability.

Accordingly, the Board finds that an additional VA examination is required to consider the Veteran's lay contentions regarding symptom worsening and functional limitations; to include obtaining updated radiological/diagnostic imaging.

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103 (d); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

As the opinion of record is inadequate it results in a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required.

3. Entitlement to service connection for squamous skin cancer lower right jawbone is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for squamous skin cancer of the lower right jawbone.

In this case, a derma pathology report, dated September 2024, indicates that a left forehead and right lateral submandibular cheek biopsy revealed a current diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma. Evidence of healing scars were observed from recent treatment for squamous and basal cell carcinoma to the left forehead and right jaw.  

Review of the record indicates that the Veteran has confirmed service in the Republic of Vietnam.  A Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum, dated September 2024, indicated that duties associated with his official miliary occupation as an infantryman direct fire crewman have been associated with herbicide exposure.

Despite the above, a VA examination was not conducted.

In determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided, or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration.  

These four factors are:  (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  

With respect to the third factor above, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service.

To date, the Veteran has already been granted service connection for left eye, facial disfigurement with scar due to basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and actinic keratosis. 

Despite the above, a separate VA examination has not been conducted regarding the Veteran's skin cancer to the right jaw.

Accordingly, the Board finds that a VA examination is warranted.

Where the record before the Board contains insufficient medical information for evaluation purposes, a remand may be required. Littke v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 90. (1990).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the current severity of his service-connected left and right shoulder arthritis. The entire claims file and a copy of this remand should be made available to the examiner for review, and such review should be noted in the examination report. All necessary tests and studies should be conducted, to include X-ray (radiological imaging) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

The examiner must also discuss the functional effects of the Veteran's service-connected left and right shoulder arthritis, and any related residual conditions.

As a part of the examination and/or opinion, the examiner must consider all medical evidence to include the Veteran's lay statements.

Any opinion offered must be accompanied by a complete rationale, to include consideration of all medical evidence and lay statements. If any requested opinion cannot be offered without resorting to speculation, the examiner should indicate such in the examination report and explain why a non-speculative opinion cannot be offered. The examiner should also identify what, if any, additional information or evidence would allow for a more definitive opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma to the right jaw. The entire claims file and a copy of this remand should be made available to the examiner for review, and such review should be noted in the examination report. All necessary tests and studies should be conducted. 

(a) In rendering an opinion, the examiner's attention is called to favorable findings regarding left eye, facial disfigurement with left eyelid facial scar due to basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and actinic keratosis.

(b) Then, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), that the Veteran's squamous skin cancer of the lower right jawbone is etiologically related to active service, to include as due to toxic risk exposure activities performed therein. 

As a part of the examination and/or opinion, the examiner must consider all prior diagnoses in the record and nexus opinions and explain or distinguish any variations in findings and conclusions.

Any opinion offered must be accompanied by a complete rationale, which should reflect consideration of the STRs, medical evidence of record, and lay statements. If any requested opinion cannot be offered without resorting to speculation, the examiner should indicate such in the examination report and explain why a non-speculative opinion cannot be offered. The examiner should also identify what, if any, additional information or evidence would allow for a more definitive opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the Veteran's claims.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Whitaker, Nakiya E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.