Citation Nr: A25033788
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-457603
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dysfunction with pain (claimed as bruxism) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for psychiatric disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for rectal disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's TMJ dysfunction with pain began during active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for TMJ dysfunction with pain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2015 to December 2015. He had additional service with Marine Corps Reserve. These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2024 rating decision.

In a December 2023 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for adjustment disorder, bruxism, insomnia, proctalgia fugax, left knee surgical scars, and right shoulder surgical scars. 

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) and requested review of the December 2023 decision. In May 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 decision and denied entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder, bruxism, insomnia, proctalgia fugax, left knee surgical scars, and right shoulder surgical scars.

In a July 26, 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement(NOD)), the Veteran appealed the May 2024 decision and elected the Board's Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the December 2023 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for psychiatric disability, rectal disability, left knee disability, and right shoulder disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As for characterization of the issues on appeal, in light of the Veteran's reported symptoms and contentions and to encompass all disorders that are reasonably raised by the record, the Board has re-characterized the claims of service connection for adjustment disorder, insomnia, proctalgia fugax, left knee surgical scars, and right shoulder surgical scars as claims of service connection for psychiatric disability, rectal disability, left knee disability, and right shoulder disability. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms described, and the evidence in support of the claim).

Finally, in this regard, the Veteran's statements reflect a desire for an expeditious decision on his claims and therefore the Board infers that he wishes to forego the one year period following the rating decision in which to switch dockets.  Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305, 307 (2024) ("because [38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2)] gives a claimant the later of one year from the date that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) mails notice of the decision or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD to change the NOD and select a different lane, the Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up").

Entitlement to service connection for TMJ dysfunction with pain (claimed as bruxism)

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

The Board finds, for the following reasons, that the Veteran has current TMJ dysfunction with pain, and that this disability began during active service.

An August 2023 VA temporomandibular disorders examination report indicates that the Veteran was diagnosed as having TMJ disorder with pain. Therefore, current jaw disability is demonstrated.

Moreover, there is evidence of jaw symptoms in service and evidence of continuous symptoms in the years since service. In this regard, the Veteran has reported that he began to grind his teeth during active service in 2015, which was also noticed by his dentist at the time. He was given a night guard, but would still catch himself clenching his jaw, would wake up with jaw muscle tension and clicking, and experienced difficulty chewing food. Additionally, the Veteran's post-service medical records and lay statements essentially indicate that he has experienced continuous jaw symptoms in the years since service.

The Veteran is competent to report jaw symptoms in service and continuous symptoms in the years since service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Moreover, the Veteran's statements regarding his jaw symptoms are generally internally consistent, consistent with the other evidence of record, and consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's reports of jaw symptoms in service and continuous symptoms in the years since service are credible.

In December 2023, a VA dentist reviewed the Veteran's claims file and opined that his claimed jaw disability was likely ("at least as likely as not"/"likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) incurred in or caused by service. The dentist reasoned, in pertinent part, that the Veteran had bruxism due to service-related anxiety, which led to his TMJ issues in 2015. The etiology of the Veteran's jaw pain was service-related anxiety which he started to experience soon after he entered service. He initially developed adjustment disorder and felt that he was always on edge all the time due to very high expectations, deadlines that had to be constantly met, and constantly being yelled at for completing his job. He had to adjust to this cultural shock and later developed insomnia. The dentist also cited medical literature and concluded that there was a strong clinical correlation between anxiety and bruxism, which leads to TMJ issues.

The December 2023 opinion is based upon a review of medical literature and the Veteran's records, and consideration of his reported history, and it is accompanied by a specific rationale that is consistent with the evidence of record. Therefore, this opinion is entitled to substantial probative weight. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

Overall, in light of the December 2023 opinion and the Veteran's competent and credible reports of jaw symptoms during active service and continuous symptoms in the years since service, the evidence supports a conclusion that the Veteran's TMJ dysfunction with pain began during active service. Therefore, service connection for TMJ dysfunction with pain (claimed as bruxism) is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for psychiatric disability, rectal disability, left knee disability, and right shoulder disability are remanded.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the claimant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

In this case, the Veteran contends that he began to experience impaired sleep, rectal pain, left knee disability, and right shoulder disability during his service with the Marine Corps Reserve in the years after his initial period of active service from January 2015 to December 2015. With regard to his claimed left knee and right shoulder disabilities in particular, the evidence reflects that he initially injured his left knee and right shoulder in a motor vehicle accident on August 5, 2017. The period from January 2015 to December 2015 is currently the only verified period of active service. The AOJ has not made all necessary attempts to verify the dates of any subsequent periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty training (INACDUTRA) (to include by way of contacting the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS)), and the Veteran's claims file does not appear to contain his complete service personnel records. As this was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is required to obtain these relevant outstanding service records. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Moreover, the Veteran was afforded VA scars, shoulder, psychiatric, rectum, and knee examinations in August 2022 and August 2023, and he was diagnosed as having right shoulder and left knee scars, residuals of status post right shoulder labral repair, insomnia disorder, and proctalgia fugax. VA physicians provided opinions in November 2023 and December 2023 that the Veteran's claimed rectal disability and psychiatric disability were not likely related to service. The rectal disability opinion is inadequate because it is not accompanied by any specific explanation or rationale. Also, the psychiatric disability opinions are inadequate because they are solely based on the absence of evidence of treatment for psychiatric problems during service, and they do not acknowledge or discuss the Veteran's reports of impaired sleep during service.

Also, medical opinions were provided in August 2022 and November 2023 that the Veteran's claimed left knee and right shoulder disabilities were likely related to service. However, these opinions are based upon evidence of treatment for left knee and right shoulder problems in the years following the Veteran's initial period of active service from January 2015 to December 2015. As explained above, the dates of any periods of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA in the years since that initial period of service have not yet been verified.

A remand based on this pre-decisional duty to assist error is also warranted to obtain adequate medical opinions as to whether the Veteran's claimed psychiatric disability, rectal disability, left knee disability, and right shoulder disability are caused or aggravated by service. Id.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Verify all ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA dates for the Veteran's service in the Marine Corps Reserve (including, but not limited to, the nature of any service on August 5, 2017). If necessary, a request should be made to DFAS. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

2. Obtain the Veteran's complete service personnel records, to include all documents pertaining to service in the Marine Corps Reserve. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

3. If any of the Veteran's service records pertaining to his service in the Marine Corps Reserve are missing or are otherwise unavailable, this fact should be documented and a formal finding of unavailability should be made with notice to the Veteran and his representative.

4. After all efforts have been exhausted to verify the dates of the Veteran's ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA and to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional service records, obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician as to whether the Veteran's current psychiatric disability is related to service. The clinician should be provided the precise dates of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA, to the extent possible.

The clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any psychiatric disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately July 2023 (including, but not limited to, insomnia disorder) (i) began during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015 or any period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTA; (ii) is related to an injury or disease during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015; (iii) is related to an injury or disease during a period of ACDUTRA or an injury during a period of INACDUTRA; OR (iv) is aggravated by any period(s) of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.

The clinician must provide reasons for each opinion given. In this regard, the clinician must acknowledge and discuss the Veteran's reported psychiatric and sleep symptoms during service.

5. After all efforts have been exhausted to verify the dates of the Veteran's ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA and to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional service records, obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician as to whether the Veteran's current rectal disability is related to service. The clinician should be provided the precise dates of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA, to the extent possible.

The clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any rectal disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately July 2023 (including, but not limited to, proctalgia fugax) (i) began during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015 or any period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTA; (ii) is related to an injury or disease during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015; (iii) is related to an injury or disease during a period of ACDUTRA or an injury during a period of INACDUTRA; OR (iv) is aggravated by any period(s) of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.

The clinician must provide reasons for each opinion. 

6. After all efforts have been exhausted to verify the dates of the Veteran's ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA and to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional service records, obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician as to whether the Veteran's current left knee disability is related to service. The clinician should be provided the precise dates of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA, to the extent possible.

The clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any left knee disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately July 2023 (i) began during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015 or any period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTA; (ii) manifested within one year after separation from his period of active service from January 2015 to December 2015 (in the case of any currently diagnosed arthritis); (iii) is related to an injury or disease during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015; (iv) is related to an injury or disease during a period of ACDUTRA or an injury during a period of INACDUTRA; OR (v) is aggravated by any period(s) of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.

The clinician must provide reasons for each opinion. 

7. After all efforts have been exhausted to verify the dates of the Veteran's ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA and to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional service records, obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician as to whether the Veteran's current right shoulder disability is related to service. The clinician should be provided the precise dates of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA, to the extent possible.

The clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any right shoulder disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately July 2022 (i) began during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015 or any period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTA; (ii) manifested within one year after separation from his period of active service from January 2015 to December 2015 (in the case of any currently diagnosed arthritis); (iii) is related to an injury or disease during his period of active duty service from January 2015 to December 2015; (iv) is related to an injury or disease during a period of ACDUTRA or an injury during a period of INACDUTRA; OR (v) is aggravated by any period(s) of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.

The clinician must provide reasons for each opinion given.  

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Elwood, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.