Citation Nr: A25033958
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452269
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for neck straightening with severe pain is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 30 percent for cluster headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from December 1997 to March 2007.  She was awarded the Navy Achievement  Medal, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, and Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, among others.

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2024.  Therefore, the modernized review system, known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Under the Direct Review docket, the Board is authorized to review only the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the June 2024 rating decision.  The Board may not consider evidence presented outside of the timeframes discussed above.  Therefore, evidence provided following the June 2024 rating decision has not been considered by the Board in its decision on the claims.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that a Veteran is now generally entitled to a one year window within which the Veteran may elect to switch Board review dockets if desired by submitting a new, completed VA Form 10182.  A Veteran may also waive this docket switch window.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 205 (2024).  As noted above, the Veteran's rating decision was provided in June 2024 and VA Form 10182 was received in July 2024; thus, she currently has time pending within which she may switch dockets.  However, as the Board can remand this claim based on the evidence of record, the Board will proceed with adjudication as the remand will result in no prejudice to the Veteran.

1. Entitlement to service connection for neck straightening with severe pain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her neck pain is due to her service.  Specifically, she contends that she fell down a ladder during service and that her neck pain has continued since this injury.  See February 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran contends that her claim was denied without being provided a VA medical examination.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182.

Establishing direct service connection generally requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Shedden v. Principi, 381, F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The June 2024 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran has a current disability and a qualifying in-service event.  These findings are binding on the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  Therefore, the first and second elements of direct service connection are met.  As such, the only question pending before the Board is regarding the third element of direct service connection.

To date, the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination or medical opinion as it relates to the claimed condition.  The AOJ requested an examination and noted that the Veteran did not need to report for this examination.  See February 2024 Exam request.  There is no documentation of record regarding the scheduling of an examination, notification to the Veteran that an examination was scheduled, or that her presence was required.  The June 2024 rating decision denied the claim on the basis that the Veteran was a no show and good cause was not shown.

The Board is cognizant of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 regarding action to be taken when a Veteran fails to report for a scheduled VA examination "when entitlement to a benefit cannot be established" without the scheduled examination.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.  Nevertheless, in this case, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is unclear whether the Veteran was properly notified, and there is no published guidance establishing the presumption of regularity in such a situation.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Kyhn v. Shinseki, 716 F.3d 572 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (reversing Kyhn v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 335 (2010)); see also Kyhn v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 371 (2013).

The Board finds that the AOJ indication that the Veteran need not attend the examination and the AOJ's failure to inform the Veteran of a scheduled examination constitutes good cause.

No nexus opinion has been provided from the Veteran's private treating providers, if any.

Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  See also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  These elements are conjunctive as set forth and, as such, all must be satisfied.

The Board finds that the McLendon elements above have been met.  The McLendon elements represent a low threshold that requires that evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a causal nexus between the disability or persistent symptoms of a disability and military service.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  The Veteran has asserted that her neck condition may be associated with her service.  The AOJ provided a favorable finding of a qualifying in-service event and a confirmed diagnosis.  Finally, there is insufficient clinical information in the record for the Board to make a decision on the claim.

As the Board has found the McLendon elements met, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not providing the Veteran with a VA examination and medical opinion for the claimed neck condition.  The Board must remand this matter for such examination and medical opinions to be provided.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

In providing this remand, the Board makes no determination, express or implied, regarding the credibility of any statements within the record.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

2. Entitlement to a rating greater than 30 percent for cluster headaches is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her service-connected headache disability has worsened.  See February 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran contends that her claim was denied without being provided a VA medical examination.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182.  The Veteran is service-connected for migraines with an assigned 30 percent rating effective August 2007.  See June 2024 Codesheet.

To date, the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination as it relates to the service-connected headache disability.  The AOJ requested an examination and noted that the Veteran did not need to report for this examination.  See February 2024 Exam request.  There is no documentation of record regarding the scheduling of an examination, notification to the Veteran that an examination was scheduled, or that her presence was required.  The June 2024 rating decision denied the claim on the basis that the Veteran was a no show and good cause was not shown.

The Board is cognizant of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 regarding action to be taken when a Veteran fails to report for a scheduled VA examination "when entitlement to a benefit cannot be established" without the scheduled examination.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.  Nevertheless, in this case, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is unclear whether the Veteran was properly notified, and there is no published guidance establishing the presumption of regularity in such a situation.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Kyhn v. Shinseki, 716 F.3d 572 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (reversing Kyhn v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 335 (2010)); see also Kyhn v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 371 (2013).

The Board finds that the AOJ indication that the Veteran need not attend the examination and the AOJ's failure to inform the Veteran of a scheduled examination constitutes good cause.

No medical examination has been provided from the Veteran's private treating providers, if any.

Turning to the record, the Veteran's treatment records note ongoing chronic headaches.  See July 2023 medical notes within the February 2024 CAPRI record.

Currently, there is insufficient clinical information in the record for the Board to make a decision on the claim.

Based on the above, the Board has found the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not providing the Veteran with a VA examination for the service-connected headache disability.  The Board must remand this matter for such examination to be provided.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

In providing this remand, the Board makes no determination, express or implied, regarding the credibility of any statements within the record.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

The Board notes that while VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in substantiating his claims, that duty is not a one-way street, and the Veteran is reminded it is important that she make efforts to assist VA in gathering evidence relevant to her claim.  See Woods v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (further holding that "[i]f a Veteran wishes help, (s)he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where (s)he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining the putative evidence").  While the Board provides the Veteran with another opportunity to report to physical examinations given proper notification, she is reminded that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, failure to cooperate by not attending the requested VA examination may result in an adverse determination for these claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination and medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's neck condition.  The entire claims file, including this remand, must be made available to the clinician and have been reviewed by the clinician in conjunction with this request.

For the purpose of providing the opinion requested, please acknowledge, and discuss:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (meaning approximate balance or is nearly equal) that the neck condition was incurred in or aggravated during the Veteran's service to include during training events and/or during deployments.

b)	Adequately address the Veteran's lay contentions of record and those submitted within the examination.

The term "aggravation" means any incremental increase in disability or any additional impairment of earning capacity of a disability, regardless of permanence, at any time during the period on appeal.  If aggravation is found, please identify, to the extent possible, the baseline level of disability prior to the aggravation.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and injuries, as well as diagnoses provided to him by physicians, and that her reports (lay observations) must be considered in formulating the requested opinion.

If the Veteran's statements are discounted, the examiner should provide a full, medically explained reason for doing so.  The Veteran's statements or lay statements may not be discounted solely on the basis of the lack of confirmation in the medical or service records.

The examiner may not mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any and all opinions expressed.  If the examiner finds that the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, he or she should so state, and should indicate whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given the state of medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record (i.e., additional facts are required), or that the examiner does not have the necessary knowledge or training.

When responding, regardless of whether favorably or unfavorably, it is essential the examiner provide rationale preferably citing to evidence in the file and/or accepted medical authority in order to support the conclusions asserted.  An unsupported medical opinion will carry negligible probative weight.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination regarding the severity of the Veteran's service-connected headache disability.  The entire claims file, including this remand, must be made available to the clinician and have been reviewed by the clinician in conjunction with this request.

For the purpose of providing the opinion requested, please acknowledge, and discuss:

a)	The current severity of the Veteran's service-connected headache disability.

b)	Adequately address the Veteran's lay statements of record and those provided as part of the VA examination.

The term "aggravation" means any incremental increase in disability or any additional impairment of earning capacity of a disability, regardless of permanence, at any time during the period on appeal.  If aggravation is found, please identify, to the extent possible, the baseline level of disability prior to the aggravation.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and injuries, as well as diagnoses provided to him by physicians, and that her reports (lay observations) must be considered in formulating the requested opinion.

If the Veteran's statements are discounted, the examiner should provide a full, medically explained reason for doing so.  The Veteran's statements or lay statements may not be discounted solely on the basis of the lack of confirmation in the medical or service records.

The examiner may not mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any and all opinions expressed.  If the examiner finds that the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, he or she should so state, and should indicate whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given the state of medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record (i.e., additional facts are required), or that the examiner does not have the necessary knowledge or training.

When responding, regardless of whether favorably or unfavorably, it is essential the examiner provide rationale preferably citing to evidence in the file and/or accepted medical authority in order to support the conclusions asserted.  An unsupported medical opinion will carry negligible probative weight.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Daniel Stephens, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.