Citation Nr: A25033801
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-466717
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 50 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder, including PTSD, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1986 to October 2002. This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In May 2023, service connection was granted for PTSD, effective December 8, 2021. An initial evaluation of 30 percent was granted.  In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the initial disability rating assigned for the grant of service connection for PTSD. In September 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Period on Appeal

In May 2023, the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 30 percent rating effective from December 8, 2021, the date of the initial claim. Then, as noted above, in response to the May 2023 rating decision, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim along with the new opinion of a private examiner. In the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ interpreted the Veteran's supplemental claim application form as a claim for increase of his service-connected PTSD and continued the assigned rating of 30 percent for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. 

In response to the September 2023 rating decision, the Veteran's representative submitted the August 2024 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) along with a brief. In the August 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative argued that this appeal stems from a July 2023 request for administrative review of the May 2023 initial rating decision, and is not a separate claim for an increased rating. The Board finds that the Veteran submitted the July 2023 supplemental claim within one year of the May 2023 rating decision, and that the Veteran' submitted the August 2024 NOD within one year of the September 2023 supplemental claim decision. Accordingly, the Board finds that the period on review is from the date of the grant of service connection, that is December 8, 2021, through the date of the supplemental rating decision, September 14, 2023. 

Disability Ratings

VA's percentage disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which are based on the average impairment of earning capacity as a result of service-connected disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Payton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 287 (1991). 

The most relevant information in determining the appropriate initial disability rating pertains to the severity of the disability since the effective date of service connection. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Staged ratings may be awarded if there are decreases or increases in symptomatology that meet the criteria for a different rating for a distinct period. Id; Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). An increased or staged rating should be assigned based on when the increase in disability can be factually ascertained, not simply the date of the medical report. See id; Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015). In other words, where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibited diverse symptoms meeting the criteria for different ratings during the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings would be necessary. The Board has considered the record and has found that staged ratings are not warranted as the evidence of record indicates that the degree of disability has remained approximately the same during the period on appeal.

All reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. The Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise. Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the Veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), affirmed en banc 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (exact equipoise is not required for benefit of the doubt to be applied); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for his service-connected PTSD. Specifically, in the August 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative contends that the Veteran is entitled to a rating of 70 percent for his service-connected PTSD. See VBMS document titled, "Third Party Correspondence," receipt date 08/26/2024.

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for an initial disability in excess of 30 percent.

The Board concludes that, throughout the appeal period, (i.e., since the grant of service connection), the Veteran's psychiatric disability more nearly approximates the level of impairment contemplated by the criteria in the rating of 50 percent.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. 38 C.F.R. §4.126.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships causing occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Evidence

The probative evidence of record includes VA examinations and opinions, private examinations and opinions, VA treatment records, and Social Security Administration (SSA) records, as well as lay statements from the Veteran.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023. The VA examination report was completed in conjunction with an in-person examination and the VA examiner indicated review of the Veteran's VA e-folder citing specifically, "CAPRI subject Birmingham E VA Clinic PTSD, p 11, 27, 3" and cited the Veteran's December 2021 statements describing the in-service stressor incidents. The examiner did not explain the citations or refence them elsewhere in the report. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD and opined that the Veteran's psychiatric disability causes occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The Veteran reported that he has been employed as a warehouse supervisor, a Lyft driver, and is currently a football coach. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 01/26/2023.

The January 2023 VA examination report found that the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating (depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment); and with a 50 percent rating (disturbances of motivation and mood). The January 2023 VA examination report did not find that the Veteran's PTSD manifested any unlisted symptoms or symptoms associated with a rating in excess of 50 percent. The only symptom explanation the examiner offered was a note that the Veteran "stated that his concentration and sleep vary," and that the Veteran does not have suicidal or homicidal thoughts. Id. 

The Board acknowledges that the January 2023 VA examination report also identified "irritable behavior and angry outbursts" within the PTSD diagnostic criteria but that the examiner then did not identify "impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence" in Section 5 of the report, which identifies symptoms "for VA rating purposes." Moreover, the examiner did not indicate or cite any evidence elsewhere in the report that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms include any physical aggression or violent outbursts. Id.

The Veteran submitted a July 2023 private evaluation for VA rating purposes. The July 2023 private evaluation found that the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating (depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation)); with a 50 percent rating (disturbances of motivation and mood and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships); and with a 70 percent rating ("impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability)"). The July 2023 private evaluation also identified unlisted symptoms (decreased participation in physical/social activities, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, and relationship problems). The July 2023 examiner did not indicate whether her evaluation was based on evidence review or in conjunction with an examination and only referenced the Veteran's lay statement as the basis for determining his symptoms. See VBMS document titled, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," receipt date 07/27/2023.

The Veteran's file also includes relevant VA treatment records from January 2022 through May 2022. In January 2022, a VA supervisory psychologist conducted a "functional assessment" of the Veteran's mental health, diagnosed him with "depression and PTSD symptoms," noted no current suicidal ideation, and no domestic violence. In addition, the January 2022 VA functional assessment includes the Veteran's report that he "[does not] want to get out of bed, sometimes I feel sad and cry. Worry a lot, about money, have a temper." Based on the functional assessment, the January 2022 VA psychologist referred the Veteran for outpatient mental health therapy and medication evaluation. See VBMS document titled, "CAPRI," receipt date 09/15/2022, pages 35, 36, 42 of 48 (identical file added to Veteran's file on 09/13/2023 with no additional treatment records). 

Then in February 2022, the Veteran was afforded a psychotherapist intake evaluation. The February 2022 VA provider diagnosed the Veteran with anxiety, depression, PTSD, and insomnia. In February 2022, the Veteran reported that "I just have a lot of anger and... I guess I've had a hard time blending in with the civilian side of things...sometimes it just get frustrating. I do ok with my job and everything. I guess I'm managing it ok. I have my own little coping mechanisms that I've developed over time...I guess I just have a really really short fuse." As to symptoms related to sleep impairment, the Veteran reported that "some nights ok, some night not...I do well sporadically...I sweat a lot. I do get up every night and change t-shirts. Sometimes that's followed up with putting a towel down on my side of the bed because my sheet is just drenched...I can't remember the last time I woke up from sleep and was like man I really rested well last night." As to symptoms of anxiety, the Veteran reported "worrying about a variety of topics, events, or activities to the point of having fatigue, muscle aches, difficulty sleeping, irritability around others." The February 2022 VA provider noted symptoms of depression, anxiety to the point of muscle aches and fatigue, difficulty sleeping, intrusive and distressing memories including dreams of the events, mood swings, lack of interest in activities, problems with anger and aggression, hypervigilance. The February 2022 VA provider noted no suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, mania, psychosis, or panic. Regarding the Veteran's social history, the February 2022 VA provider noted that the Veteran is currently married and that this is the Veteran's third marriage. Id. at 27, 28, 29, 32.

In April 2022, the Veteran was afforded a "mental health prescriber intake appointment" where the VA provider characterized the Veteran's diagnoses as moderate recurrent major depressive disorder (MDD) and chronic PTSD. The Veteran reported that "people say I'm short tempered all the time. Just feel frustrated. It's so different from the military...just make it hard at work. Just mad for no reason. Don't like being around people." The Veteran also reported that he coaches football for several area high schools and that he tries to enjoy teaching the kids. The April 2022 VA provider noted symptoms of depression; irritability; angry; anxiety; increased/unrealistic worry; intrusive thoughts; easily fatigued; muscle tension; restlessness; decreased interest; and feeling detached and numb. He denied panic, suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia. The Veteran reported that his appetite is "up and down;" his sleep is "not good;" "energy is low;" immediate memory is "decreased;" focus/concentration is "reduced/distractible;" and interest is "loss or decrease." The April 2022 VA provider assessed the Veteran as having "periods of low mood; anxiety; poor sleep; varied appetite; lack of energy; difficulties with focus and concentration with some shortened memory deficits." Id. at 13, 15, 16, 20, 21. 

In May 2022, the Veteran attended a "mental health prescriber follow-up appointment," where the May 2022 provider noted symptoms including depression, irritability, angry, increased/unrealistic worry, intrusive thoughts, easily fatigued, muscle tension, restlessness, decreased interests, feeling detached and numb, decreased concentration, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response. The Veteran denied panic, suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia. The provider assessed the Veteran as having "periods of low mood; anxiety; poor sleep; varied appetite; lack of energy; difficulties with focus and concentration with some shortened memory deficits." Id. at 3, 8.

Considering the whole VA treatment record, the Veteran's VA providers found that the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating (depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, and chronic sleep impairment); and unlisted symptoms (insomnia, anger, increased/unrealistic worry, easily fatigued, muscle tension, restlessness, irritability, decreased interests, feeling detached and numb, decreased concentration, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, memory deficits, varied appetite, lack of energy, and mood changes). Id. 

There are no other medical treatment records associated with the Veterans file relevant to the appeal period.  

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a lay statement describing his symptoms and their effects on his life. The Veteran stated that he prefers to be alone, that he worries his career is in jeopardy because he "can't function," is "unable to concentrate," and "only sleep[s] 5 hours a night." The Veteran described feeling "frustrated or angry easily, causing arguments with those close to me." As to his relationship with his family and friends, the Veteran said that "sometimes I snap at [my grandchildren] and become angry with them because of my discomfort...If I plan to hang out with friends, I usually cancel on them...I have no interest in trying to interact with them." He described "repeated behaviors... include being short-fused and easily irritated. At times, I experience unwanted thoughts and distrust from most people." The Veteran did not mention suicidal ideation. See VBMS document titled, "VA 21-4138," receipt date 07/27/2023.

Analysis

Based on the foregoing evidence and a holistic analysis that considers all of the Veteran's associated symptoms, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that the impact of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the 50 percent rating criteria under the General Formula. The Board further finds that the persuasive evidence of record is against assigning a rating in excess of 50 percent. 

First, the Board addresses the competency and credibility of the Veteran's lay statement and reported descriptions of his symptoms to VA treatment providers and examiners. 

The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms of his psychiatric disability to include his experiences, emotions, difficulties, and what others tell him. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 471 (1994) (the Veteran is competent to report his observable symptoms).  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran competently reported symptoms including getting easily angry and frustrated, wanting to be by himself, descriptions of sleep disruptions, descriptions of effects on his occupation and social relationships, having problems with his memory, and feeling worried, sad, and anxious.

The Board finds that the Veteran's competent statements and reports are credible and entitled to probative weight because the Veteran's reports during his examinations, VA medical treatments, and lay statements are internally consistent and consistent with the relevant medical evidence of record. In addition, the Veteran has competently reported similar or nearly identical symptoms throughout the appeal period including in his July 2023 lay statement and to VA treatment providers on four separate occasions. In turn, the Veteran's lay statements and reports to the VA treatment providers were supported by the VA providers assessments and impressions, the VA examination findings, and the private evaluation findings. See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 478, 511 (1995), aff'd per curium,78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (when determining whether lay evidence is satisfactory, the Board may properly consider internal consistency, facial plausibility, consistency with other evidence submitted on behalf of the Veteran). Furthermore, there is no evidence that explicitly contradicts the Veteran's descriptions of the duration and frequency of the Veteran's symptoms as well as his observations of his feelings, emotions, and experiences with regards to his psychiatric disability. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's competent lay statements and reports are credible and entitled to probative weight. 

Second, the Board addresses the probative value of the January 2023 VA examination report and July 2024 private evaluation.  

The Board finds that the January 2023 VA examination report has probative value as to assessing the severity of the Veteran's symptoms for rating purposes. The VA examination includes checked boxes to indicate symptoms without specific descriptions or details as to what evidence or report led the examiner to find that the Veteran suffers from the indicated symptoms. For example, although the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms include "chronic sleep impairment," the examiner did not include any description of the Veteran's sleep disturbances or reference the Veteran's reports and descriptions in his VA treatment records. Nonetheless, the Board still assigns probative weight to the VA examination report because despite its lack of details or explanations, the symptoms identified are consistent with those identified in the VA treatment records and July 2023 lay statement, and show continuity of the Veteran's symptoms from the first VA treatment record in January 2022 through the VA examination in January 2023. 

The Board finds that the July 2023 private evaluation has no probative value because it is conclusory in that it lacks sufficient details or explanations to support its conclusions. The Board may reject a medical opinion as conclusory because it lacks supporting analysis. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007). See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 104 (2008) (holding that medical opinion must be based on veteran's prior medical history). Specifically, the private evaluation's conclusion that the Veteran's PTSD manifests symptoms consistent with a 70 percent rating is not supported by any explanation in the evaluation, nor is it supported by any objective evidence of record. Although the private evaluation cites the sole basis of the symptom list and rating conclusion as derived from the Veteran's competent and credible lay statement, the evaluation provides no explanation of either occupational or social limitations or how the single listed symptom from the 70 percent criteria and/or unlisted symptoms are so severe that they are consistent with or analogous to the 70 percent rating criteria. The Board finds that the private evaluation includes no details or explanation for its conclusion that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms are consistent with the 70 percent rating criteria and is therefore conclusory. Accordingly, the Board assigns no probative value to the July 2023 private evaluation.

Third, the Board finds that the Veteran's VA treatment records are the most probative evidence of record. Statements made for the purpose of medical diagnosis or treatment are exceptionally trustworthy because the declarant has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive a proper diagnosis and/or treatment. The VA treatment records include the Veteran's reports regarding his current symptoms experienced for the purposes of receiving appropriate treatment. Moreover, the Veteran's relevant VA mental health treatment records predate the May 2023 grant of service connection for PTSD. Accordingly, the Board finds that the VA treatment records are highly probative because they are based on in-person appointments with the Veteran who had an incentive to give an accurate history as to the nature and timing of his symptoms and exposures to receive proper care. 

In addition, the VA treatment records reveal symptoms identified by VA providers that are supported by detailed descriptions of the identified symptoms. For example, the Veteran's VA treatment records describe the significant struggle with sleep that the Veteran endures seemingly every night, to include changing his t-shirt and sometimes using a towel because of his night sweats. The records also include the Veteran's report that he has a lot of anger, he has had a hard time "blending in" with civilian life, that he does "okay" with his job due to his own coping mechanisms but that he has "a really really short fuse." The VA treatment records descriptions and assessments are more detailed than the symptoms identified in the January 2023 VA examination report and the July 2023 private evaluation. Furthermore, the symptoms identified and described in the VA treatment records are consistent with those symptoms identified by the other probative evidence, the VA examination report and the Veteran's July 2023 lay statement. Because the VA treatment records include the most detailed descriptions of the Veteran's symptoms as recorded by treatment providers, are internally consistent, and consistent with the other relevant evidence of record, the Board finds that they are the most probative evidence regarding the severity of the Veteran's symptoms. 

The Board also finds that although the VA treatment records only cover January 2022 through May 2022, they are still highly probative as to the issue of the severity throughout the appeal period because they are consistent with the findings and descriptions identified by the January 2023 VA examination and July 2023 lay statement. Moreover, the Veteran has not contended and there is no evidence that the Veteran's symptoms increased or decreased in severity at any point throughout the appeal period; there are no statements, reports, or findings of improvement or worsening. 

Fourth, the Board has weighed the probative evidence regarding the severity of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD symptoms throughout the appeal period. 

Based on the probative evidence of record, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that the Veteran's most significant PTSD symptom is disturbance of motivation and mood, which is listed under the 50 percent rating criteria. The probative evidence supporting this finding includes VA treatment records, the VA examination report, and the Veteran's lay statement which include reports, assessments, and impressions that he gets angry, frustrated easily, has mood swings, snaps at his grandchildren, makes plans with friends only to cancel later, and causes arguments with those close to him. 

The evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's reported and assessed irritability, anger, and short temper are analogous to impaired impulse control as listed under the 70 percent rating criteria. The probative evidence is silent for reports, assessments, or findings that the Veteran has experienced any violent outbursts and VA treatment records show that the Veteran expressly denied irresponsible behavior, violent ideation, and any incidents of domestic violence throughout the appeal period.

In addition, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that although his chronic sleep disturbance symptom is listed under the 30 percent rating criteria, his PTSD sleep symptomology is more severe than as contemplated under the 30 percent rating criteria. Specifically, the 30 percent rating criteria refers to "occasional impairment due to... chronic sleep impairment," however, the Veteran's reports of sleep disturbance, description of changing his clothes due to night sweats almost every night, February 2022 diagnosis of insomnia, and statement that he cannot remember a night that he woke feeling well rested are analogous to a more severe impairment. The Veteran's PTSD sleep symptomology is not analogous to any rating criteria in excess of 50 percent because there is no evidence that the Veteran's sleep impairment symptoms have caused him to miss work, caused him to be unable to establish and maintain effective occupational and social relationships, or otherwise resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. 

Accordingly, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that although chronic sleep impairment is listed under the 30 percent rating criteria, the Veteran's PTSD sleep symptomology is analogous to the 50 percent rating criteria because his symptoms are more frequent than "occasional" and cause significant physical limitations due to his severe night sweats.

Furthermore, the Board finds that the evidence of record is persuasively against assigning a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The Board finds that there is no evidence that the Veteran has ever reported or experienced suicidal ideation. The probative evidence is silent for any other symptoms listed under the 70 percent rating criteria, and there is no evidence that the Veteran's symptoms, when considered as a whole have caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. 

The Board acknowledges that the probative evidence of record includes descriptions of the Veteran's symptoms' effects on his work and relationships with his family and friends. Specifically, the evidence shows that the Veteran worries about his career and that his symptoms make his work more difficult, but the Veteran has not submitted any evidence that his service-connected PTSD symptoms have cause him to be late to work, missed work, lost work, or that any supervisor has reprimanded him or threatened to suspend or terminate him.

As to his social relationships, the evidence includes the Veteran's competent and credible statements that his PTSD symptoms have caused problems, strained, and made his relationships with his friends and loved ones more difficult. However, there is no evidence that the Veteran has been unable to establish or maintain those relationships. The probative evidence shows that the Veteran lives with his wife, has adult children, has grandchildren, works as a high school football coach, and has friends. Although the evidence shows that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms have caused difficulties in his relationships, there is no evidence that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms have caused him to be unable to establish or maintain any relationships. None of the probative evidence shows that the Veteran has lost any relationship with a friend or family member due to service-connected PTSD symptoms throughout the period on appeal. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively shows that the Veteran's PTSD disability did not manifest any symptoms listed or analogous to the 70 percent rating criteria and did not cause impairment most closely approximate to the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating.

Finally, based on a holistic analysis of the entire record with consideration appropriately weighed based on the probative value of the aforementioned evidence, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that his service-connected PTSD symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating throughout the period on appeal.

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to an initial rating of 50 percent for his service-connected PTSD throughout the period on appeal. 

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webb, Katherine S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.