Citation Nr: A25033670
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231125-396851
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with alcohol use disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable for allergic rhinitis is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable for chronic fatigue syndrome is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a type II diabetes mellitus disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the right upper extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the left upper extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral eye disability is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), claimed as hernia, is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a migraine headache disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for an erectile dysfunction disability is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's symptoms of PTSD are indicative of occupational and social impairment with no more than occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks; occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity is not shown at any time during the appeal.  

2. The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is shown to be manifested by itchy and watery eyes with sneezing, but there are no nasal polyps or greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.

3. The Veteran's chronic fatigue syndrome has not manifested with a total period of incapacitation of at least one week; or, the requirement of control by continuous medication.

4. The Veteran does not have a TBI.

5. The Veteran does not have current bilateral hip disabilities.

6. The Veteran's left shoulder disability is not related to an in-service injury, disease, or event. 

7. The Veteran does not have a current type II diabetes mellitus disability.

8. The Veteran does not have a current hypertension disability.

9. The Veteran does not have a current sinusitis disability.

10. The Veteran's peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities is not related to service to include exposure to environmental hazards during service at Camp Lejeune.

11. The Veteran's IBS is not related to service to include exposure to environmental hazards during service at Camp Lejeune.

12. The Veteran's bilateral eye disability is not related to service to include exposure to environmental hazards during service at Camp Lejeune.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2002); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

3.  The criteria for an initial compensable evaluation for the chronic fatigue syndrome have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 6354. 

4. A TBI disability was not incurred or aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304. 

5. The criteria for service connection for a right hip disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304(f), 3.310 (2021). 

6. The criteria for service connection for a left hip disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304(f), 3.310. 

7. A left shoulder disability was not incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

8. The criteria for service connection for diabetes mellitus are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 5103, 5103(A); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

9. The criteria for service connection for hypertension are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 5103, 5103(A); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

10. A sinusitis disability was not incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

11. Peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity was not incurred in active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

12. Peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity was not incurred in active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

13. IBS was not incurred in active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

14. A bilateral eye disability was not incurred in active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1987 to July 1998.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from July 2023 and September 2023 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182s, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 and September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for right and left knee, GERD, migraine headache, obstructive sleep apnea and erectile dysfunction disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

                                                Higher Ratings

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant.  Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value.  When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claims or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the most persuasive evidence is against the claims, in which case, the claims are denied.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (2012). Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.  If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (2021).  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3 (2021). 

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (2021). Where service connection has already been established, and increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of the disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  However, in Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999), it was held that evidence to be considered in the appeal of an initial assignment of a disability rating was not limited to that reflecting the then current severity of the disorder.  The Court also discussed the concept of the "staging" of ratings, finding that, in cases where an initially assigned disability evaluation has been disagreed with, it was possible for a veteran to be awarded separate percentage evaluations for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.  See also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2008).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (2021).

In this case, the Veteran is competent to testify on factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). He is also competent to report symptoms of his PTSD, allergic rhinitis, and chronic fatigue syndrome disabilities. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994). The Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms and their effects on employment or daily activities.  

PTSD

In the September 2023 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for PTSD with alcohol use disorder at an initial 30 percent disability rating, effective October 28, 2022, under Diagnostic Code 9411.

The Board notes that psychiatric disabilities other than eating disorders are rated pursuant to the criteria for General Rating Formula.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Under the general rating formula for mental disorders, a noncompensable rating is warranted when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

A 10 percent evaluation is warranted if there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A rating of 30 percent is assigned when the Veteran exhibits occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affected the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id. 

The evidence considered in determining the level of impairment for psychiatric disorders under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the rating code.  Disability ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in the General Rating Formula demonstrates that the symptoms after the phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment from psychiatric disorder under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in Diagnostic Code 9411.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). 

When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment, but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (2021).

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023. The diagnosis was PTSD. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of social and occupational impairment as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The physician noted that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. On examination, he had adequate hygiene and no motor or verbal tics. He had a talkative response pattern and cooperative attitude. He was oriented and there were no delusions or hallucinations. He had mild memory and concentration issues and denied suicidal and homicidal ideation. 

After reviewing the evidence of record as a whole, the Board finds that the assignment of a disability an initial rating greater than 30 percent for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD is not warranted as the Veteran's impairment more nearly approximated the occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks contemplated by a 30 percent disability rating.  

Notably, the evidence does not show that the occupational and social impairment from the disability more nearly approximates the reduced reliability and productivity contemplated by a 50 percent rating. The collective evidence shows that the Veteran generally functioned satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation, all of which is consistent with the criteria for a rating of 30 percent. 

Additionally, as noted above, the August 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran's social and occupational impairment with regard to all mental diagnoses was best summarized as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation which corresponds squarely with the schedular requirements for the assignment of a 30 percent disability rating under the General Rating Formula.   

The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms do not show that he had deficiencies in most of the areas in the criteria for a 50 percent rating nor has he been shown to have most of the symptoms listed as examples in the criteria.  

In sum, the most persuasive evidence establishes that the social and occupational impairment from the Veteran's PTSD with alcohol use disorder most nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks. Accordingly, the Board concludes that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD is not warranted. 

As the most persuasive evidence is against the claim for an increased rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (West 2002); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). 

Allergic Rhinitis

In the September 2023 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for allergic rhinitis at an initial noncompensable disability rating, effective October 28, 2022, under Diagnostic Code 6522.

While Diagnostic Code 6522 does not provide for a noncompensable disability evaluation, 38 C.F.R. § 4.31 provides for zero percent evaluations in every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code and the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met. 

Under Diagnostic Code 6522, allergic rhinitis warrants a 10 percent rating when there are no nasal polyps but there is greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passages on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. A maximum rating of 30 percent is warranted when polyps are present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

Under the General Rating Formula for Sinusitis, a noncompensable evaluation is warranted when sinusitis is detected by x-ray only.  A 10 percent rating requires one or two incapacitating episodes per year requiring prolonged (lasting from four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment; or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 30 percent rating requires three or more incapacitating episodes per year requiring prolonged (lasting from four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment; or, more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 50 percent evaluation requires chronic osteomyelitis following radical surgery, or; near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6511, General Rating Formula for Sinusitis. 

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2023.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had allergic rhinitis. He currently had symptoms of sneezing, a runny nose and nasal pressure. He currently used over the counter medications and nasal spray. He did not have episodes of sinusitis and did not have any non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain or purulent discharge or crusting in the past 12 months and did not have incapacitating episodes of sinusitis characterized by requiring prolonged treatment in the past 6 months. There was not more than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides due to rhinitis. There was not complete obstruction on the left or right side due to rhinitis. There was permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates. There were no nasal polyps. The Veteran did not have any granulomatous conditions. The Veteran's rhinitis condition did not impact his ability to work. Additionally, the April 2023 VA examiner specifically indicated that there was no diagnosis of sinusitis. 

Based on the evidence, the Board does not find that the Veteran is entitled to an initial compensable evaluation for his service-connected allergic rhinitis disability.

Notably, the evidence throughout the claims period establishes that the Veteran does not have nasal polyps, greater than 50 percent obstruction of either nasal passage, or complete obstruction of one nasal passage, due to his rhinitis which would warrant an initial 10 percent evaluation. 

As a lay person, the Veteran is competent to report symptoms capable of lay observation, such as a runny nose, sneezing and sinus pressure. However, the Board finds the competent medical evidence of record showing that the Veteran does not have nasal polyps or greater than 50 percent obstruction of either nasal passage due to his rhinitis to be more probative.

The Board has also considered the applicability of other rating criteria that could afford the Veteran greater benefit.  

Diagnostic Code 6504, pertaining to loss of part of, or scars of, the nose, is not warranted as the Veteran had no tissue loss, scarring, or deformity of the nose and there is no evidence that the Veteran has residuals of an injury to the pharynx, so Diagnostic Code 6521, which pertains to injuries of the pharynx, is also inapplicable. 

Accordingly, as the most persuasive evidence is against the claim for an initial compensable rating for the service-connected allergic rhinitis disability, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2002); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

In the September 2023 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome at an initial noncompensable disability rating, effective October 28, 2022, under Diagnostic Code 6354.

Under Diagnostic Code 6354, a 10 percent disability rating is granted for symptoms that wax and wane but result in periods of incapacitation of at least one but less than two weeks total duration per year; or symptoms controlled by continuous medication. A 20 percent disability rating evaluation is assigned for symptoms which are nearly constant and restrict routine daily activities by less than 25 percent of the pre-illness level, or; which wax and wane, resulting in periods of incapacitation of at least two but less than four weeks total duration per year. A 40 percent disability rating is assigned for symptoms which are nearly constant and restrict routine daily activities to 50 to 75 percent of the pre-illness level, or; which wax and wane, resulting in periods of incapacitation of at least four but less than six weeks total duration per year. A 60 percent disability rating is assigned for symptoms which are nearly constant and restrict routine daily activities to less than 50 percent of the pre-illness level, or; which wax and wane, resulting in periods of incapacitation of at least six weeks total duration per year. A maximum, 100 percent, disability rating is assigned for symptoms which are nearly constant and so severe as to restrict routine daily activities almost completely and which may occasionally preclude self-care. Id.

For the purpose of rating chronic fatigue under Diagnostic Code 6354, the condition will be considered incapacitating only while it requires bed rest and treatment by a physician. Note, 38 C.F.R. § 4.88b, Diagnostic Code 6354.

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023. The diagnosis was chronic fatigue syndrome. Continuous medication was not required. The debilitating fatigue reduced daily activity level to less than 50 percent of pre-illness level for 6 months or longer. There were symptoms of debilitating fatigue, nonexudative pharyngitis, generalized muscle aches or weakness, fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise, headaches, migratory joint pain, neuropsychologic symptoms, and sleep disturbance. He had cognitive impairment attributable to chronic fatigue syndrome as he had an inability to concentrate and forgetfulness. The Veteran's symptoms waxed and waned, but his symptoms did not result in periods of incapacitation. The Veteran's chronic fatigue syndrome did not impact his ability to work. 

As noted above Diagnostic Code 6354 provides a 10 percent disability rating is for symptoms that wax and wane but result in periods of incapacitation of at least one but less than two weeks total duration per year; or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

Notably, the August 2023 VA examination does not show that the medical evidence supports a finding that the Veteran had symptoms controlled by continuous medication or periods of incapacitation of at least one but less than two weeks duration per year. The Veteran reported symptoms of debilitating fatigue, nonexudative pharyngitis, generalized muscle aches or weakness, fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise, headaches, migratory joint pain, neuropsychologic symptoms, and sleep disturbance. However, the Veteran did not report missing time due to his chronic fatigue syndrome and the examiner specifically noted that the Veteran's symptoms waxed and waned but did not result in periods of incapacitation. As such, the reported symptoms itself was not indicative of incapacitation as defined under the applicable rating criteria and the Note to Diagnostic Code 6354.

Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's chronic fatigue syndrome has more nearly approximated the assigned initial noncompensable rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.31.

Service Connection

Laws and Regulations

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service."  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1315-16 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain diseases, to include hypertension and diabetes mellitus, may be presumed to have been incurred in service when manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from active duty.  38 U.S.C. § 1112 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309 (2021). 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), an alternative method of establishing the second and third Shedden for certain chronic disabilities such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus is through a demonstration of continuity of symptomatology.  

In relevant part, 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a) requires that the VA give "due consideration" to "all pertinent medical and lay evidence" in evaluating a claim to disability or death benefits.  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional."  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed.Cir.2007).  In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Id. at 1376-77; see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Once evidence is determined to be competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible.  See Layno, supra (distinguishing between competency ("a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered") and credibility ("a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted"). 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

The Board notes that on August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. Section 303 of this law provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity ("TERA"), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the claimed disabilities and the toxic exposure risk activities during service. Pub. L. 117-168, § 303. 

Pursuant to the PACT Act, VA issued TERA memorandums in July 2023 and January 2025 indicating participation in a TERA during service. The memorandum noted that while herbicide exposure was not conceded, the Veteran participated in a TERA as he was presumed to have been exposed to contaminated water while assigned to Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. 

For veterans who are presumed to have been exposed to contaminants in the water supply while serving at Camp Lejeune for no less than 30 days from August 1, 1953, to December 31, 1987, VA has established a presumption of service connection for certain diseases.  As noted above, the Veteran clearly was stationed at Camp Lejeune during the pertinent time frame and as a result, exposure to contaminants at Camp Lejeune is presumed. 

For disabilities not presumed by regulation to be due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, the Veteran may still establish service connection by showing that any such disability is directly and causally linked to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, or any other incident or injury in service. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

TBI

The Veteran contends that he has TBI that is due to his service. Notably, the Veteran's service treatment records demonstrate that the Veteran slipped and fell and hit his chin in March 1991.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of PTSD and moderate alcohol use disorder. However, the examiner specifically noted that the Veteran did not have a current TBI diagnosis.

Under the circumstances of this case, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for a TBI disability as the Veteran has not been shown to have a current TBI disability.

The Veteran's service treatment records again show that the Veteran suffered a slip and fall injury where he hit his chin in March 1991.

However, even when affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt that he sustained an in-service head injury, the Board again notes that the record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a current TBI disability.

While the Veteran sincerely has reported his belief that he has a TBI, the record is negative for an actual diagnosis of TBI.

The Board notes that during the Veteran's August 2023 VA examination conducted specific testing when determining that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for a confirmed diagnosis of a TBI. 

Accordingly, neither the lay nor medical evidence of record supports a current diagnosis of the claimed TBI disability as there is no evidence in the record of a current TBI disability.

Hence, whereas here, the competent evidence establishes that the Veteran does not have the disability for which service connection is sought, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In the instant appeal, the claim for a TBI disability must be denied because the first criterion for the grant of service connection-competent evidence of the disability for which service connection is sought-is not met.

Bilateral Hips

Under the circumstances of this case, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for a bilateral hip disability as the Veteran has not been shown to have a current bilateral hip disability.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints or treatments related to a bilateral hip disability.

VA and private treatment records also do not provide a diagnosis of a bilateral hip disability or complaints of hip pain. 

While the Veteran sincerely has reported his belief that he has a bilateral hip disability, the record is negative for an actual diagnosis of a bilateral hip disability.

Accordingly, neither the lay nor medical evidence of record supports a current diagnosis of the claimed bilateral hip disability as there is no evidence in the record of a current bilateral hip disability.

Hence, whereas here, the competent evidence establishes that the Veteran does not have the disability for which service connection is sought, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In the instant appeal, the claim for a bilateral hip disability must be denied because the first criterion for the grant of service connection-competent evidence of the disability for which service connection is sought-is not met.

The Board notes that the Veteran was not provided with a VA examination and opinions to assess the current nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral hip disability. However, VA need not conduct an examination with respect to the claims on appeal, as information and evidence of record contains sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claims. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).  Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in disability compensation (service connection) claims, the VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 

Simply stated, the standards of McLendon are not met in this case as there is no credible evidence that the Veteran has a current bilateral hip disability. Thus, remand for a VA examination is not necessary. 

As noted above, the Veteran has conceded TERA exposure related to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

The PACT Act again created additional procedural rights for veterans with claimed TERA as it requires that examinations must consider 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. 

However, the Board notes that exceptions to this requirement are for orthopedic disabilities related to blunt force trauma, trauma due to repetitive use and penetrating trauma. TERA VA examinations, however, may be warranted provided there is competent medical or scientific evidence of an association between the disability and the in-service TERA. See VBA Letter 20-22-10, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022).

As the record does not contain medical or scientific evidence of an association between the Veteran's claimed orthopedic bilateral hip disabilities and the in-service TERA, the Board again finds that remand for VA examinations is not necessary.

Left Shoulder

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for treatments or complaints of a left shoulder disability.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023. The diagnosis was left shoulder Parsonage Turner Syndrome. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left shoulder disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event, injury or illness. The examiner noted that the Veteran's service treatment records were negative for treatments or complaints of a left shoulder disability and as a result, his left shoulder Parsonage Turner Syndrome was less likely than not related to his service. 

When considering the pertinent evidence of record in light of the above-noted legal authority, the Board finds that service connection for a left shoulder disability is not warranted.

As there is a current left shoulder disability, the first element of service connection is satisfied. However, a veteran seeking disability benefits must establish not only the existence of a disability, but also an etiological connection between his military service and the disability.  Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); D'Amico v. West, 209 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Hibbard v. West, 13 Vet. App. 546, 548 (2000).

As reflected above, the Veteran's service treatment records were negative for any or diagnoses of any chronic left shoulder disability. 

Additionally, the most probative opinions do not show a relationship between any current left shoulder disability and the Veteran's service.

Notably, the only medical opinions addressing the etiology of the left shoulder disability weigh against the claim. As noted above, the August 2023 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left shoulder disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event, injury or illness.

None of the competent medical evidence of record refutes these conclusions, and the Veteran has not presented or identified any such existing medical evidence or opinion. Thus, the Board finds the examiner's August 2023 opinions to be persuasive.

Additionally, as the record does not contain medical or scientific evidence of an association between the Veteran's claimed orthopedic left shoulder disability and the in-service TERA, the Board finds that remand for a VA TERA examination is not necessary.

Given that the most probative opinions are against a finding of a relationship between a left shoulder disability and his service, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted.

In sum, the Board finds that service connection for a left shoulder disability must be denied. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the most persuasive evidence is against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53-56 (1990). 

Diabetes Mellitus 

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for treatments or complaints of diabetes mellitus.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023. The examiner specifically determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of type II diabetes mellitus but instead had a diagnosis of impaired glucose. The examiner opined that the Veteran's impaired glucose was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

Under the circumstances of this case, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for a type II diabetes mellitus disability as the Veteran has not been shown to have a current type II diabetes mellitus disability.

While the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for a diagnosis of type II diabetes mellitus, the Veteran has conceded TERA exposure due to his service at Camp Lejeune and a current diagnosis of impaired glucose. However, the Board again notes that the record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a current diabetes disability. 

The Board notes that impaired glucose tolerance is insufficient to establish a disability for the purposes of service connection. Under VA regulations, laboratory results are not a disease upon which VA disability benefits can be based. 61 Fed. Reg. 20440, 20445 (May 7, 1996) (Suppl. Information - Endocrine System). The Court has also noted that a diagnosis of impaired glucose is not equivalent to a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Waugerman v. Shinseki, No. 08-2685, 2011 WL 337152, at 4 (Vet. App. Feb. 4, 2011) (citing Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1960 (31st ed. 2007) (defining "impaired glucose tolerance" as "a term denoting values of fasting plasma glucose or results of an oral glucose tolerance test that are abnormal but not high enough to be diagnostic of diabetes mellitus.")). Therefore, impaired glucose tolerance does not constitute a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Instead, impaired glucose tolerance merely refers to abnormal results on laboratory testing.

Accordingly, neither the lay nor medical evidence of record supports a current diagnosis of the claimed diabetes mellitus disability as there is no evidence in the record of a current diabetes mellitus disability.

Hence, whereas here, the competent evidence establishes that the Veteran does not have the disability for which service connection is sought, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In the instant appeal, the claim for a diabetes mellitus disability must be denied because the first criterion for the grant of service connection-competent evidence of the disability for which service connection is sought-is not met.

Hypertension

Regulations provide that hypertension for VA purposes means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90 or more or systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160 or more.  Hypertension must be confirmed by readings taken two or more times on three different days. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, Note (1).

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for treatments or complaints of hypertension.

Under the circumstances of this case, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for a hypertension disability as the Veteran has not been shown to have a current hypertension disability.

While the Veteran sincerely has reported his belief that he has hypertension, the record is negative for an actual diagnosis of hypertension as there is no confirmed diagnosis of hypertension and there is no evidence of blood pressure readings demonstrating diastolic blood pressure predominantly 90 or more or systolic blood pressure predominantly 160 or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, Note (1).

Accordingly, neither the lay nor medical evidence of record supports a current diagnosis of the claimed hypertension disability as there is no evidence in the record of a current hypertension disability.

Hence, whereas here, the competent evidence establishes that the Veteran does not have the disability for which service connection is sought, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In the instant appeal, the claim for a hypertension disability must be denied because the first criterion for the grant of service connection-competent evidence of the disability for which service connection is sought-is not met.

The Board notes that the Veteran was not provided with a VA examination and opinion to assess the current nature and etiology of his claimed hypertension. However, VA need not conduct an examination with respect to the claims on appeal, as information and evidence of record contains sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claims. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).  Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in disability compensation (service connection) claims, the VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 

Simply stated, the standards of McLendon are not met in this case as there is no credible evidence that the Veteran has a current hypertension disability. Thus, remand for a VA examination is not necessary. 

Sinusitis

The Veteran's service document complaints and treatment related to an upper respiratory infection.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2023. The diagnosis was allergic rhinitis. The examiner specifically noted that the symptoms and physical examination were not indicative of chronic sinusitis. 

Under the circumstances of this case, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for chronic sinusitis as the Veteran had not been shown to have a current chronic sinusitis disability.  

While the Veteran has conceded herbicide and TERA exposure as well as in-service complaints of an upper respiratory infection, the persuasive medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran does not currently have a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.

Additionally, while statements from the Veteran reflect his continued assertion that he has chronic sinusitis, the most probative medical evidence does not support his opinion. While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, he is not necessarily competent to attribute such symptoms to a specific underlying disorder. In this regard, the Board ultimately places more weight on the medical opinions and clinical findings of record on the matter of whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence is against the claims as the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.

Hence, whereas here, the competent evidence establishes that the Veteran does not have the disability for which service connection is sought, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  In the instant appeal, the claims for service connection for chronic sinusitis must be denied because the first criterion for the grant of service connection-competent evidence of the disability for which service connection is sought-is not met.

The Board additionally notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for asthma under Diagnostic Code 6602 and allergic rhinitis under Diagnostic Code 6522 which account for respiratory symptoms. However, as noted above, the medical evidence of record does not contain a diagnosis of sinusitis as the April 2023 VA examiner specifically indicated that there was no diagnosis of sinusitis. Thus, there is no basis for assignment of a rating pursuant to the sinusitis diagnostic criteria. See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015) ("[W]hen a condition is specifically listed in the Schedule, it may not be rated by analogy.").

In sum, for the reasons and bases expressed above the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a chronic sinusitis disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  

Peripheral Neuropathy

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for treatments or complaints of peripheral neuropathy.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2023. The diagnosis was peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities was less likely than not incurred in or caused by claimed in-service event, injury or illness. In making this determination, the VA examiner indicated that there were no service treatment records to indicate that this condition occurred in service and there was no evidence of record to show chronicity since his military service.

The Veteran underwent a VA TERA examination in August 2023 where the examiner opined that the peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

When considering the pertinent evidence of record in light of the above-noted legal authority, the Board finds that service connection for a peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities' disability is not warranted.

As there is a current diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, the first element of service connection is satisfied. However, a veteran seeking disability benefits must establish not only the existence of a disability, but also an etiological connection between his military service and the disability.  Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); D'Amico v. West, 209 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Hibbard v. West, 13 Vet. App. 546, 548 (2000).

The Board again notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints or treatments for a peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities disability.

Additionally, the only medical opinions addressing the etiology of the peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities disability weigh against the claim, Specifically, the April 2023 VA examiner indicated that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event, injury or illness. 

None of the competent medical evidence currently of record refutes this conclusion, and the Veteran has not presented or identified any such existing medical evidence or opinion.  

Given that the most probative opinions are against a finding of a relationship between a peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities disability and his service, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted.

As noted above, the Veteran clearly was stationed at Camp Lejeune during the pertinent time frame and as a result, exposure to contaminants at Camp Lejeune is presumed. However, peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities is not included as a disease associated with such exposure for the purposes of presumptive service connection.

For disabilities not presumed by regulation to be due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, the Veteran may still establish service connection by showing that any such disability is directly and causally linked to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, or any other incident or injury in service. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Notably, on the August 2023 TERA examination, the VA examiner again opined that the peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities disability was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

This opinion has clear conclusions and supporting data, as well as reasoned medical explanations when determining the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities disability is less likely than not related to service, to include other toxic exposure. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded great probative weight. Additionally, the Board notes that there is no contrary opinion of record.

In sum, for the reasons and bases expressed above the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  

IBS

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for treatments or complaints of an IBS disability.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2023. The diagnosis was IBS. 

The Veteran underwent a VA TERA examination in August 2023 where the examiner opined that the IBS was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner noted that the cause or etiology of the IBS was unknown but that there was no medical evidence to support that the toxic water at Camp Lejeune or asbestos exposure caused IBS.  

When considering the pertinent evidence of record in light of the above-noted legal authority, the Board finds that service connection for an IBS disability is not warranted.

As there is a current diagnosis of IBS, the first element of service connection is satisfied. However, a veteran seeking disability benefits must establish not only the existence of a disability, but also an etiological connection between his military service and the disability.  Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); D'Amico v. West, 209 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Hibbard v. West, 13 Vet. App. 546, 548 (2000).

The Board again notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints or treatments for an IBS disability.

Additionally, there is no competent evidence or opinion even suggesting that there exists a medical nexus between a current IBS disability and the Veteran's service and the Veteran has not presented or identified any such existing medical evidence or opinion.  

As noted above, the Veteran clearly was stationed at Camp Lejeune during the pertinent time frame and as a result, exposure to contaminants at Camp Lejeune is presumed. However, IBS is not included as a disease associated with such exposure for the purposes of presumptive service connection.

For disabilities not presumed by regulation to be due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, the Veteran may still establish service connection by showing that any such disability is directly and causally linked to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, or any other incident or injury in service. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Notably, on the August 2023 TERA examination, the VA examiner again opined that the IBS was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

This opinion has clear conclusions and supporting data, as well as reasoned medical explanations when determining the Veteran's IBS disability is less likely than not related to service, to include other toxic exposure. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded great probative weight. Additionally, the Board notes that there is no contrary opinion of record.

In sum, for the reasons and bases expressed above the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for an IBS disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  

Bilateral Eye

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for treatments or complaints of a bilateral eye disability other than refractive error.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2023. The diagnosis was a refractive error that had its onset in service. The examiner noted however that documented eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes were new, separate and unrelated. The cysts began sometime around 2018.

The Veteran underwent a VA TERA examination in August 2023 where the examiner opined that the eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner noted that there was no medical evidence to support that the toxic water at Camp Lejeune or asbestos exposure caused eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes.  

When considering the pertinent evidence of record in light of the above-noted legal authority, the Board finds that service connection for a bilateral eye disability is not warranted.

As there is a current diagnosis of eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes, the first element of service connection is satisfied. However, a veteran seeking disability benefits must establish not only the existence of a disability, but also an etiological connection between his military service and the disability.  Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); D'Amico v. West, 209 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Hibbard v. West, 13 Vet. App. 546, 548 (2000).

The Board again notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints or treatments for a bilateral eye disability aside from refractive error.

As noted above, the April 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a refractive error that was related to service. However, refractory errors such as myopia, presbyopia, and astigmatism are considered developmental defects and are not eligible for service connection. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (c), 4.9. Actual pathology, other than refractive error, is required to support impairment of visual acuity.

While the Veteran has current diagnoses of eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes, there is no competent evidence or opinion even suggesting that there exists a medical nexus between current eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes disabilities and the Veteran's service and the Veteran has not presented or identified any such existing medical evidence or opinion.  

As noted above, the Veteran clearly was stationed at Camp Lejeune during the pertinent time frame and as a result, exposure to contaminants at Camp Lejeune is presumed. However, eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes are not included as a disease associated with such exposure for the purposes of presumptive service connection.

For disabilities not presumed by regulation to be due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, the Veteran may still establish service connection by showing that any such disability is directly and causally linked to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, or any other incident or injury in service. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Notably, on the August 2023 TERA examination, the VA examiner again opined that the eyelid cysts and corneal neovascularization of both eyes disabilities were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

This opinion has clear conclusions and supporting data, as well as reasoned medical explanations when determining the Veteran's bilateral eye disability is less likely than not related to service, to include other toxic exposure. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded great probative weight. Additionally, the Board notes that there is no contrary opinion of record.

In sum, for the reasons and bases expressed above the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral eye disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  

All Disabilities

The Board notes the Veteran's contentions regarding the etiology of his claimed TBI, bilateral hip, left shoulder, diabetes, hypertension, sinusitis, peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, IBS and bilateral eye disabilities. To the extent that the Veteran himself contends that a medical relationship exists between his claimed TBI, bilateral hip, left shoulder, diabetes, hypertension, sinusitis, peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, IBS and bilateral eye disabilities and service, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to testify as to his observations.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Furthermore, lay witnesses may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (finding that the Board's categorical statement that "a valid medical opinion" was required to establish nexus, and that a layperson was "not competent" to provide testimony as to nexus because she was a layperson, conflicts with Jandreau). In the instant case, however, the Board finds that TBI, bilateral hip, left shoulder, diabetes, hypertension, sinusitis, peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, IBS and bilateral eye disabilities are not disabilities subject to lay diagnosis as these diagnoses require medical training. 

More significantly, the Veteran does not have the medical expertise to provide an opinion regarding the claimed TBI, bilateral hip, left shoulder, diabetes, hypertension, sinusitis, peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, IBS and bilateral eye disabilities etiologies. Specifically, where the determinative issue is one of medical causation, only those with specialized medical knowledge, training, or experience are competent to provide evidence on the issue.  See Jones v. West, 12 Vet. App. 460, 465 (1999). 

In sum, for the reasons and bases expressed above the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence is against the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection. The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claims must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board finds that more development is necessary prior to final adjudication of the claims remaining on appeal.

Regarding the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee disability, the Veteran underwent an VA examination in April 2023. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current right and left knee strains were less likely than not incurred in or caused by claimed in-service event, injury or illness. In making this determination, the VA examiner indicated that there were no service treatment records to indicate that these conditions occurred in service and there was no evidence of record to show chronicity since his military service.

However, the April 2023 VA opinion was insufficient as the examiner did not acknowledge the Veteran's prior medical history regarding his right and left knee disabilities. While the April 2023 VA examiner indicated that there were no service treatment records to indicate that these conditions occurred in service, the Veteran's service treatment records document that the Veteran presented with complaints of right knee pain in April 1996 and reports of his knees popping in May 1998. Despite these complaints, the April 2023 VA examiner again found that there were no in-service knee complaints.

Thus, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to resolve the claims for entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disabilities and that further opinion in connection with these claims is necessary for a fully informed evaluation of the claims on appeal.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).

Regarding the Veteran's claimed GERD disability, a VA examiner on an August 2023 VA TERA examination opined that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

However, the absence of a disease from the presumptive list does not preclude a Veteran from otherwise proving that his disability resulted from exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Service connection may still be granted on a direct basis. 

The Veteran also underwent an VA examination in April 2023. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not incurred in or caused by claimed in-service event, injury or illness. In making this determination, the VA examiner indicated that there were no service treatment records to indicate that this condition occurred in service and there was no evidence of record to show chronicity since his military service.

However, the April 2023 VA opinion was insufficient as the examiner did not acknowledge the Veteran's prior medical history regarding his GERD disability. While the April 2023 VA examiner indicated that there were no service treatment records to indicate that this condition occurred in service, the Veteran's service treatment records document that the Veteran presented with complaints of stomach pain and nausea in October 1992. Despite these complaints, the April 2023 VA examiner again found that there were no in-service complaints.

Thus, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to resolve the claim for entitlement to service connection for GERD and that further opinion in connection with this claim is necessary for a fully informed evaluation of the claims on appeal.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).

Regarding the Veteran's claims for migraine headaches and sleep apnea, the Veteran underwent VA examinations in April 2023 where the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches and obstructive sleep apnea. 

Additionally, a VA examiner on an August 2023 VA TERA examination opined that the Veteran's migraine headaches and sleep apnea were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effet of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

However, the August 2023 VA TERA examiner also noted that the Veteran had "non-military risk factors" for sleep apnea such as obesity, allergic rhinitis and airway obstruction which "far outweigh toxin exposure." Notably, while the examiner described these contributing factors as "non-military risk factors", the Veteran is again service connected for allergic rhinitis.

Additionally, the August 2023 VA TERA examiner also noted that the Veteran had "non-military risk factors for migraines such as sleep difficulty and chronic fatigue syndrome which far outweigh toxin exposure." Notably, while the examiner described these contributing factors as "non-military risk factors", the Veteran is again service connected for chronic fatigue syndrome while also having a pending claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. 

As a result, while the Veteran underwent VA examinations to address his service connection claim due to TERA exposure, there is no VA medical opinion regarding his claimed obstructive sleep apnea and migraine headaches on a secondary basis.

Thus, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to resolve the claims for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea and migraine headaches and that further opinion in connection with these claims is necessary for a fully informed evaluation of the claims on appeal.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).

Regarding the Veteran's claimed erectile dysfunction disability, the Veteran contends that his claimed erectile dysfunction disability is related to service to include as secondary to his service-connected PTSD disability.  

Notably, the Veteran has yet to undergo a VA examination regarding his erectile dysfunction disability.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran should be scheduled for a VA examination and opinion to determine whether the Veteran's claimed erectile dysfunction disability is related to service, to include as secondary to his service-connected PTSD disability.

An examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on a claim if the evidence of record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability and indicates that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the claimant's active military history but does not contain sufficient medical evidence to make a decision on the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) (2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).

As a result, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to resolve the claim for entitlement to service connection for an erectile dysfunction disability and that further development is warranted so an examiner can provide an opinion to determine whether the Veteran has a current erectile dysfunction disability, that is related to his service to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.  See Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).

The Board noted that AMA provides that remands are warranted based on VA's duty to assist prior to the AOJ decision. Pub. L. No. 115-55, § 2(d)(2). The AMA structure allows remand only where VA has committed error in the duty-to-assist (DTA) prior to the decision on appeal. After a thorough review of the record, the Board finds the arguments of the Veteran's representative to be compelling. In requesting additional development on remand in this case, the Board notes that the basis for this remand arises from deficiencies in the record existing prior to the appealed AMA decision. Notably, prior to the rating decision, there was evidence of a possible in-service incurrence of GERD and right and left knee disabilities as the Veteran's service treatment records demonstrate complaints of stomach pain and bilateral knee pain. As noted above, despite the in-service complaints of stomach pain and bilateral knee pain, the VA examinations in April 2023 failed to address the Veteran's in service GERD and knee complaints as the examiner instead opined that that there were no service treatment records to indicate that these conditions occurred in service.

Regarding the Veteran's migraine headache, obstructive sleep apnea and erectile dysfunction claims, while the Veteran had diagnoses of migraine headaches, obstructive sleep apnea and erectile dysfunction, the Veteran was not provided with adequate VA examinations with etiological opinions regarding the migraine headache, obstructive sleep apnea and erectile dysfunction disabilities on a secondary basis prior to the appealed AMA decision.  

Thus, the Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to provide the Veteran with etiological opinions with respect to these claimed conditions as there exists a pre-decisional duty to assist error and the claims must be remanded. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The Veteran should be scheduled for a VA examination to determine the etiology of the claimed right and left knee disabilities. 

Based on a review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's has a current right and left knee disabilities that are related to any incident of the Veteran's active-duty service.  

The examiner should specifically consider the Veteran's documented in-service complaints of bilateral knee pain. 

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale.

Adequate reasons and bases for any opinion rendered must be provided.  All studies deemed appropriate in the medical opinion of the examiner should be performed, and all the findings should be set forth in detail.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner, who should review the entire claims folder in conjunction with this examination.  

2. The Veteran should be scheduled for a VA examination to determine the etiology of the claimed GERD disability (also claimed as a hiatal hernia). 

Based on a review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's has a current GERD disability that is related to any incident of the Veteran's active-duty service.  

The examiner should specifically consider the Veteran's documented in-service complaints of stomach pain. 

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale.

Adequate reasons and bases for any opinion rendered must be provided.  All studies deemed appropriate in the medical opinion of the examiner should be performed, and all the findings should be set forth in detail.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner, who should review the entire claims folder in conjunction with this examination.  

3. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination, to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed migraine headache disability.  

Based on a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current migraine headache disability that is related to any incident of the Veteran's service.  

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current migraine headache disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

The VA examiner must provide separate findings and rationales relating to causation and aggravation.

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale.

Adequate reasons and bases for any opinion rendered must be provided.  All studies deemed appropriate in the medical opinion of the examiner should be performed, and all the findings should be set forth in detail.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner, who should review the entire claims folder in conjunction with this examination.  

4. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination, to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed obstructive sleep apnea disability.  

Based on a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current obstructive sleep apnea disability that is related to any incident of the Veteran's service.  

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current obstructive sleep apnea disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

The VA examiner must provide separate findings and rationales relating to causation and aggravation.

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale.

Adequate reasons and bases for any opinion rendered must be provided.  All studies deemed appropriate in the medical opinion of the examiner should be performed, and all the findings should be set forth in detail.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner, who should review the entire claims folder in conjunction with this examination.  

5. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination, to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed erectile dysfunction disability.  

Based on a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current erectile dysfunction disability that is related to any incident of the Veteran's service.  

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current erectile dysfunction disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

The VA examiner must provide separate findings and rationales relating to causation and aggravation.

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale.

Adequate reasons and bases for any opinion rendered must be provided.  All studies deemed appropriate in the medical opinion of the examiner should be performed, and all the findings should be set forth in detail.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner, who should review the entire claims folder in conjunction with this examination.  

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	James A. DeFrank

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.