Citation Nr: A25033067
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-455911
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1986 to February 2001. 

In the present case, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the rating decision on appeal on April 19, 2024. The Veteran filed a timely appeal of that decision using VA Form 10182 in July 2024 and requested the Direct Review Lane with the Board. Accordingly, the Board will consider evidence of record up to the April 19, 2024, AOJ decision. Evidence submitted outside this time frame cannot be considered.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).

The Board finds that the failures of the VA to obtain an adequate medical opinion as to the etiology of his obstructive sleep apnea amounts to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

In April 2024, a VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with obstructive sleep apnea. The Board finds the associated VA medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea to be inadequate. The examiner opined the Veteran's sleep apnea was not related to toxic exposure risk activities the Veteran participated in during service. However, the examiner did not adequately address the lay evidence of record including the Veteran's credible statements that he began experiencing symptoms of sleep apnea in 1988. Therefore, while the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to obtain another opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions, and must not be based solely on the lack of records. Because it is important "that each disability is viewed about its history," copies of all pertinent records in the Veteran's claims file should be reviewed and the examiner should acknowledge such review.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment, and that his reports must be taken into account in formulating the requested opinions regardless of contemporaneous treatment. If there is a medical basis to doubt the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a thorough explanation.

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was causally or etiologically related to his military service. The examiner should explicitly discuss the Veteran's contention that his symptoms began during service. 

The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean within the realm of medical possibility, but rather that the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of conclusion as it is to find against it.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sherman, C

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.