Citation Nr: A25033279
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-427580
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and PTSD are at least as likely as not related to his military service. 

2. The Veteran does not have a hearing loss disability for VA purposes. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304(f), 4.125

2. The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.385. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1986 to April 1992, to include service in Southwest Asia.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from July 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal as to each issue.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for low back and bilateral knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection generally will be awarded when a veteran has a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a link ("nexus") between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009). 

For the chronic diseases listed in 38 U.S.C. § 1101 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), which include sensorineural hearing loss, service connection may alternatively be established with evidence of chronicity of the disease during service or during a presumptive period following service separation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2012 (holding that only the chronic diseases listed in § 1101 of the statute and § 3.309(a) of the regulations are subject to the provisions of § 3.303(b)).  For conditions noted during service (or in the presumptive period) but not shown to be chronic at the time, a continuity of symptomatology after service is required to support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  

To establish service connection for a chronic disease based on a continuity of symptoms, the following elements must be satisfied: (1) a condition "noted" during service; (2) evidence of post-service continuity of the same symptoms; and (3) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of a nexus between the present disability and the post-service symptoms.  Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 263-264 (2015).

When chronicity or continuity of symptomatology of a chronic disease is established as set forth above, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, no matter how remote in time from the period of service, will be service connected unless clearly attributable to causes unrelated to service ("intercurrent" causes).  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

In addition, where a veteran served continuously for 90 days or more during a period of war, or after December 31, 1946, there is a presumption of service connection for sensorineural hearing loss  if it manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service, even if there is no evidence of the disease during the service period itself.  38 U.S.C. § § 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  This presumption may be rebutted by affirmative evidence to the contrary.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(d). 

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance-which includes but is not limited to equipoise-the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

1. Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran seeks service connection for PTSD due to fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, as well as major depression and anxiety due to the deaths of fellow Marines and "Scud missiles that landed near by which had us scared for our lives."  See January 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Given the nature of the claim and the various diagnoses reflected within the medical record, the Board has broadened and recharacterized the claims as one for any acquired psychiatric disorder.  See Clemons v. Shinseki,?23?Vet. App.?1?(2009).

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a) require that a diagnosis of a mental disorder conform to the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM-5).  Service connection for PTSD requires: (1) medical evidence establishing a diagnosis of the condition; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed inservice stressor occurred; and, (3) a link established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  Lay testimony alone can establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor in certain circumstances, which include: when PTSD is diagnosed during service and the claimed stressor is related to that service, when the veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that combat, when the stressor claimed by a veteran is related to the veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and certain other conditions are met, and when the veteran was a prisoner-of-war and the claimed stressor is related to that prisoner-of-war experience.  Id.  In other cases, the claimed stressor must be corroborated by credible supporting evidence.

During a VA examination afforded in May 2023, the Veteran was diagnosed with both PTSD and major depressive disorder.  The Veteran asserted, as a stressor for the purposes of a PTSD diagnosis, that he feared for his life at times from SCUD missile attacks, and that his role as a forklift operator involved loading body bags of fellow soldiers onto ships.  The examiner found the Veteran's stressors to be adequate to support a PTSD diagnosis and that the stressors were related to the fear of hostile military or terrorist activity.  The examiner noted that it was not possible to differentiate which of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms were attributable to which diagnosis because they share etiology and co-occur.  PTSD, the examiner continued, "can be in response to stressors that result in overall loss of prior life functioning, relationships, purpose," and that, as a consequence, "depression symptoms of depressed mood, lack of energy, worthlessness, suicidal ideation, are commonly associated with PTSD." 

The Veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD was denied, however, because the Veteran did not return a VA Form 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, prior to the October 2023 decision on appeal in order for the AOJ to confirm his stressors.  While the Veteran did eventually provide statements to the AOJ regarding his stressors in April and May 2024, the Board cannot consider this evidence because it was submitted outside of the relevant evidence window under the Direct Review docket.  

?

Nevertheless, the Veteran did provide statements regarding his stressors regarding his fear of hostile military or terrorist activity prior to the decision on appeal, in both his initial claim and during his VA examination, and as noted above the VA examiner found that these events were adequate to support the diagnosis of PTSD.  Not only does the Board find no reason to doubt the Veteran's claimed stressor given his service in Southwest Asia and his Military Operational Specialty (MOS) as a Logistics/Embarkation Specialist (see Veteran's DD Form 214), but the AOJ, in the October 2023 decision on appeal, conceded the Veteran's claimed stressors as a factual finding. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the October 2023 decision on appeal only addressed the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis in the Veteran's denial.  As noted above, the VA examiner also diagnosed the Veteran with major depressive disorder.  Moreover, the examiner opined in the positive as to its etiology, finding it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's depressive disorder is related to his reported traumatic events.  Again, the Board has found no reason to doubt the Veteran's reports of his traumatic events, and there is no other medical opinion of record that is in significant conflict with the examiner's opinion. 

As such, after resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder and PTSD, is warranted and the claim is therefore granted.  The Board thanks the Veteran for his service.  

2. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran asserts that he has a hearing loss disability that is related to military service, reporting acoustic trauma in the performances of his duties.  The Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for tinnitus due to such acoustic trauma, and therefore, in-service noise exposure is conceded.  The Veteran's clam has been denied, however, based on an absence of a hearing loss disability for VA purposes.

For the purpose of applying the laws administered by VA, impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold for any of the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; the auditory thresholds for at least three of these frequencies are 26 decibels or greater; or speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  The threshold for normal hearing is from 0 to 20 decibels; higher threshold levels indicate some degree of hearing loss.  Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993).

Notably, the Veteran was afforded a VA audiological examination prior to the July 2023 decision on appeal, in May 2023.  The results of the examination, as measured by puretone audiometry testing, were as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	10	15	5	0	10

LEFT	15	10	5	5	15

Moreover, speech discrimination scores were 100 percent in each ear.  These findings show a lack of a hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  The Veteran's medical treatment records during the relevant appeal period are not in conflict with the above, and the record does not reflect that the Veteran has been treated by outside providers for his reported hearing loss.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's report of the functional impact of his hearing loss on his daily life.  In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that even in the absence of a diagnosis, there is a current disability where a veteran experiences functional impairment from symptoms of a disorder.  However, since VA has specifically defined what constitutes a hearing loss disability in 38 C.F.R. § 3.385, the Federal Circuit's holding in Saunders is not applicable to a claim for service connection for hearing loss.  See McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15, 25 (2016) (concluding that § 3.385 "reasonably interpreted what constitutes a hearing disability").

?

A key element for any grant of service connection is a finding of a current disability.  Based on the above, however, the Veteran does not have hearing loss in either ear for VA purposes based on the reviewable evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements, to include his assertions that he has hearing loss that is related to service.  As the Veteran is not shown to have medical education or experience, he is a lay person and is competent to report (1) symptoms that are observable to a layperson, e.g., difficulty hearing; (2) symptoms at the time supporting a later diagnosis by a medical professional; or (3) a contemporaneous medical diagnosis.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (2009).  The Veteran is not competent to independently render a medical diagnosis of hearing loss that meets the criteria of 38 C.F.R. § 3.385, which is based upon audiological testing and speech recognition scores.  Thus, his lay assertions do not constitute evidence upon which service connection can be granted.  In any event, the Board ultimately assigns greater probative weight to the medical evidence of record, to include the audiological testing completed at the time of the May 2023 VA examination.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether service connection for hearing loss is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a finding.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).? The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.? Id.? The remand must specify the action to be taken by the AOJ.? Id.

1. Service connection for back injury is remanded.

2. Service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

3. Service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Evidence prior to the decision on appeal suggests that the Veteran, who the Board notes is unrepresented, may have private treatment records that could be relevant to his musculoskeletal disability claims.  Notably, the Veteran reported to a VA knee examiner in May 2023 that he had been prescribed Meloxicam for pain.  His VA treatment records do not reflect that this prescription-required medication was prescribed by VA providers.  Thus, and while the Board regrets further delay, remand is necessary to assist the Veteran in obtaining any missing private treatment records.

Further, the Board finds that the medical opinions provided by the VA examiner(s) in May 2023 are inadequate, as the examiner(s) did not address the service treatment record showing treatment for right knee problems in June 1987 and/or the Veteran's in-service duties involving marching up hills, running, lifting and carrying heavy equipment, bending, and tying equipment.  As such, additional medical opinions must be obtained on remand. 

The matters are therefore REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to identify all outstanding non-VA treatment records relevant to his claims, to include the medical care provider that prescribed Meloxicam for his knee pain.  All properly identified records should be obtained if the necessary authorization to obtain the records is provided by the Veteran.  

2. Send the claims file to an appropriate examiner(s) to offer opinions on the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain had its onset during service or is otherwise related to any incident of service, to include the rigors associated with his duties involving running, marching up hills, lifting and carrying heavy equipment, bending, and tying equipment.  

(b) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome had its onset during service or is otherwise related to any incident of service, to include the rigors associated with his duties involving running, marching up hills, lifting and carrying heavy equipment, bending, and tying equipment.  

(c) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome and/or arthritis had its onset during service or is otherwise related to any incident of service, to include the rigors associated with his duties involving running, marching up hills, lifting and carrying heavy equipment, bending, and tying equipment.  

"	In formulating this opinion, the examiner should consider the June 1987 service treatment record showing that the Veteran complained of right knee pain after a 10-mile run, with findings of crepitus and pain on range of motion and a diagnosis of chondromalacia patella.  

The need for an additional physical examination(s) is left to the discretion of the examiner(s).  

A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Scarduzio, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.