Citation Nr: A25033627
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-467179
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran died in October 2017 due to metastatic bladder cancer; the appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.

2. It is likely that the Veteran's metastatic bladder cancer was incurred in or caused by his active service, to include exposure to toxic chemicals, e.g., benzene, which contributed to his death.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, § 1310, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102; 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had served on active duty from April 1971 to July 1997. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran died in October 2017. His surviving spouse is the appellant.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for cause of death is granted.

The appellant contends that the Veteran's death was due to his service, specifically as a result of exposure to certain chemicals while performing his military occupational specialty (MOS) duties as a hull technician and a saturation diver, which he performed for most of his active-duty years. See April 2023 appellant statement; DD-214 Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty.

Service connection for the cause of a veteran's death is warranted if a service-connected disability either caused or contributed substantially or materially to the cause of the veteran's death. 38 C.F.R. § 3.312. For a claimant to establish such service connection, he or she must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability [regarding the veteran at time of death]; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service." Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1315-16 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Generally, the death of a veteran will be considered as having been due to a service-connected disability when the evidence establishes that such disability was either the principal or a contributory cause of death. 38 C.F.R. § 3.312 (a).  A service-connected disability will be considered as the principal, or primary, cause of death when such disability, singly or jointly with some other condition, was the immediate or underlying cause of death or was etiologically related thereto. 38 C.F.R. § 3.312 (b).

A contributory cause of death is inherently one not related to the principal cause. In determining whether the service-connected disability contributed to death, it must be shown that it contributed substantially or materially; that it combined to cause death; or that it aided in the production of death. It is not sufficient to show that it casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.312 (c)(1); see also Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39 (1994).

As to veterans who served during the Vietnam War, as the Veteran in this case, if such a veteran served in certain locations and within a certain time period, as specified in the applicable regulations, he or she will be presumed to have been exposed to tactical herbicide agents. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307. In such cases, certain diseases may be presumed service-connected if a veteran is shown, or presumed, to have been exposed to tactical herbicide agents in service, even if there is no record of the disease during service. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(6), 3.309(e). Applicable to this case, bladder cancer is among VA's listed diseases presumed to be associated with tactical herbicide exposure. However, for reasons discussed below, the Veteran has not been found to have served in those specified location during the requisite time period and, therefore, this presumption is not applicable. 

Regardless, when service connection is not permitted on a presumptive basis, as in this case, the Veteran's bladder cancer may still be found to be related to service on a direct basis if the facts show such a connection. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material issue, all reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021).

As to the procedural history of this claim, in December 2017, VA received the appellant's Application for Dependency and Indemnification (DIC), Death Pension, and/or Accrued Benefits, which was denied in an April 2018 VA rating decision. The AOJ denied the claim due to its finding that service connection for the Veteran's cause of death was not warranted since he was not found to have died from a service-connected disability. Later, in a June 2021 VA letter, VA advised the appellant that it was conducting a special review of the claims folder in accordance with the Consent Decree that settled the class action suit of Nehmer v. U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. For historical information, that Consent Decree required VA to issue new regulation providing presumptive service connection for additional diseases shown to be associated with herbicide exposure and required VA to identify and readjudicate previously denied claims related to such diseases in view of such exposures. If service connection was determined warranted on a readjudicated claim due to such herbicide exposure, then VA would pay disability and/or death benefits retroactive to the initially denied claim to the Nehmer class members, e.g., Vietnam War veterans and surviving spouses, children or parents of a deceased Vietnam War veteran who died from a covered herbicide disease. 

Relevant here, in January 2021, new diseases were added to VA's list of conditions presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents, to include bladder cancer. The addition of bladder cancer to VA's list of presumptive disabilities associated with herbicide exposure, together with the Veteran's history of having served during the Vietnam War, prompted VA's special review of the claims file in June 2021, resulting in the November 2023 rating decision on appeal. Notably, while the special review was pending, on April 28, 2022, VA received the appellant's VA form 21-0966 Intent to File a Claim (ItF), followed by the appellant's Supplemental Claim within one year thereafter, on April 25, 2023, wherein the April 2018 rating decision that had last denied service connection for the Veteran's cause of death was noted as the decision in dispute. 

In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ noted that its decision was in response to the special review of the claims file mandated on June 21, 2021 pursuant to the Nehmer Consent Decree and found that "service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death remains denied since evidence fails to show that it was related to military service and the evidence does not demonstrate the Veteran was exposed to herbicides during military service". No mention was made of the Veteran's April 2023 Supplemental Claim, or of the evidence submitted with that Supplemental Claim. The Board further notes that although the AOJ acknowledged receipt of the April 2022 ItF, in its May 2022 VA notification letter, it never acknowledged receipt of the Supplemental Claim received one year thereafter. Under such circumstances, the Board would typically remand the matter to the AOJ to address the appellant's April 2023 Supplemental Claim that it erroneously overlooked in not rendering a decision in response, or even addressing the evidence received with that Supplemental Claim that was part of the record prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, for the reasons explained below, since the Board finds that the evidence received with the April 2023 Supplemental Claim is new and relevant evidence since the April 2018 VA rating decision that had previously denied the claim, and that the weight of the evidence leans in favor of the claim, remanding the matter would not only be a waste of time and resources, but also a disservice to the Veteran's spouse, the appellant herein. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, the appellant asserted that the issue on appeal was service connection for the Veteran's cause of death. Accordingly, the issue before the Board here is service connection for the cause of death of the Veteran. 

Now turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's death certificate states that the Veteran died from a metastatic bladder cancer, which is a presumptive service-connected condition if the Veteran were found to have been exposed to tactical herbicides, as contemplated under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 and 3.309. However, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran did not serve in the locations specified in the regulations to be presumed as having been exposed to tactical herbicides. See July, August and October 2023 VA Memoranda. Although the record does not support a finding that the Veteran was presumptively exposed to such herbicides in service, as contemplated by the regulations, the Board nevertheless finds that the Veteran's bladder cancer, which caused his death, is related to service, as explained in greater detail below. 

In an April 2023 statement, provided by the Veteran's spouse, and appellant herein, she reported that she knew the Veteran since 1985 while he was still on active duty and when he had just made master saturation diver. She reported that the "purpose of saturation diving is, among other things, to rescue submarines, retrieve items that had detached from vessels, salvage the remnants of crashed airplanes and vessels, and to repair ships and submarines". She reported that the Veteran told her of times when he would retrieve anchors, nuclear items and hazardous and non-hazardous materials. She reported that he had told her that he was exposed to a lot of "nasty stuff", that included uranium, plutonium, lead based paint and "welding fumes" due to his welding duties. She reported that the Veteran was diagnosed with bladder cancer in 2015 and that the doctor had told him that "he probably had the cancer for longer than he knew", as it had significantly already spread throughout his body.

A medical article, entitled Saturation Diving; Physiology and Pathophysiology, published in the journal of Comprehensive Physiology, received in the claims file in April 2023, notes that the "toxic effects of [petrochemicals and hydrocarbons] ... in saturation diving, ... because of the raised ambient pressure in a low volume pressure vessel, exposures typically typified by very high partial pressures of volatile compounds are possible". The article also noted that the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) detected in trace amounts in the atmosphere of a diving bell and accommodation chamber included benzene [italicized for emphasis]. It further stated that "[t]he carcinogenic property of compounds such as benzene is related to the production of cancer producing molecules by oxidative metabolism. The effect of living in a hyperoxic environment while being exposed to benzene clearly needs to be addressed". 

Prior to the rating decision on appeal, a July 2007 VA training letter addressed internally to all ROs was received in the claims file in April 2023, along with the appellant's Supplemental Claim. This letter's introduction stated that the "purpose of this training letter is to provide information on the disabilities that may result from diving ... [and] to ensure that VA decision makers are informed of the medical consequences of diving so that claims from veterans who were divers in service are properly developed and adjudicated". It also states that "[w]hile many of the medical effects described in this letter can result from non-saturation diving, some of the effects are more common and more severe in saturation divers". It further notes a diver's exposure to "[a]tmospheric contaminants such as carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon fuel vapors, or vapors from paints, solvents, or welding fumes may lead to either acute toxic effects, or subtle, unrecognized long-term toxicity [italicized for emphasis]. To avoid most of these toxic reactions, deep divers use various mixtures of oxygen, nitrogen, helium, and sometimes hydrogen, with the percentage of oxygen used depending on the depth. In military and commercial diving, great care is taken to reduce known atmospheric contaminants, but unrecognized contamination is a constant risk". 

In a March 2023 private examiner report, provided by a physician specializing in internal medicine and neurology, with an additional Ph.D. degree in pharmacology, the examiner noted that he had reviewed the claims file provided to him, and stated that the Veteran "reported that he was exposed to welding fumes, Sodasorb/baralyme dust, hydraulic oil, paint, asbestos, cumene gas, radiation, and plutonium during the course of his duties [and] has a history of exposure to volatile organic compounds [VOCs]". The examiner noted that the Veteran's duties as a saturation diver included the maintenance of numerous pieces of equipment and exposed him to numerous chemicals during service. "These exposures placed him at increased risk of bladder cancer. The examiner stated that it was his "medical opinion, [that] it is at least as likely as not these exposures caused or contributed to his death. [The Veteran's] occupational history made him highly susceptible to toxic chemical exposure ... with a group aromatic hydrocarbon compounds known to be environmental pollutants. ... Studies and clinicians who treat patients with known exposure to benzene suggest exposure to it is a contributing factor in the development of cancer. It is a very toxic agent even in the smallest doses; even the smallest exposure can be hazardous to one's health. No single organ or system in the body stands alone. These chemicals are heavily damaging to multiple systems and organs.... Moreover, benzene and its inherent properties have the propensity to stay dormant in the human body for decades before symptoms are apparent. The basic organic solvent of benzene is retained in some body tissues for a long time (even decades), so target organ exposure continues even after external exposure ceases... There is a known nexus between benzene exposure ... and bladder cancer. Environmental or occupational exposures to carcinogens, especially tobacco, are the main risk factors for bladder cancer". However, the examiner noted that certain "data suggest an association between exposure to benzene ... and an increased susceptibility to develop ... cancer". ... Here, [the Veteran's] benzene exposure posed a very high-risk factor in the development of his bladder cancer... The exposure of benzene and other volatile organic solvents with its long-term toxicity had a definite risk and at least as likely as not caused or contributed to the development of the Veteran's metastatic bladder cancer which led to his demise. A question may arise as to the cause of his bladder cancer and if it was likely to be causally linked to his tobacco use. Although [the Veteran] utilized tobacco, [the examiner was] not convinced this was the only risk factor to the development of his bladder cancer. In [the examiner's] opinion, the Veteran's bladder cancer is at least as likely as not due to his exposure to toxic chemicals during service".

The Board notes that the 2007 VA letter noted welding fumes and hydrocarbon fuel vapors, which the medical article, received in April 2023, and the March 2023 private examiner both noted to include benzene, as chemicals to which saturation divers were exposed in service. This evidence, in conjunction with the private examiner's explanation of the causal connection between benzene exposure and the development of cancer, even where the Veteran had a history of smoking, and the examiner's positive nexus opinion in this case, and affording the appellant the benefit of the doubt where the evidence is in approximate balance, the Board finds the weight of the evidence significantly weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's in-service exposure to the above noted chemicals contributed substantially or materially in causing his death. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102.38, 3.312 (c)(1); Gabrielson, supra.

As to the question of whether the evidence received with the April 2023 Supplemental Claim is new and relevant since the April 2018 rating decision that last denied the claim before the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the Board finds this question as moot for the November 2023 rating decision adjudicated the claim at a time when the above noted evidence was already part of the record and, therefore, implicitly found said evidence as new and relevant. Although the AOJ in the November 2023 rating decision was focused on its special review pursuant to the Nehmer Consent Decree as to whether the Veteran was exposed to tactical herbicides while on active duty, such focus does not alleviate the AOJ's duty to analyze all the evidence of record before it. As such, the Board finds that the AOJ implicitly found the evidence as new and relevant by adjudicating the merits of the claim and need not be addressed herein, as such is a favorable finding for the appellant. In any event, irrespective of such implicit AOJ determination, the Board explicitly finds that the evidence received in April 2023 was new, as it was not part of the record prior to the April 2018 rating decision, and highly relevant as it goes to the crux of the service connection issue in question, that is the nexus between the Veteran's bladder cancer that caused his death and his active-duty service.

For the reasons discussed above, the Board gives significant probative weight to the March 2023 private medical nexus statements and opinion, particularly in light of the absence of any medical evidence of record that contradicts this nexus opinion. After careful analysis of the probative medical evidence of record and in light of the significant amount of time the Veteran served as saturation diver and hull technician where he was exposed to such chemicals that the record shows were related to his bladder cancer that caused his death, the Board finds that service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is warranted. Thus, the claim is granted.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Raia, Camille A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.