Citation Nr: A25033249
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240606-447596
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left foot disability is denied.

Service connection for a right foot disability is denied.

Service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

Service connection for a right knee disability is denied.

Service connection for a lumbar spine disability is denied. 

REMANDED

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. There are current diagnoses of left and right foot plantar fasciitis.

2. The evidence shows in-service reports of left and right foot pain. 

3. The current left and right foot plantar fasciitis disabilities are not related to in-service right and left foot pain. 

4. There are current diagnoses of left and right knee Osgood-Schlatter's disease.

5. The evidence shows in-service reports of left knee pain. 

6. There was no right knee injury, disease, or event during service.

7. The current left and right knee Osgood-Schlatter's disease are not etiologically related to service.

8. There is a current diagnosis of lumbar strain.

9. The evidence shows in-service reports of lumbar spine pain. 

10. The current lumbar strain is not etiologically related to service, including the lumbar pain during service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left foot disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a right foot disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a right knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for a lumbar spine disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, who is the appellant, served on active duty from June 1998 to June 2002.  

This matter came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision. 

By way of procedural history, in February 2023 the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for feet, knees, lumbar spine, and PTSD, as well as other issues.  A rating decision in July 2023 denied service connection for feet, knees, lumbar spine, and PTSD.  In June 2024, the Veteran filed a notice of disagreement to the July 2023 rating decision for service connection for feet, knees, lumbar spine, and PTSD.  

The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) or modernized review system, created a new framework of review for veterans who disagree with VA's decision on their claim.  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Service connection for a left foot disability is denied.

2. Service connection for a right foot disability is denied.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in service disease or injury and the current disability.

The Veteran contends that the left and right foot were injured in service during repetitive ruck marches over uneven ground in service.  See February 2023 statement of Veteran.  Pursuant to this claim, the Veteran reports that during service he was seen at medical several times for the feet due to pain, instability, cracking, popping sounds, and plantar fasciitis, and that he has continued to have pain and symptoms with the feet since service. 

The July 2023 rating decision identified the favorable findings: that the July 2023 VA examination showed a current disability of bilateral plantar fasciitis, and that service records showed (in-service event of) acute bilateral foot pain in 2002.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The record shows treatment for foot pain three times in service.  In December 1999, the Veteran was seen for left foot pain after a road march.  Pain was noted over the fifth metatarsal proximal head.  In December 2001, the Veteran was treated for right foot heel pain, which had started three weeks prior.  In January 2002, the Veteran was treated by the podiatry clinic, reporting that the right foot felt much better, but that the left foot still hurt.  The left foot was assessed with retrocalcaneal bursitis.  The May 2002 service separation examination did not include complaints, findings, or abnormalities of the feet. 

After a review of all evidence, lay and medical, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the currently diagnosed left and right foot plantar fasciitis is related to service. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023 wherein the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the current plantar fasciitis was related to the left and right foot complaints in service.  See July 2023 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  Regarding the left foot, the examiner reviewed the history of evaluation for foot pain during service, diagnosis of left foot retrocalcaneal bursitis, or inflammation on the back of the heel by podiatry, that the left foot pain was treated with an injection in January 2002, with no further treatment, and that the service separation physical did not include foot complaints or conditions.  The VA examiner reasoned that retrocalcaneal bursitis was an acute condition that typically resolved with conservative treatment within 6 to 12 weeks, and, consistent with this timeline, after 2002 no records were found of any foot problems, diagnostics, or treatments.  The VA examination in July 2023 showed tenderness of plantar surface, consistent with plantar fasciitis, of which there was no evidence in service; after service the Veteran worked as a police officer for the past 13 years, which required prolonged standing; the current plantar fasciitis was presumed to be associated with the current occupation, as there was no evidence of plantar fasciitis prior to the examination. 

Regarding the right foot, the examiner provided the rationale that the Veteran was evaluated with right heel pain and notes from 2002 showed that right foot pain improved and required no further treatment; no further notes were found documenting any foot problems and the separation physical did not include foot complaints or conditions.  The VA examiner reasoned that current examination showed tenderness of the plantar surface, consistent with plantar fasciitis, while there was no evidence of this condition in service.  The rationale was also that the current plantar fasciitis was presumed to be associated with the current occupation of police officer, as there was no evidence of plantar fasciitis prior to the exam. 

The examiner had an accurate history, medical expertise and training, and provided a sound rationale for the medical opinions; therefore, the July 2023 VA medical opinions were of significant probative value.  

Post-service treatment records were silent for foot complaints and the Veteran indicated that there was no evaluation, diagnosis, or treatment for foot pain or symptoms since service.  See July 2023 Foot Conditions, including Flatfoot DBQ.  The Veteran reported that he had continuous feet symptoms since service, including pain, cracking, and popping.  See February 2023 statement of Veteran.

The Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to report past and current foot symptoms but is not competent to assign causation for the plantar fasciitis under the facts of this case.  Such opinions as to causation involve making findings based primarily on medical knowledge of the etiology of foot disabilities.  There is no competent opinion of record linking the left and right feet plantar fasciitis disabilities to service.

In the June 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran asserted a new theory of entitlement to service connection for the plantar fasciitis as caused by an in-service ankle injury.  The Veteran was service connected for bilateral ankle sprains in the July 2023 rating decision on appeal; however, the evidence pertaining to the newly raised issue of secondary service connection is outside the appropriate evidentiary window, leaving no support for a secondary service connection theory.

Thus, in consideration of the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the finding that the currently diagnosed left and right foot plantar fasciitis is related to service; therefore, the appeals must be denied. 

3. Service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

4. Service connection for a right knee disability is denied.

The Veteran contends during this claim for compensation that the left and right knee were injured in service during repetitive training and stress, including ruck marches over uneven ground in service.  See February 2023 statement of Veteran.  The Veteran also reported that he fell while doing preventative maintenance on a truck, at which time he banged his leg and knee on a piece of metal and that, when he went for treatment, there was a bone spur on the left knee, which was treated with a cortisone shot.  See February 2023 statement of Veteran; see also July 2023 Knee and Lower Leg DBQ.

The July 2023 rating decision identified the favorable findings that the July 2023 VA examination showed bilateral Osgood-Schlatter's disease, and service records showed acute treatment for left knee pain in 2000.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The record shows the Veteran was treated for left knee pain in service.  In May 2000, the Veteran was seen for left knee pain after a six-mile run one month prior.  In October 1999, the Veteran complained of a pulled muscle in the left leg with pain, which was diagnosed as a left bicep femoris strain.  The May 2002 service separation examination did not include a history of injury or complaints, findings, or diagnoses of a left knee abnormality. 

After review of all the evidence, lay and medical, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that there was a right knee injury, disease, or event during service.  Service treatment records are silent for report of injury, complaints, findings, diagnosis, or treatment for the right knee.  A May 1998 service entrance examination indicated that the Veteran had a growth on the right knee in childhood, which disappeared at age 11.  The May 2002 service separation examination did not include a history of knee injury, complaints, findings, or diagnoses of the right knee, and the Veteran specifically denied impaired use of the legs, swollen or painful joints, knee trouble, the need to use corrective devises, and bone, joint, or other deformities. 

Post-service treatment records show no right knee complaints for over 20 years after service, and no history of knee injury, symptoms, or treatment during service.  The histories reported during treatment are of high probative value because a person is expected to provide an accurate medical history in order to receive good medical treatment.  When pursuing this compensation claim, and over 20 years after service, the Veteran first reported that during service he was seen multiple times for pain, swelling, weakness, cracking, and popping in both knees, and he had problems with the right knee since service.  See February 2023 statement of Veteran.  

In this case, the persuasive weight of the more contemporaneous lay and medical evidence shows there was no injury or disease of the right knee during service.  The Veteran's reports of routine combat training activities, including long marches, do not describe a right knee injury or disease during active duty.  Symptoms of right knee pain, as described by the Veteran, can be expected after prolonged marches and do not indicate a right knee injury or chronic symptoms of injury or disease.  

Consistent with the finding that there was no right knee injury or disease during service, and normal findings of the right knee during active service, contemporaneous active-duty medical assessments and histories show the Veteran denied having right knee problems.  The Veteran sought treatment in service for other musculoskeletal symptoms, including pain in the left knee, left leg, ankles, and feet.  The Veteran had the opportunity to report right knee pain symptoms during the various medical histories, and he is competent to do so, but he consistently denied right knee problems.  It was over 20 years after service when pursuing a compensation claim that the Veteran first came up with the story of right knee symptom onset during service and continued symptoms during service.  Such recent assertions are inconsistent with, and outweighed by, the more contemporaneous lay and medical evidence showing no knee injury, disease, or symptoms during service, contemporaneous denial of such during service, and no mention of in-service injury or symptoms during post-service treatment.   

The Veteran does not represent that there are private treatment records or lay statements of any injury or disease of the right knee during active service.  The lay and medical evidence generated contemporaneous to service, which showed no in-service right knee injury or disease and no right knee symptoms, is likely to reflect accurately the Veteran's physical condition, so is of probative value and weighs persuasively against a finding of a right knee injury or disease during service. 

After review of all the evidence, lay and medical, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the current left and right knee Osgood-Schlatter's disease is etiologically related to service.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023 for the left knee wherein the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the current Osgood-Schlatter's disease was related to the left knee complaints in service.  See July 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner noted the history of left knee pain in service, evaluation for acute left knee pain in 2000, and conservative treatment for the knee pain, with no follow up encounters, and that the service separation physical examination showed no knee abnormalities.  The examiner indicated no records were found to establish any current, chronic diagnosed condition of the left knee, and there was no record of any knee evaluation, diagnosis or treatment after 2000.  There was evidence on examination of Osgood-Schlatter's disease (osteochondrosis), which was characterized by development of a bony prominence on the tibia which occurred in childhood and adolescence and was not related to service.  

The VA examiner in July 2023 had an accurate history, medical expertise and training, and provided a sound rationale for the medical opinion; therefore, the July 2023 VA medical opinion was of probative value to weigh against a finding of nexus between current Osgood-Schlatter's disease and service.  

The Veteran was not provided with a VA medical opinion for the issue of service connection for the right knee, and a nexus opinion is not required.  The persuasive weight of the evidence demonstrates no relevant right knee injury during service, no relevant disease during service, and no event during service, to include even right knee symptoms during service.  There is no reasonable possibility that a VA opinion could aid in substantiating the current claim for service connection without being speculative because any purported opinion would be an attempt to relate a current disorder to an in-service injury or disease that in fact (based on the weight of the evidence) did not occur.  VA adjudications are to be based on evidence that shows some probability and are not to be based on "pure speculation or remote possibility."  38 C.F.R. 3.102.  

Any medical opinion that purported to provide a nexus between the current Osgood-Schlatter's disease and service would necessarily be based on an inaccurate history regarding what occurred in service, so would be of no probative value.  The Court has held on a number of occasions that a medical opinion premised upon an unsubstantiated account of a claimant is of no probative value.  See e.g., Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993) (generally observing that a medical opinion premised upon an unsubstantiated account is of no probative value and does not serve to verify the occurrences described). 

The Board notes that in the June 2024 notice of disagreement the Veteran asserted a new theory of entitlement to service connection for the left and right knee instability as caused by an in-service ankle injury.  The Veteran was service connected for bilateral ankle sprains in the July 2023 rating decision on appeal; however, this evidence outside the appropriate evidentiary window, leaving no evidence to substantiate the newly raised theory of secondary service connection. 

For the reasons described above, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence is against the appeal for service connection for the right and left knee disorders; therefore, the appeals must be denied. 

5. Service connection for a lumbar spine disability is denied.

The Veteran contends that the lumbar spine was injured during ruck marches during active duty.  See February 2023 statement of Veteran.

The July 2023 rating decision identified the favorable findings of current lumbar spine disability (that the July 2023 VA examination showed lumbar strain), and an in-service event (service records showed acute treatment for lumbar strain in 2000).  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The record shows that during service the Veteran was treated several times in service for lower back pain.  See service treatment records December 1998 (describing lower back pain over the past day without trauma), March 1999 (describing back pain for two weeks), May 1999 (describing back pain after four mile run that week where he twisted left ankle and hurt left muscle of lumbar region), June 1999 (recommending "back class" due to over six months of lower back pain from original injury in basic training on obstacle course; provisional diagnosis of right sacroiliitis joint inflammation), and August 2000 (describing lower back pain for the last one and a half months after a six-mile march, with re-injury two weeks prior; indicating a profile for seven months due to back).  

The evidence does not show chronic back symptoms during service.  At the May 2002 service separation examination, the Veteran did not report back complaints and specifically denied swollen or painful joints, and recurrent back pain.  Examination of the lower back at service separation showed no abnormalities.

After a review of all evidence, lay and medical, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the currently diagnosed lumbar strain is related to service.  At a VA examination in July 2023, the Veteran described the ruck marches in service.  The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the current lumbar strain was related to the lower back pain complaints in service.  The examiner provided the rationale that the Veteran was evaluated for low back pain in 1998 and 1999 in service and the injury was diagnosed as mechanical low back pain due to sit-ups, treated conservatively, and no other injuries or issues were noted, and the low back condition was presumed resolved.  The 2002 separation physical exam showed no low back complaints or findings.  The Veteran worked as a full-time police officer for the past 13 years with no evidence of the back condition until 2021.  Chiropractic records showed treatment from 2021 to 2023 for low back pain, with no evidence of back problems between 1999 and 2021.  The examiner had an accurate history, medical expertise and training, and provided a sound rationale for the medical opinion; therefore, the July 2023 VA medical opinion was of significant probative value.  

Post-service private treatment records showed the Veteran received chiropractic treatment beginning in September 2021 for stiff pain in the lower back that was intermittent and of gradual onset.  The Veteran reported that he injured the lower back during frequent, at least weekly, ruck marches on uneven terrain, and monthly 8-to-12-mile marches; the low back pain never resolved.  See July 2023 Back Conditions DBQ.  The Veteran reported that he saw chiropractors over the years since service separation, but did not see a primary care physician, and he had imaging done at some point.

The Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to report past and current lower back symptoms but is not competent to assign causation for the lumbar strain under the facts of this case.  Such opinions as to causation involve making findings based primarily on medical knowledge of the etiology of lower back disabilities.  There is no competent opinion of record linking the lower back disability to the remote events of service.

The Board notes that in the June 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran asserted a new theory of entitlement to service connection for the lower back disability as caused by an in-service ankle injury, that resulted in knee instability and subsequent lower back symptoms.  The Veteran was service connected for bilateral ankle sprains in the July 2023 rating decision on appeal; however, the evidence pertaining to this newly raised theory of secondary service connection is outside the appropriate evidentiary window. 

For the reasons described above, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence is against the claim for service connection for the lower back disability; therefore, the appeal must be denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

6. Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he began to have problems with panic attacks when near water or swimming after a training exercise where he was submerged and unable to rise to the surface, while needing air, for a period of time.  In order to assist the Veteran, the Board has restyled the appeal for PTSD as service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 4-5 (2009) (holding that a claimant without medical expertise cannot be expected to precisely delineate the diagnosis of his mental illness). 

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a). 

For the reasons discussed in detail below, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error for failure to obtain a VA examination. 

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of the acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, because a medical examination has not been obtained regarding whether the psychiatric symptoms reported qualify as a psychiatric diagnosis, and if so, whether the psychiatric condition was incurred in service or was otherwise related to service.  See 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. 

VA must provide a VA medical examination or medical opinion when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence is on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79, 81 (2006). 

The Veteran reported that, after the training incident in water during service in which he was submerged underwater and was unable to rise to the surface, he had progressively worsening symptoms such as panic attacks since service.  He reported re-living events, distressing memories, panic attacks, racing heart, hyperventilating, anger, irritability, memory issues, and sleep disturbances.  The Veteran asserts that, when he first left service, he had suicidal thoughts, depression, anger outbursts, rage, and involvement in high-risk behaviors.  The Veteran reported seeing a therapist in the past for anger, and that he has quit jobs due to symptoms. 

Service treatment records showed the May 1998 service entrance examination did not include psychiatric complaints, findings, or diagnoses.  In January and February 1999, the Veteran was treated for tension headaches related to family stressors, and the Veteran reported insomnia, increased feeling of being down, and requested a mental health consultation.  Treatment records from March 2001 show generally that unspecified counseling occurred, and that the Veteran was taking Citalopram through November 2000.  The Veteran reported at the May 2002 separation examination that he had counseling on a "personal matter" but was "better now," and no psychiatric condition was noted by the examiner. 

In this case, there are reported psychiatric symptoms after service, evidence of psychiatric symptoms and treatment in service, and evidence that the current psychiatric symptoms may be associated with the reported water training event.  VA has not provided an opinion regarding whether the psychiatric symptoms reported qualify as a psychiatric diagnosis, and if so, whether the psychiatric condition was incurred in service or was otherwise related to service.  Failure to obtain a medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a). 

The issue of service connection for a psychiatric disorder is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination to help determine the nature and etiology of any current psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.  The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

a)	Please identify any diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder(s) as defined by the DSM-V.

b)	For each identified current disorder, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder is related to service?  The examiner should note and consider the water training exercise during service (described in the February 2023 statement of Veteran) and the counseling and use of Citalopram during service. 

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Beilsmith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.