Citation Nr: A25033046
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241016-483949
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, currently claimed as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), including, but not limited to, depression and anxiety, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1977 until honorable discharge in March 1978.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

Subsequently, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) in October 2024. The Veteran elected to place this appeal on the Direct Review docket. As a valid and timely VA Form 10182 was received, the appeal is properly before the Board.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, currently claimed as PTSD, including, but not limited to, depression and anxiety, is remanded.

The Veteran underwent a VA medical examination in September 2024. The VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not meet diagnostic criteria for PTSD, nor did the Veteran have any other mental health diagnoses. VA medical examination, September 2024.

The record includes a memorandum from M. J., III, LCSW, received in June 2024, indicating that the Veteran was receiving treatment for depression and anxiety. While the record includes requests by VA to obtain some of the Veteran's private medical records, there is not a request to obtain records from M. J., III, LCSW.

The record includes a VA medical provider's progress note indicating that the Veteran received treatment in October 2005, and that a progress note detailing the encounter was scanned to the file; however, no such note exists in the file. The Board cannot determine if this treatment record is relevant to the current appeal based on the facts available.

In determining entitlement to service connection for claimed disabilities, especially mental health disabilities, the Board must not limit its consideration based upon the specific claimed disability. Rather, the Board must consider all of the available evidence and allow medical professionals to appropriately diagnose disabilities based upon the Veteran's description of history and symptomatology. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (U.S. 2009). Accordingly, while the Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for PTSD, there is credible evidence that he is receiving treatment for depression and anxiety. The Board will recharacterize the claim to entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, currently claimed as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), including, but not limited to, depression and anxiety. This better encompasses the claim based on the available evidence.

When VA undertakes to provide a medical opinion, it must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). The VA medical opinion is inadequate in that it does not consider the full scope of the Veteran's claim based on the available evidence, nor does it discuss the Veteran's ongoing mental health treatment.

Failure to attempt to obtain private medical records from M. J., III, LCSW, failure to obtain VA medical records regarding treatment in October 2005, and failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion are predecisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). A remand is necessary to correct these errors.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain all of the Veteran's VA treatment records, including, but not limited to, records from October 2005.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for Matthew Johnson, III, LCSW. Make two requests for the authorized records, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding all of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder(s), including, but not limited to, depression and anxiety. If necessary, schedule the Veteran for a VA psychiatric examination. In any case, the examiner must review the entire claims file, including this opinion.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Determine the nature and etiology of all of the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disabilities, including, but not limited to depression and anxiety. If the examiner determines that the Veteran does not have any currently diagnosed acquired psychiatric disabilities, the examiner must discuss this in relation to the Veteran's documented treatment for depression and anxiety. The examiner must opine whether any diagnosed acquired psychiatric disabilities are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. The examiner must provide a complete rationale to support the opinion(s).

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. T. Holtsclaw

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.