Citation Nr: A25033522
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 250129-504382
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma (claimed as skin cancer), to include as due to a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of fracture to fifth metacarpal bone of the right hand is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of fracture to second metacarpal bone of the left hand is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma was first diagnosed decades after service, and the evidence is persuasively against finding that it is etiologically related to service, including his TERAs. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma (claimed as skin cancer), to include as due to a TERA, are not met. 38 U.S.C.                 § 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1971 to November 1973. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2024 higher-level review rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In an earlier, August 2024 rating decision, the reviewer found that a duty to assist error had occurred with respect to the initial July 2024 rating decision, as the RO had not associated all the Veteran's available treatment records with his claims file. 

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) higher-level review decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With respect to the denied claim, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

For the remanded claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R.                       § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As a preliminary matter, in January 2025 the Veteran filed two VA Form 10182 Notices of Disagreement. The Veteran signed the first Notice of Disagreement, which listed the claims set forth above in this appeal. The Veteran did not sign the second one, which listed five other claims that the RO denied in the December 2024 rating decision. Following receipt of the Notices of Disagreement, in January 2025 the Board notified the Veteran that it could not accept his unsigned Notice of Disagreement and that he would have to submit another signed VA Form 10182 if he wished to proceed with the appeal of those claims. 

In February 2025 the Veteran submitted another, signed VA Form 10182 covering the five other claims that the RO denied in the December 2024 rating decision. However, instead of combining all the issues raised in the Veteran's two VA Form 10182 Notices of Disagreement in one appeal, as the Veteran's appeal has been advanced on the docket, the Board will proceed with deciding the appeal only as to three claims set forth above herein, and the Veteran's other five appealed claims will be adjudicated in a new appeal stream/docket number.

Further, the Board acknowledges that the time to request a docket switch has not yet elapsed. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Under 38 C.F.R.               § 20.202(c)(2) a docket switch is precluded if the Veteran has submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303. While the Veteran did not request a hearing and has not submitted additional evidence, in March 2025 the Veteran's representative submitted an Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP). In this instance, the Board interprets the Veteran's appeal being advanced on the docket, along with the Veteran's representative submitting an IHP, as the Veteran's indication that he desires to have the Board proceed with deciding his appeal without any further delay. Accordingly, the Board will proceed with deciding this appeal. 

As an additional, preliminary matter, the December 2024 rating decision denied service connection for the Veteran's skin cancer claim, as the evidence submitted was not new and relevant. While the RO found new and relevant evidence had not been submitted, the RO then went on to readjudicate the Veteran's skin cancer claim, along with the Veteran's residual of metacarpal fracture claims. As such, the Board finds the RO made an implied favorable finding that new and relevant evidence had been received with respect to all the Veteran's claims herein and readjudicated the matters on the merits. As there is not clear and unmistakable error in these findings, the favorable findings made by the RO are binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). As such, the Board will proceed to the merits.

Service Connection

VA provides compensation for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. This is referred to as "service connection." 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, to establish service connection there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999). When these elements are satisfied, service connection may be granted on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma (claimed as skin cancer), to include as due to a TERA, is denied.

In his May 2024 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran asserted that his diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma was related to his exposure to Agent Orange (AO)/herbicide agents while stationed in Guam from 1971 to 1972.

In June 2024 the RO issued a TERA memorandum for the Veteran, which conceded presumptive exposure to herbicide agents while serving in Guam and probable asbestos exposure while serving onboard the USS Hunley. 

In the December 2024 rating decision of appeal, the RO made favorable findings that the Veteran was diagnosed with squamous cell cancer and that exposure to herbicide agents while serving in Guam was conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

As the first two elements of service connection are met, the Board next turns to the evidence concerning whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's squamous cell cancer and his service. 

The PACT Act implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule certain Veterans for an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases if they engaged in a TERA. Section 1168 of the PACT Act requires VA to "obtain a medical opinion... as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity." 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a)(1)(B). Unlike general opinions for service connection, TERA opinions must consider "the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran." 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a)(2)(A) and (B).

In a June 2024 VA examination, the examiner confirmed that the Veteran was diagnosed with squamous cell cancer in 2014. The RO requested that the examiner opine as to whether the Veteran's skin cancer was related to his conceded exposure to AO. The examiner found that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's skin cancer was related to the Veteran's conceded exposure to AO, citing that the association between AO and squamous cell carcinoma is unclear. The examiner did not provide an opinion concerning the Veteran's probable exposure to asbestos. 

Once VA provides an examination or medical opinion, it must be adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). An adequate medical opinion must be based upon a consideration of the relevant evidence and must provide the Board with a foundation sufficient to evaluate the probative worth of that opinion. See Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994) (adequate medical examination is one that is based on consideration of Veteran's prior medical history and describes his or her condition with a level of detail sufficient to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision on the relevant medical question). Moreover, the Board is required to ensure that medical opinions are made based on sufficient facts or data and the application of reliable medical principles. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008) (requiring the Board to ensure that medical opinions are made based on sufficient facts or data and the application of reliable medical principles).

The Board finds the June 2024 nexus opinion inadequate and assigns it no probative weight. As cited above, unlike general opinions for service connection, TERA opinions must consider "the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran." 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a)(2)(A) and (B). As the June 2024 VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's probable exposure to asbestos, the examiner did not consider the Veteran's total TERA potential exposure in formulating the examiner's opinion. Accordingly, the opinion is inadequate in that regard. 

Following the August 2024 rating decision that identified a duty to assist error, in September 2024 a different VA examiner was asked to provide another TERA opinion. The RO requested that this examiner provide an opinion concerning whether the Veteran's skin cancer was caused by his active service in the U.S. Marine Corps after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

This September 2024 examiner noted review of the Veteran's claims file. The examiner then opined that the Veteran's skin cancer was less likely than not due to the Veteran's TERA exposure. The examiner reasoned that squamous cell carcinoma has a specific etiology, in that it is associated with exposure to UV radiation, along with environmental exposures other than UV radiation to include arsenic, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, nitrosamines, alkylating agents, and ionizing radiation. Additionally, the examiner cited demographic factors as fair skin, male, and older age, along with immunosuppressed states of iatrogenic, leukemia, and AIDS. Further, the examiner explained that there is no positive, scientific evidence of an association between squamous cell carcinoma and the hazardous exposures as reported on the Veteran's TERA memorandum. 

In the March 2025 appellate brief filed by the Veteran's representative, the representative argues that the Veteran's June 2024 VA nexus opinion concerning skin cancer is inadequate, as the contract examiner were merely a nurse practitioner with no indicated experience or training in dermatology or oncology. The argument did not point to a flaw in any specific opinion rendered, nor any statement that was believed to be non-credible. Instead, the representative argued that without a showing of experience in dermatology or oncology, the opinion of the nurse practitioner was inadequate, and should be entitled to the same weight as the opinion of the Veteran.

As noted above, the Board has found the June 2024 VA opinion inadequate based on reasons unrelated to the examiner being a nurse practitioner. Additionally, the Veteran's representative did not specifically object to the September 2024 VA examiner's qualifications, although that examiner was also a nurse practitioner. However, to the extent that the representative's objection could also be viewed as objecting to the credentials of the September 2024 VA examiner as a nurse practitioner, the Board will still address the argument as it relates to the September 2024 nexus opinion.

There is a presumption that an examiner is competent and there is no requirement that an examiner be the most highly qualified in a medical discipline. See Rizzo v. Shinseki, 580 F.3d 1288 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, once a challenge to the competency of an examiner is made, the presumption has no further effect, and just as in typical litigation, the side presenting the expert must satisfy its burden of persuasion as to the examiner's qualifications. Francway v. Wilkie, 940 F.3d 1304, 1308 (Fed. Cir. 2019). This requires the Board to make factual findings regarding the qualifications and provide reasons and bases for concluding whether the medical examiner was competent to provide the opinion. Id.

Typically, a claimant is entitled to receive from VA the information necessary to raise a competency challenge. If a request is made, a claimant normally has the right, absent unusual circumstances, to the CV and other information about the qualifications of a medical examiner as part of VA's duty to assist. Id. However, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board reviews the record only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. In this case, the examination being challenged was conducted in June 2024, along with the later September 2024 examination also being performed by a nurse practitioner; the AMA rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2024; and the Veteran's challenge to the VA examiner's competency was raised in March 2025. 

Because the challenge was made after the rating decision on appeal, the fact that the Veteran has not received from VA the VA examiner's qualifications does not constitute a pre-decisional duty to assist error, as the duty to assist does not attach at the Board level in an AMA appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Thus, a remand to provide the Veteran with the VA examiner's CV would not be proper. Nevertheless, because the Veteran has raised a challenge to the VA examiner's competence, the Board must still satisfy its burden of persuasion as to the examiner's qualifications. Francway, 940 F.3d at 1308.

As far as the representative's argument that a nurse practitioner examiner is not competent to render medical opinions in the case, the Board disagrees. The representative has broadly argued that the June 2024 examiner was not competent to render opinions based on the examiner being a licensed nurse practitioner. The representative has not pointed to any specific medical opinion offered, nor given any specific reason why any medical finding or opinion offered was not adequate. As the Board has already found the June 2024 VA opinion inadequate, the Board will address the September 2024 VA nurse practitioner opinion. The Board finds the September 2024 nurse practitioner examiner competent, as her credentials, in the record show, that they she is licensed by the state of Texas as a nurse practitioner and, accordingly, has the requisite education, training, and experience to render medical diagnoses, statements and opinions. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1); see also Cox v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 563, 569 (2007) (holding that "[a] nurse practitioner, having completed medical education and training, fits squarely into the requirement of § 3.159(a)(1) as one competent to provide diagnoses, statements, or opinions").

The Board also finds the September 2024 nurse practitioner credible, as there is no evidence of bias or motivation to lie, nor has the representative pointed to any statement believed non-credible.

For these reasons, the Board finds the September 2024 VA examiner to be competent and credible.

The Board finds the September 2024 TERA opinion adequate and assigns it much probative weight. The examiner noted review of the Veteran's claims file. Additionally, the examiner demonstrated consideration of the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities. Further, the examiner provided sufficient reasoning and rationale for the conclusion reached by explaining the scientifically accepted known causes, associations, and risks of squamous cell carcinoma, which did not include exposure to herbicide agents or asbestos. 

Regarding other potential causes of the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma related to the Veteran's active service, the RO only afforded the Veteran a VA nexus opinion concerning the Veteran's exposure to TERA. 

In McLendon v. Nicholson, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims ("CAVC") held that a VA examination/opinion is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing an "in-service event, injury, or disease," or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the current disability may be related to the in-service event, but (4) insufficient evidence to decide the case. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-83 (2006). 

The Veteran has not asserted, and the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and other medical records do not indicate, any other potential causes (listed in the September 2024 nexus opinion) of his squamous cell carcinoma related to his active service. For instance, there is no documentation that the Veteran was treated for a severe sunburn while in service. Accordingly, VA's duty to assist the Veteran with his claim did not extend to securing a nexus opinion concerning potential causes of his squamous cell carcinoma other than his TERA. 

While in his May 2024 Statement in Support of Claim the Veteran indicates belief that his squamous cell carcinoma was caused by his exposure to herbicide agents, as cited by the September 2024 examiner, there is no current scientific studies or other evidence to demonstrate such an association. Additionally, the Veteran is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. Determining the cause of the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical knowledge. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran because the record does not show that he has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the medical evidence; specifically, the September 2024 VA opinion that did not find a nexus between the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma and his TERA exposure. 

Accordingly, the record does not contain medical evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma and his service. The Board is not competent to render its own medical conclusions but must rely upon those with specialized medical knowledge to provide such opinions. Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991). 

In conclusion, the claim for service connection for squamous cell carcinoma must be denied as there is no competent evidence of record demonstrating a nexus between the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma and his service. In reaching the conclusion to deny the claim, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (holding the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application when the evidence is persuasively for or against the claim). Thus, entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma (claimed as skin cancer), to include as due to a TERA, is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of fracture to fifth metacarpal bone of the right hand is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of fracture to second metacarpal bone of the left hand is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he suffers residual pain and functional loss from factures he incurred during service to his fifth metacarpal bone of the right hand and second metacarpal bone of the left hand. 

In October 2024 the Veteran underwent a VA examination. The Veteran reported that he broke his hands fighting during training in boot camp in San Diego, CA. He reported that he was scared to report both fractures, so he did not receive treatment for both, and only had his right second finger casted. He also reported current aching and intermittent cramping in his hands. The examiner noted that the Veteran suffered from functional loss, as the Veteran had to limit his use of tools and required frequent breaks due to hand pain. The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have any current diagnoses, which led the RO to deny the Veteran's claims in the December 2024 rating decision. The examiner's rationale for not finding any diagnoses and the Veteran's current symptoms were not related to service was that the Veteran's claimed fractures were not confirmed by x-rays in the Veteran's STRs or in post-military treatment records.

However, the Veteran's STRs contradict the examiner's findings. In April 1971 the Veteran injured his left hand during a pugil stick contest. The Veteran presented with swelling around the second metacarpal bone of his left hand. An x-ray was performed, which showed a small chip fracture of the second metacarpal bone of the left hand. The Veteran was treated with a short-arm cast and splint. Additionally, in August 1972 the Veteran's STRs indicate that upon x-ray the Veteran was diagnosed with a fracture of the fifth metacarpal bone in his right hand (a "boxer's fracture). Accordingly, as the October 2024 VA examiner did not consider all the relevant medical records, the nexus opinion is inadequate. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302 (requiring the Board to ensure that medical opinions are made based on sufficient facts or data and the application of reliable medical principles).

Additionally, while the examiner concluded that the Veteran did not suffer from a current disability, under the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2018), pain, which produces functional impairment, will qualify as a disability for VA purposes. Despite the indication that the Veteran suffered from pain in his hands and the examiner's finding of functional loss due to the pain, the RO found no disability. 

As the October 2024 VA nexus opinion is inadequate, the Board is without an adequate medical nexus opinion to decide the claim. The Board is not competent to render its own medical conclusions but must rely upon those with specialized medical knowledge to provide such opinions. Colvin, 1 Vet. App. 171. 

The failure to provide an adequate nexus opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring a necessary remand under the AMA. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Thus, entitlement to service connection for residuals of fracture to fifth metacarpal bone of the right hand and residuals of fracture to second metacarpal bone of the left hand is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed residuals of fracture to fifth metacarpal bone of the right hand and claimed residuals of fracture to second metacarpal bone of the left hand. On review of the complete record (including this remand), the consulting provider must opine on the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's claimed residuals of fracture to fifth metacarpal bone of the right hand were incurred in or are otherwise related to his active service? 

To that end, the examiner must note consideration of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) that indicate in August 1972, after x-ray, the Veteran was diagnosed and treated for a fracture of the fifth metacarpal bone in his right hand (a "boxer's fracture).

(b.)  Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's claimed residuals of fracture to second metacarpal bone of the left hand were incurred in or are otherwise related to his active service? 

To that end, the examiner must note consideration of the Veteran's STRs that indicate in April 1971 the Veteran injured his left hand during a pugil stick contest. The Veteran presented with swelling around the second metacarpal bone of his left hand. An x-ray was performed, which showed a small chip fracture of the second metacarpal bone of the left hand. The Veteran was treated with a short-arm cast and splint.

In rendering the medical nexus opinions set forth above, the examiner must note that under the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2018), pain, which produces functional impairment, will qualify as a disability for VA purposes. In the October 2024 VA examination, the Veteran described suffering from aching pain and intermittent cramping in his hands. Additionally, the examiner found that the Veteran suffered functional loss, as the Veteran had to limit his usage of tools and required frequent breaks due to hand pain.

Additionally, in considering the lay statements of record, the examiner must note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner must provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner must identify and specifically cite each reference material used and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history. The examiner must also specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with the findings.

(Continued on the next page)

?

All opinions must be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, the examiner must comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.M. Winchell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.