Citation Nr: A25033161
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250306-524448
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1966 to December 1967.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which, in pertinent part, readjudicated and denied claims for service connection for sleep apnea and asthma.  

In March 2025, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), on which he identified the June 2024 rating decision, the issues as service connection for asthma and sleep apnea, and elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or his representative, with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

On the March 2025 VA Form 10182, the Veteran's attorney, Robert V. Chisholm, waived the remainder of the period to modify the Notice of Disagreement for the purpose of selecting a different evidentiary record.  Mr. Chisholm, however, had also submitted additional evidence with the VA Form 10182.  He is reminded that under these circumstances, requests to modify a Notice of Disagreement will not be granted.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  

In a March 2025 letter, Mr. Chisholm waived the remainder of the 90 day period during which evidence might be submitted in support of the claim, stating that there was no additional evidence that needed to be submitted and requested a decision be issued without further delay.   

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

The Veteran contends that his sleep apnea began during active and has continued to the present.  After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand of this claim is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

VA has already made favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a sleep apnea disability.  The Veteran claims that he snored loudly while on active duty and that other service members witnessed him stop breathing while sleeping.  He theorizes that these symptoms represented the onset of his current sleep apnea.  

VA obtained a medical opinion in September 2023 that addressed whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was due to his presumed herbicide agent exposure, which is considered a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) under the PACT Act.  However, the Board finds the medical opinion inadequate for two reasons.  First, the opinion only addressed the question of nexus with potential toxic exposure and did not address the Veteran's contentions that his disability developed during service.  The Veteran's specific contention is that symptoms he believes to be indicative of sleep apnea began during active duty.  

Second, the clinician's opinion is based on speculation and does not provide a rationale for the determination that the Veteran's sleep apnea was not caused by his presumed toxic exposure risk activity.  The opinion noted that there are several risk factors for developing sleep apnea, noting the Veteran has several of these.  However, no explanation was offered for the opinion that these risk factors were a more likely cause of the Veteran's sleep apnea than his toxic exposure.  

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Reliance on an inadequate opinion in rendering a decision on a claim is a duty to assist error on the part of VA.  As the Board finds the September 2023 VA opinion inadequate and this was the basis for the decision against the claim, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and that remand is necessary to correct that error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The Board has considered whether a decision could be rendered based upon the private medical opinion submitted with the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement.  However, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate for purposes of deciding the claim.  

To begin, the Board notes that the opining private clinician noted in the disclosure statements that their analysis is "based upon the available current information and the assumption that the information provided to me is correct."  Presupposing that all the Veteran's statements were credible, whether consistent with the evidence or not, calls into question both the impartiality of the opining clinician and the probative value of the medical opinion.  Notably, the opinion relies entirely on the Veteran's statement, the statement from his ex-spouse, and a statement from a former service member who reported serving with the Veteran, to determine the Veteran experienced symptoms of sleep apnea in service.  However, despite stating that the opinion is based on a review of the entire claims folder, the opining clinician does not reconcile this total reliance on lay statements from the Veteran and his supporting witnesses, all made after his application for benefits, with his statements from July 2020, prior to his application for benefits, that his symptoms of snoring only go back 15 to 20 years.  This inconsistent prior statement cuts directly against the credibility of the other statements the examiner relied entirely on in rendering a diagnosis of a disease from over 50 years ago.  The fact that it is not addressed by the examiner is both a failure to provide an adequate opinion, and raises the question of whether the entire claims file was reviewed as asserted.  

Further, while the private opinion does note that sleep apnea was not recognized at the time the Veteran served, and would not be well understood for many years after, the opining clinician does not address the Veteran's statements from his report of medical history at his separation, wherein the Veteran affirmatively denied having or ever having had symptoms such as shortness of breath, night sweats, or frequent trouble sleeping.  

Essentially, the private clinician either did not review all the evidence of record, in which case the opinion lacks probative value, or made determinations as to which of the Veteran's statements to deem credible without providing a rationale to do so, which would also render the opinion inadequate.  Either way, for this reason, the Board cannot rely on the opinion.  

Additionally, the medical opinion notes on several occasions that sleep apnea is a progressive disease, with symptoms often developing over an average of 7 years before diagnosis.  However, the opinion does not reconcile that the Veteran's case would be an extreme outlier from that average, with him living over 50 years from the development of symptoms to the diagnosis of the disability.  Moreover, per the examiner's explanation, symptoms of sleep apnea build gradually and worsen over a period of years until patients seek treatment.  However, in the Veteran's case, after over 50 years of untreated symptoms, the examiner offers no explanation as to why the condition was only noted to be "mild" per the sleep study done in 2020.  If the condition had developed during service as the Veteran contends, it would be well outside the described process of progression as laid out by the medical opinion.  

Considering these shortcomings in the private opining clinician's rationale, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate for purposes of deciding this claim.    

2. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he developed asthma due to his exposure to coal and coal dust while on active duty.  He asserts that, during basic training, he had to shovel coal to run the heating unit in his barracks.  After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand of this claim is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

VA obtained a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) of herbicide agent exposure and its relationship to his asthma in September 2023.  The medical opinion noted that the causes of asthma are multifactorial, and include a combination of environmental and genetic factors.  The opinion went on to note several "triggers" for asthma, including allergens, respiratory infections, cold air, physical exertion, and stress.  The clinician went on to note that smoking cigarettes is a "major trigger that can aggravate the condition."  The clinician determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's asthma was due to his toxic exposure because the other risks outweigh the risk in the TERA.  

The Board finds this opinion inadequate for two reasons.  First, the opining clinician did not address the Veteran's primary contention that it was exposure to coal while in basic training that caused his asthma.  

Second, the opining clinician's rationale is speculative and incomplete.  The clinician stated that smoking can cause aggravation of asthma, and then proceeded to imply that the Veteran's history of smoking was a more likely cause than his presumed toxic exposure.  More importantly though, the clinician listed several "risk factors" for the development of asthma, indicating in the end that they were more likely causes of the Veteran's asthma than his TERA, but without addressing how those risk factors played into the Veteran's own personal health history and why they were more likely causes for the Veteran's asthma than his TERA, rather than more likely causes for asthma generally.  

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Reliance on an inadequate opinion in rendering a decision on a claim is a duty to assist error on the part of VA.  As the Board finds the September 2023 VA opinion inadequate and this was the basis for the decision against the claim, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and that remand is necessary to correct that error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  After reviewing the relevant evidence of record, the opining clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current sleep apnea, which was diagnosed in 2020, had its onset during his period of active duty from January 1966 to December 1967, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease, to include toxic exposure risk activity? 

In providing the request opinion, the opining clinician should consider the Veteran's claimed symptoms in service and thereafter, including the nature, onset, progression and severity of such claimed symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the claimed symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the current sleep apnea is known to develop or are his reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?  The Board did not make a credibility determination pending the clinician's opinion.  

The clinician must also consider 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

2. Obtain a medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's asthma.   After reviewing the relevant evidence of record, the clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:  

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current asthma had its onset during his period of active duty from January 1966 to December 1967, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease, to include toxic exposure risk activity? 

In providing the request opinion, the opining clinician should consider the Veteran's claimed symptoms in service and thereafter, including the nature, onset, progression and severity of such claimed symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the claimed symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the current asthma is known to develop or are his reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?  The Board did not make a credibility determination pending the clinician's opinion.  

The clinician must also consider 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kleponis, Kevin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.