Citation Nr: A25033680
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240623-450301
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1983 to October 1985 and from October 1986 to September 1995.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the August 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for OSA is remanded.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

The Veteran contends that his OSA began during service and was caused by an in-service event, injury, or exposure.  He also contends that his OSA is secondary to his service-connected PTSD.  Specifically, he alleges that his PTSD medications caused weight gain which led to the development of his sleep apnea.  See November 2021 compensation claim and October 2023 DBQ.

An October 2023 medical opinion addressing obesity as an intermediate step does not contain a sufficient rationale.  The examiner did not provide an adequate opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD aggravated his obesity, and she failed to address the Veteran's contention that his medication for PTSD caused obesity. Failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103(d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW.

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate examiner.  Following a review of the record, and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming his statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

(a) Did any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (to include his PTSD) cause the Veteran to become obese, or aggravate (worsen) his obesity, either individually or by the total combined effect of two or more service-connected disabilities? Why or why not?

(b) If so, was the obesity a substantial factor in causing the OSA? Why or why not?

(c) Would the OSA not have occurred but for the obesity? Why or why not?

*The Veteran contends that weight gain/obesity caused by his PTSD medications led to the development of his OSA.  See November 2021 compensation claim.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy.  See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.  In addition, a copy of this Remand must be provided to the examiner for review.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty. Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.  

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

2. Provide the Veteran notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

3. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Mecone

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.