Citation Nr: A25033832
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240311-423757
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability, as secondary to the Veteran's right foot disability and arthritis, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right foot pain is dismissed. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot bone spur is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left foot pain is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cervical radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neck pain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right ankle disability is at least as likely as not related to his service-connected right foot disability and arthritis.

2. There is no remaining case or controversy regarding the benefit sought on appeal, as the agency of original jurisdiction has already granted the claim for entitlement to service connection for right foot pain in its November 2024 rating decision granting service connection for right foot hallux valgus with bunion deformity and arthritis.

3. The Veteran's left foot bone spurs are not secondary to the Veteran's service-connected knee disability and are not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

4. The Veteran's left foot pain is not secondary to the Veteran's service-connected knee disability and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right ankle disability as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right foot disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for right foot pain have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 19.20.

3. The criteria for service connection for left foot bone spurs as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected knee disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

4. The criteria for service connection for left foot pain as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected knee disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from February 1985 to February 1988.

The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the rating decisions on appeal in March and September 2023, which constitute initial decisions. Therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted two VA Form 20-0996s, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Reviews (HLRs) and requested review of the March 2023 and September 2023 decisions. In March 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior decisions. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 and September 2023 AOJ decisions, respectively, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for right ankle pain that he contends began in 1987 from training and running in the Navy, as well as his in-service knee injuries. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; July 2023 VA ankle examination. 

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. 

To establish service connection for a claimed disorder, the following must be shown: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

The evidence shows that the Veteran has a diagnosis of right ankle arthritis and calcaneal spurring. See medical records documenting right ankle imaging dated June 5, 2023, and July 20, 2023. Thus, the first element of service connection is met, that of a current diagnosis.?? 

As to the second element of service connection, that of an in-service injury, disease, or incurrence, the Veteran reports his ankle pain began in 1987, when after running for training, he would have a sharp pain in his ankles. See July 2023 ankle examination. Thus, the second element of service connection is met.

As to the third element of service connection, that of a nexus between the in-service incurrence and the current diagnosis, there are conflicting opinions. Most probative, however, is the following imaging study, in combination with the subsequent right foot service connection claim. In June 2023, the Veteran underwent foot and ankle imaging studies. The ankle imaging documented "minimal dorsal and plantar calcaneal spurring is present." See VA treatment records dated June 5, 2023. As detailed more fully below, the Veteran is service connected for right foot arthritis, to include the right foot "bone spurs, dorsal and plantar," and the hallux valgus (bunion). See November 2024 rating decision. Thus, the rating decision for the right foot contemplates the right dorsal and plantar bone spurs, also known as calcaneal bone spurs. It grants service connection for the right foot as secondary to aggravation. As it grants service connection for the same calcaneal bone spur, the Board finds it is sufficient to grant the ankle disability. Because the AOJ rated the right foot disability on painful motion of the metatarsal joint, not the ankle joint, however, a separate evaluation of the disability rating schedule is warranted.

In sum, the Board finds that there is at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to whether the Veteran's current right ankle arthritis and calcaneal spurring are proximately caused by his service-connected right foot disability and arthritis. Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for right ankle arthritis and calcaneal spurring, as secondary to the service-connected right foot disability and arthritis, is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right foot pain is dismissed. 

In the Veteran's June 2023 claim, he sought entitlement to service connection for right foot pain and right ankle pain. See VA Form 21-526EZ; see also March 2023 VA Form 10182.

Here, in its November 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for right foot hallux valgus with bunion deformity and arthritis, effective December 9, 2022. The effective date is the day VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim. Specifically, the AOJ granted the disability rating with an evaluation of 10 percent based on the right foot's painful motion, to include dorsal and plantar bone spurs and hallux valgus with bunion. See November 2024 rating decision. 

Thus, the AOJ granted service connection for the Veteran's claimed condition while the Veteran's appeal was awaiting review by the Board. As the relief sought has been granted in full, there is no longer any case or controversy as to the Veteran's claims of service connection for his right foot pain. Accordingly, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration. Therefore, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal. The Veteran's appeal of his claim for service connection for right foot pain are dismissed. See 38 U.S.C. § 7105.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left foot bone spurs, as secondary to the Veteran's knee disability.

4. Entitlement to service connection for left foot pain, as secondary to the Veteran's knee disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for left foot bone spurs and pain that he contends is due to his service-connected left knee disability. See VA Form 21-526EZ. 

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Where a service-connected disability aggravates a nonservice-connected condition, a Veteran may be compensated for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. Id.

The Veteran has bilateral feet bone spurs and pain, bilateral plantar fasciitis, and bilateral hallux valgus. He is also diagnosed with bilateral ankle joint pain. See VA treatment records dated April 26, 2023; June 2, 2023; July 2023 VA foot examination. The Veteran is service connected for right foot disabilities, arthritis in the lumbar spine region, and bilateral knee disabilities.

There is no indication in the Veteran's STRs of a left foot disability, however. Nor does the Veteran assert he complained of or was treated for left foot problems in service. Therefore, the issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's left foot disability and pain are proximately caused, or aggravated by, his service-connected left knee disability, as he contends. The Board concludes that the evidence of record does not support the contention that the Veteran's left foot disability was caused by, or aggravated by, his service-connected left knee disability.

In July 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA foot examination and received an associated opinion. The clinician found no causative connection between the Veteran's left foot disability and his service-connected knee disability. According to the examiner, "there is no medical pathophysiological relationship between the knee causing or leading to a foot injury or strain since they are both anatomically and different physiological systems." See July 2023 VA foot opinion. 

The Veteran reports both left and right knee, ankle, and foot pain in conjunction with each other. See VA treatment records dated June 2, 2023 (reporting bilateral knee pain that radiates down to his ankles); June 22, 2023 (pain to knees, ankles, and feet, rated an eight on a scale of 1 to ten). The Veteran is competent to report these symptoms. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (lay persons are competent to report observable symptoms). 

However, unless medically trained, lay persons are not necessarily competent to provide an opinion as to the cause of those symptoms. Here, there is no indication the Veteran is medically trained. While the Veteran believes the claimed left foot bone spurs and pain are related to his knee disability, the Veteran is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case. This issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and knowledge of the interaction between the anatomically and physiologically different systems as noted by the clinician. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1377 n.4. Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence. 

There is no positive medical opinion evidence. 

Finally, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) added new examination requirements where toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) are implicated. 38 U.S.C. § 1119. The PACT Act provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a TERA, then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity. 38 U.S.C. § 1168. 

Although VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a TERA and of a disability, VA has identified several exceptions to this general obligation where there is no indication of an association between the disability and the TERA. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). Specifically, a TERA opinion is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma; mental disorders; disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide exposure; and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure. See VBA Letter 20-22-10 at 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022). Here, a TERA opinion is not required as bone spurs result from physical trauma, such as trauma due to repetitive use.

The Board finds that the Veteran's claim cannot be granted as he has not met the requirement of causation or aggravation of the current diagnosis, for the claimed disorder of left foot bone spurs and pain. As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). Accordingly, the claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervical radiculopathy is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for neck pain is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for cervical radiculopathy and neck pain that he contends is due to his left knee arthritis. See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. On examination, he reported he originally hurt his neck and back in 1986 by picking up a gyroscope from an aircraft on the VP-49. See January 2023 VA neck examination. He did not seek medical care at the time but instead self-medicated with over-the-counter pain relievers. The Veteran sees a private pain specialist. See Dr. D. P.'s correspondence dated December 9, 2022.  No clinician has yet opined as to a direct nexus connection, which is warranted in this case, because the Veteran injured his neck in service. See DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 53 (2011) (the duty to assist includes investigation of service connection theories that are reasonably raised by the record). 

Additionally, there are outstanding private treatment records relevant to appeal that are not associated with the claims file. 

The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any outstanding private treatment providers that treated him for cervical radiculopathy and pain. 

2. Thereafter, attempt to obtain the authorized private treatment records and associate them with the record, in addition to any outstanding VA and private treatment records.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical radiculopathy and neck pain. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and the findings then reported in detail. A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

4. The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resorting to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

Leetra J. Harris

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Black, Julie A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.