Citation Nr: A25033941
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240925-476468
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent for service-connected migraine headaches is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches more nearly approximate prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over several months.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 30 percent for service-connected migraine headaches are met.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §§ 4.7,?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active military service from July 1999 to December 2008.???? 

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (hereinafter the "Appeals Modernization Act").  The Appeals Modernization Act became effective February 19, 2019.??? 

In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied his increase ratings claim for his service-connected migraine headaches.  He continuously pursued his claim and filed a request for a higher level review in November 2023.  In August 2024, the AOJ again denied his claim.  In September 2024, the Veteran appealed the decision and elected Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  Accordingly, the Board considers the matter per the Direct Review Docket, according to which the appellate review proceeds without additional time allocated for a Board hearing or forwarding further evidence.?

The Board notes the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305.  In Williams v. McDonough, the Court held the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In the present case, the rating decision on appeal was issued on August 19, 2024.  Thus, the one-year period following the decision has not yet elapsed.  However, as the Veteran requested a 30 percent rating for his service-connected headaches and as the decision below represents a grant of the benefits sought, the Board finds that there is no prejudice with the Board adjudicating the claim prior to the expiration of the one-year period, and delaying adjudication would needlessly delay the award of benefits to the Veteran with no potential benefit.  Thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claims.  

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  That being said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.  Hart v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007); see also Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  This practice is known as staged ratings.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent for service-connected migraine headaches is granted.

The Veteran's headaches are rated under Diagnostic Code 8100.  Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging less than one in two months over the last several months.  38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for headaches with prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 8100. 

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness. 

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contains several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30?Vet. App.?245, 253 (2018).  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraine attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46 (2004). 

As an initial matter, the Veteran filed a claim for increased rating in June 2023. 

Turning to the medical evidence, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2023 and April 2024. 

In a September 2023 VA examination, the Veteran stated that he has headaches about three times per week and that each episode lasts for several hours.  He described his headache pain as pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of his head.  He endorsed having sensitivity to light and sound.  The examiner determined that he does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine and/or non-migraine headache pain.  Additionally, the examiner determined that the Veteran does not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines and/or non-migraine pain.  The examiner noted that he does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to his migraine headaches.  He claimed that he has occasional workplace absence due to headaches. 

In an April 2024 VA examination, he stated that his head pain lasts for less than one day.  He described his headache pain as pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of his head.  He endorsed having sensitivity to light and sound.  The examiner determined that he does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine and/or non-migraine headache pain.  Additionally, the examiner determined that the Veteran does not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines and/or non-migraine pain.  The examiner noted that he does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to his migraine headaches. 

Despite the findings from the September 2023 and April 2024 VA examinations, the treatment records show that in March 2022, his migraine headaches were noted to be manageable.  See August 2024 CAPRI.  Then, in a June 2023 VA treatment record he reported that he has migraine headaches almost every day with photophobia.  He was prescribed propanolol for prophylaxis, and rizatriptan for status migrainosus which indicates that his migraine headaches are worse than noted in the VA examinations.  

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraine headaches are consistent with no more than a 30 percent disabling rating.  In the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraine headaches likely waxed and waned in severity.  At times, he had migraine headaches almost every day as noted in the June 2023 VA treatment record.  Then, at other times, he likely had headaches about three times per week as he stated to the September 2023 VA examiner.  As to whether these episodes of migraine headaches are characteristic prostrating attacks on an average of once a month over the last several months, the Board notes that the Veteran claimed that he had occasional workplace absences due to headaches.  Considering the record in a way that is most beneficial to the Veteran, the Board finds that his migraine headaches more nearly approximate a 30 percent rating for the entire appeal period. 

He is not entitled to a 50 percent rating as the records do not show that he had headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  He did not submit a statement, a third party statement, or further medical evidence in support of a higher rating.  In fact, he did not claim, and the records do not show that these claimed frequent headaches were prostrating such that the Veteran was entirely exhausted or powerlessness.  Rather, the Veteran conceded that his migraine headaches are consistent with a 30 percent rating.  See September 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  As the treatment records, to include his statements to his providers, do not show that his migraine headaches rendered him powerless, the Board finds that a 30 percent rating is consistent with his disability. 

Thus, the Board concludes that the Veteran's migraine headaches more nearly approximate a 30 percent rating as the records do not support that the Veteran has a very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. Noh

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.