Citation Nr: A25033976
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 230513-346400
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right knee instability is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's right knee condition has manifested in peristent instability requiring the use of a brace for ambulation.  The Veteran's right knee instability has not manifested in patellar instability or recurrent subluxation or instability requiring the use of an assistive device and a brace. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial 20 percent rating for right knee instability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5257.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from August 1997 to August 2001.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in October 2022 and May 2023.  In the May 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that following the issuance of the October 2022 rating decision which granted service connection for right knee instability and assigned a 10 percent rating, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking an increased rating for said condition.  See December 2022 VA Form 20-0995.  In an April 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted a 20 percent rating for right knee instability and assigned an effective date of November 23, 2022.  See April 2023 Rating Decision.  Although the Veteran elected the direct docket and cited to the October 2022 rating decision on his Notice of Disagreement, the Board finds that he has continuously pursued his appeal for an increased initial rating since the original grant of service connection.  As such, with regard to the claim for right knee instability, the Board will consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision.  

With regard to the remaining claims pertaining to service connection, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition, right shoulder condition, left knee condition, left foot condition, and arthritis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent for right knee instability, prior to November 23, 2022, is granted

The Veteran seeks an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for his right knee instability.  See May 2023 VA Form 10182. 

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran's May 2023 VA Form 10182 listed service connection as the area of disagreement for his right knee instability.  Id.  Specifically, after identifying "right knee instability - 10%," the Veteran listed his area of disagreement as: "service connection, The SC is being confused w/FDA anthrax, was given banned test chemical."  Id.  The Board observes that the Veteran is already service connected for his right knee instability and was assigned an initial rating of 10 percent.  Looking to the Veteran's supplemental application, the Veteran claimed a rating in excess of 10 percent for his right knee instability.  See December 2022 VA Form 20-0995.  The Board believes that the Veteran merely made a copy and paste error when filling in his VA Form 10182 (the same area of disagreement is listed for each of his other conditions), and that he in fact intended to appeal his initially assigned rating.  Accordingly, the Board has liberally construed the Veteran's appeal and will consider whether he is entitled to a higher rating at any time during the period on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).

Initial Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where a claimant timely appeals the rating initially assigned for the service-connected disability, VA must consider whether the claimant is entitled to "staged" ratings to compensate them for times since filing the claim when their disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the appeal.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  In view of the number of atypical instances, it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts shown in every case. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

The Veteran's right knee instability is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5257.  As it pertains to recurrent subluxation or instability of the knee, DC 5257 provides a 10 percent rating for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for either (a) sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device, or (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device or bracing for ambulation.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device and bracing for ambulation.

Procedural Matters

In October 2022, the Veteran was granted service connection for right knee instability and assigned a 10 percent rating effective June 14, 2022.  See October 2022 Rating Decision.  

In December 2022, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim requesting a 20 percent rating for his right knee instability.  See December 2022 VA Form 20-0995.  

In an April 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted a 20 percent rating for his right knee instability effective November 23, 2022.  See April 2023 Rating Decision. 

In May 2023, the Veteran appealed the initially assigned 10 percent rating for right knee instability.  See May 2023 VA Form 10182. 

The Veteran has continuously pursued an increased initial rating since he was awarded service connection.  As this is an appeal as to the initial rating assigned, the relevant temporal focus is from June 14, 2022, the effective date of the award of service connection.

The Board notes that the Veteran is currently in receipt of a "staged" initial rating.  Simply put, since the date of award of service connection, the Veteran has been compensated at different rates for the same disability.  Prior to November 23, 2022, the Veteran was in receipt of a 10 percent rating for right knee instability.  From November 23, 2023, the Veteran has been in receipt of a 20 percent rating.  

As such, and in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a), the Board has liberally construed the Veteran's appeal to consider whether he is entitled to an increased rating at any time during the period on appeal.  In practical terms, this means that the Board analyzed whether a rating in excess of 10 percent was warranted from June 14, 2022, through November 22, 2022, and whether a rating in excess of 20 percent was warranted from November 23, 2022. 

Analysis

In order for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent to be warranted for the Veteran's right knee instability, the evidence must more nearly approximate, at a minimum, the criteria for a 20 percent rating.  As noted above, a 20 percent rating is warranted for either (a) sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device, or (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device or bracing for ambulation.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device and bracing for ambulation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran was afforded two VA examinations for his right knee. 

In June 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his right knee conditions.  See June 2022 Knee and Lower Leg Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner recorded diagnoses of a right knee meniscal tear, knee anterior cruciate ligament tear, tendinitis, and chondromalacia patella.  Id.  The Veteran reported experiencing dull pain, hot joint pain, grinding, tightness, sharp pains, and instability.  Id.  With regard to joint stability, the examiner indicated that there was not recurrent subluxation or instability but that there had been a complete ligament tear which was repaired successfully.  Id.  No recurrent patellar instability was noted.  Id.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran requires the constant use of a brace for ambulation.  Id.  

In September 2022, a clarification opinion was requested from the VA examiner.  See September 2022 QTC Addendum.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran experiences recurrent subluxation or instability but does not experience recurrent patellar instability.  Id.  

In April 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination for his right knee.  See March 2023 Knee and Lower Leg DBQ.  The examiner indicated a diagnosis of knee instability and recorded the Veteran reported symptoms of dull pain, hot joint pain, grinding, tightness, sharp pains, and instability.  Id.  The examiner noted no patellar instability but indicated that the Veteran experiences recurrent subluxation or persistent instability.  Id.  The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced a complete ligament tear which was repaired successfully.  Lastly, the Veteran indicated that the Veteran required the regular use of a knee brace for ambulation.  Id.  

The Board finds the foregoing evidence highly probative in determining the severity of the Veteran's right knee instability during the period on appeal.  Both VA examiners concurred that the Veteran had a repaired complete ligament tear which causes recurrent subluxation and necessitates the regular use of a brace for ambulation.  Further, the VA examiners agreed that the Veteran did not require an additional assistive device for ambulation, nor did he experience patellar instability.  

The symptomatology documented by the June 2022 and April 2023 VA examiners most closely resembles the 20 percent rating criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.  Notably, the Veteran's repaired complete ligament tear causes persistent instability that requires the use of a brace for ambulation.  Accordingly, the Board finds that throughout the entirety of the period on appeal, a 20 percent rating is warranted for right knee instability.  

The Board has also considered whether a rating in excess of 20 percent has been warranted at any point during the period on appeal.  Upon review, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against such a finding.  First, the Board notes that there is no indication that the Veteran experiences patellar instability.  To the contrary, both VA examiners during the period on appeal indicated that the Veteran's condition did not involve patellar instability.  With regard to subluxation and instability, for a rating of 30 percent to be warranted, the evidence would need to show an unrepaired, or the failed repair, of a complete ligament tear as well a prescription for both an assistive device (i.e. cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and a brace for ambulation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257. Here, the Veteran's complete ligament tear was repaired successfully, and his condition requires only the use of a brace for ambulation.  Accordingly, a rating of 30 percent is not warranted for right knee instability.  

In denying a rating in excess of 20 percent, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against such a rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for arthritis is remanded.  

The Board regrets the delay associated with this remand, however, upon review of the evidence, the Board finds that remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his arthritis.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). 

In April 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained pertaining to the Veteran's claim for arthritis.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's condition was incurred in, or otherwise the result of, his active-duty service.  Id.  In support of this decision, the examiner stated:

Rationale is there is no medical evidence that would link his painful joints of his hands, fingers and wrist. Anthrax would affect more than just the 2 joints if it was a confirmed diagnosis. His other joints have confirmed diagnosis that explain his joint pain. There has been no confirmed nexus statements for his claim of anthrax vaccine complications.

Id.  

The Board observes several problems with this medical opinion.  First, the examiner addressed only the joints of the hands, fingers, and wrist.  Notably, the Veteran claimed service connection for arthritis causing painful joints, hands, wrist, and fingers.  See December 2022 VA Form 20-0995.  In a lay statement submitted in conjunction with his supplemental application, the Veteran claimed, "chronic joint arthritis, tendon and ligament structural weakness, and inflammation, whole body to include hands, wrists, and fingers."  See December 2022 Lay Statement.  Clearly, the Veteran intended to claim all painful joints, not just those of his hands, wrist, and fingers.  The Board also notes that the AOJ previously conceded that the Veteran has a diagnosis of right shoulder arthritis.  See September 2022 Rating Decision.  

Secondly, the examiner did not adequately address the lay statements of the Veteran, or the medical articles submitted in support of his claim.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).  In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a detailed lay statement in which he laid out his contentions and cited to articles about the relationship between the anthrax vaccine and arthritis.  See December 2022 Lay Statement.  Inexplicably, rather than addressing whether the Veteran's condition could have been caused by the anthrax vaccine, the examiner stated that "anthrax would affect more than just the two joints," and that "nexus statements have not confirmed regarding anthrax vaccine complications."  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  Ultimately, the Board finds that the April 2023 medical opinion was not supported by a thorough and well-reasoned rationale and, as such, it is conclusory and inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of his arthritis.  

2. The Entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition is remanded. 

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion pertaining to his claim of entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra. 

In June 2022, the Veteran asserted that his right knee condition caused imbalance and instability which, in turn, affected his gait and resulted in a left foot Lisfranc injury.  See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran also referenced his previously submitted police disability examination which provides insight into his Lisfranc sprain.  Id.  

In April 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained addressing whether the Veteran's left foot condition was secondary to his service-connected right knee condition.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's left foot condition was less likely than not the result of his service-connected condition.  Id.  In support of this opinion, the examiner stated only that "there is no evidence in the veteran's service records that would link his right knee condition to his left foot.  The veteran had a Lisfranc fusion which is cause by trauma to the left foot.  [T]here is no nexus statement that would support the veterans claim."

The Board finds that this medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes as it does not address the lay statements of the Veteran, nor is it supported by a thorough and well-reasoned rationale.  See Miller v. Wilkie, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra.  Significantly, the VA examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected right knee condition altered his gait, thereby causing injury to the left foot.  Moreover, the examiner stated that there is no evidence from the Veteran's service records that would link his right knee condition to his left foot condition.  The Board observes that the Veteran's service records are an unlikely source of evidence given that the Veteran has asserted that his left foot condition did not occur until after service and is secondary to his right knee condition.  The examiner did not address any other evidence of record in his rationale.

Given the above, the Board finds that remand is necessary to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion for his claimed left foot condition.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded. 

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion pertaining to his claim of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra. 

The Veteran has asserted that his left knee condition was caused by the anthrax vaccine he was given while on active-duty service.  See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ; December 2022 Lay Statement.  

In April 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained addressing the Veteran's claimed left knee condition.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition was not incurred in, or otherwise the result of, his active-duty service.  Id.  In support of this opinion, the examiner stated only that, "the veteran has confirmed diagnosis for his left knee that would explain his left knee condition. It was reported on a c/p exam on 6/24/2022. There is no nexus statement that would link his anthrax vaccine to his left knee condition."  Id.  

This medical opinion is problematic for several reasons.  First, the examiner stated that the Veteran has a left knee diagnosis which would explain his left knee condition.  While the Board is hesitant to draw assumptions, it appears that the examiner may have intended to opine that the Veteran's left knee condition is secondary to his right knee condition.  The Board finds that clarification of this opinion is necessary prior to adjudication and that the Veteran is entitled to a VA medical opinion addressing secondary service connection.  

The Board also finds that the April 2023 medical opinion is conclusory and, therefore, inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, supra; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra.  The examiner did not provide any meaningful rationale, nor did he address the lay statements of the Veteran.  See Miller v. Wilkie, supra.  

For the foregoing reasons, remand is required to afford the Veteran a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of his left knee condition. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded. 

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion pertaining to his claim of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra. 

The Veteran has asserted that his left shoulder condition was caused by the anthrax vaccine he was given while on active-duty service.  See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ; December 2022 Lay Statement.

In April 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained addressing the Veteran's claimed left shoulder condition.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition was not incurred in, or otherwise the result of, his active-duty service.  Id.  In support of this decision, the examiner stated, "the veterans left shoulder tear that was confirmed on 12/2018 with osteoarthritis this would explain his right shoulder pain. There is no nexus statement that would connect his anthrax vaccine to his right shoulder condition."  Id.  

Here, the examiner offers a rationale for the left shoulder which primarily references the Veteran's right shoulder.  Even if this was merely a typo, it is indicative of the lack of effort and inattention to detail displayed in this medical opinion.  Moreover, the opinion does not address the contentions of the Veteran, and the rationale is conclusory.  See Miller v. Wilkie, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra.  

As such, the Board finds that remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his left shoulder condition.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded. 

Lastly, the Board finds that remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed right shoulder condition.  

The Veteran has asserted that his right shoulder condition was caused by the anthrax vaccine he was given while on active-duty service.  See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ; December 2022 Lay Statement.

In April 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained addressing the Veteran's claimed right shoulder condition.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition was not incurred in, or otherwise the result of, his active-duty service.  Id.  In support of this opinion, the examiner stated, "there is no evidence that would link his anthrax vaccine with his right shoulder pain.  His service records a motorcycle accident in 2018 that is the cause of his right shoulder pain."  Id.  

The examiner did not provide any additional analysis, nor did he discuss the Veteran's lay statements, to include his assertion that symptoms began in 1998, well prior to his motorcycle accident.  See March 2023 Shoulder Conditions DBQ.  As such, the Board finds that the April 2023 medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Miller v. Wilkie, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra.  

Accordingly, remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology his claimed right shoulder condition.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain VA medical opinions from an appropriate clinician regarding the Veteran's arthritis, left foot condition, left knee condition, left shoulder condition, and right shoulder condition.  The entire claims file must be provided to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  If the physician determines it necessary, examinations should be scheduled and any indicated tests, studies, or evaluations should be performed.  

For each condition, the examiner is asked to:

(a.) If an examination is conducted, obtain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including onset and progression of symptomatology.

(b.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's claimed conditions had their onset during, or are otherwise related to, his active-duty service. 

(c.) Opine whether the Veteran's receipt of the anthrax vaccination could have caused any of his claimed conditions.  The examiner should address the lay statements of the Veteran as well as any medical articles submitted in support of his claims.  See December 2022 Lay Statement.

For the claims pertaining to the Veteran's left knee condition and his left foot condition only:

(d.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the disability 'is caused by,' 'is due to,' or 'results from,' his service-connected disabilities.  

(e.) For each diagnosed condition, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the disability underwent an incremental increase (was aggravated), regardless of permanence, due to his service-connected disabilities. 

In answering the questions above, the examiner should consider and specifically address:

i.	The April 2023 VA medical opinion pertaining to the left knee in which it appears that the examiner may have intended to opine regarding secondary causation.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ 

ii.	The lay statements of the Veteran, to include his assertion that his right knee condition altered his gait, thereby causing his left foot injury.  See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.

iii.	The Veteran's police disability documents detailing his left foot Lisfranc Sprain.  See June 2022 Court Documents.

"	The term at least as likely as not does not mean within the realm of medical possibility.  Rather, it means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as it is to find against the conclusion.

"	The term incremental increase in disability means additional impairment of earning capacity.  Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability.  Moreover, any incremental increase in disability need not be permanent.

"	Any opinion expressed by the physician should be accompanied by a complete rationale.  If medical literature is relied upon in rendering a determination, the physician should identify and specifically cite each reference material utilized.  If the physician is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided.

"	The physician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be taken into account in formulating the requested opinions.

"	The physician is also advised that noting that a condition did not manifest in service as the sole basis for forming a negative nexus opinion, without additional explanation, will not be adequate.

"	The examiner should not rely solely on silence in the medical records without explaining: (a) why the silence can be taken as proof that the symptom(s) did not occur, including why it would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

2. The AOJ must review the claims file and ensure that the foregoing development actions have been completed in full.  If any development action is incomplete, the appropriate corrective action must be implemented.  If any report or opinion does not include adequate responses to the specific opinions requested, it must be returned to the providing examiner for corrective action.

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zachary J. Ellis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.