Citation Nr: A25033240
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-468079
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy is denied.

Service connection for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the current diagnoses of left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy had their onset in service; degenerative arthritis of the left shoulder manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year; and left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy are otherwise shown to be caused by or related to any injury, event, or disease in service.

2. The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the current diagnosis of arthritis of the cervical spine neck had its onset in service, was manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year; and or is otherwise shown to be related to any injury, event, or disease in service.

3. The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's PTSD is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for arthritis of the cervical spine are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected PTSD are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army with active duty from February 1968 to January 1970.

This appeal is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 9, 2024 higher-level review (HLR) rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that rating decision, the RO confirmed and continued the prior denial of service connection for left shoulder condition and neck condition (in the underlying February 7, 2024 rating decision) and a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected PTSD (in the underlying February 22, 2024 rating decision).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A September 2024 notification letter advised the Veteran and his attorney that a hearing was scheduled for December 12, 2024.  The Veteran did not appear for the scheduled Board hearing, and neither the Veteran nor his representative provided good cause for his failure to attend the scheduled hearing.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decisions dated February 7, 2024 (which denied service connection for a left shoulder condition and neck condition) and February 22, 2024 (which continued the 50 percent disability rating for PTSD), which were subsequently subject to higher-level review in the August 2024 higher-level review rating decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his attorney within 90 days following the date of the scheduled hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(c).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date of the scheduled Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the date of the scheduled hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(c), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Except as otherwise provided, each appeal will be decided in the order in which it is entered on the docket to which it is assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 20.800(b).  However, a case may be advanced on the docket on motion if, for example, a veteran is seriously ill, homeless, or of advanced age (at least 75 years old).  38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c)(1).  This appeal has been advanced on the docket due to advanced age.  In Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows appellants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new VA Form 10182 within 60 days from when the Board receives the original VA Form 10182, or one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, whichever is later, unless (1) an appellant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§?20.302 and 20.303, or (2) the appellant or representative has requested a waiver of the ability to request to switch dockets during this timeframe.  In this case, one year from the date the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal has not elapsed.  Nonetheless, it is undisputed that the Veteran wishes to receive a decision in this matter as soon as possible in light of his attorney's request for advancement on the docket due to advanced age that was submitted with the September 2024 VA Form 10182, and the Veteran has not suggested otherwise.  His VA Form 10182 is not ambiguous as to what docket he selected.  Additionally, the record to date does not reflect any intention to switch dockets.  In weighing the benefits and risks of further delaying the case to afford the Veteran notice of the opportunity to switch dockets, the Board concludes that in light of the Veteran's advanced age, it is not in the Veteran's best interest to further delay this matter.  As the benefit of providing notice of the opportunity to switch dockets is outweighed by the risk of further delaying adjudication of this case, the Board will construe the Advancement on the Docket as a waiver of the time remaining to switch dockets.  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §?3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1)?a current disability; (2)?in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Certain chronic diseases, which includes arthritis, will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38?U.S.C. §§?1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.303, 3.307, 3.309; see also Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

1. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability.

The Veteran filed a service connection claim for a left shoulder disability in October 2023.  He did not provide any explanation for why he thought his left shoulder is caused by or related to his service.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not caused by or related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has current diagnoses of arthritis of the left shoulder and tendinopathy, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnoses of arthritis of the left shoulder and tendinopathy began during service; arthritis of the left shoulder manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year; or, arthritis of the left shoulder and tendinopathy are otherwise caused by or related to any in-service injury, event, or disease.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

A February 2023 VA treatment record documents that the Veteran has arthritis and tendinopathy of the left shoulder based on an MRI.  Thus, the evidence shows that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a left shoulder disability.

Nonetheless, the Veteran's service treatment records do not show complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis of a left shoulder injury, or symptoms associated with the left shoulder to include left shoulder pain during active service.  In the December 1969 Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied having now or ever having arthritis, lameness, bone, joint or other deformity, or painful or trick shoulder or elbow.  The clinician did not document that the Veteran reported any left shoulder pain or other left shoulder symptoms.  The Veteran's December 1969 separation examination reveals that his upper extremities were evaluated as clinically normal.  The summary of defects and diagnoses did not include any reference to his left shoulder.

The evidence shows that the Veteran first indicated he had left shoulder symptoms was when he filed a service connection claim for bilateral shoulder disability in March 2017, approximately 47 years after discharge from active service.  A June 2020 VA treatment record is the first medical evidence that indicates the Veteran sought treatment for left shoulder pain.  Although that appears it might have been a typographical error as the clinician then discussed the Veteran's right arm injury when he was a teenager.  A June 2022 VA treatment record documents that the Veteran reported pain shooting down from his mid back to left shoulder and down to his left ring finger.  The Veteran stated that the pain was new and began over the last few months.  He denied having a recent injury.  He was first diagnosed with arthritis of the left shoulder in February 2023, approximately 53 years after discharge from active service.  Such lapse in time between separation from service and the earliest documentation of symptoms of a left shoulder disability and a diagnosis of a current disability is a factor that weighs against the Veteran's service connection claim.  See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  The Board also finds it persuasive that the Veteran has not provided any lay statements that the onset of his left shoulder symptoms and/or current disability began during service with continuous or recurrent symptoms since service.  

Regarding the issue of whether service connection is warranted based on the presumption of service connection for left shoulder arthritis, the weight of the above evidence is against finding that manifestations of arthritis of the left shoulder began in service or to a compensable degree within the one-year presumptive period.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1101(3), 1112(a)(1), 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a).  

With respect to whether the Veteran's left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy is caused by active service, the Veteran was not provided with a VA examination or medical opinion.  In this case, there is no medical or lay evidence of symptoms or a medical diagnosis of a left shoulder disability during active service and there is no adequate evidence indicating that there may be any relationship between his current left shoulder disabilities and his active service.  Thus, the low threshold under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) was not met and VA's duty to provide a VA examination had not been triggered at the time of the February 7, 2024 rating decision that was subject to higher-level review in the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 3.326; McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Although the Veteran believes his current left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy are related to service, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case.  The etiology of arthritis and tendinopathy are medically complex, as they require knowledge of interpreting diagnostic medical testing.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The diagnoses and etiology of left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy cannot be competently addressed by the Veteran as a lay person based on personal observation, such as, visual observation or by any other senses.  The current diagnoses were based on interpretation of symptoms, and clinical and diagnostic tests, to include x-rays and an MRI, which require medical knowledge.  

Based on the foregoing, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current diagnoses of left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy had their onset in, or are otherwise related to, active service and arthritis of the left shoulder may not be presumed to have had its onset during service.  Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for left shoulder arthritis and tendinopathy is not warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the cervical spine.

The Veteran filed a service connection claim for a neck disability in October 2023.  An October 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ shows that the Veteran stated that his neck disability began while he was in the US Army between 1968 and 1970.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service, is at least as likely as not caused by or related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of arthritis of the cervical spine, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnosis of arthritis of the cervical spine began during service; manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year; or is otherwise caused by or related to any in-service injury, event, or disease.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

The August 2024 rating decision provides a favorable finding that a February 2023 VA treatment record shows a diagnosis of cervical spine arthritis.  In the absence of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, the evidence shows that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a neck disability.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not show complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis of a neck injury, or symptoms associated with the neck or cervical spine to include neck pain during active service.  In the December 1969 Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied arthritis, lameness, bone, joint or other deformity, or back trouble of any kind.  The clinician did not document that the Veteran reported any neck pain other symptoms of a neck disability.  The Veteran's December 1969 separation examination reveals that his spine, other, musculoskeletal was evaluated as clinically normal.  The summary of defects and diagnoses did not include any reference to his neck or cervical spine.

The evidence shows that the Veteran was first diagnosed with a cervical spine disability in December 2020, approximately 50 years after discharge from active service.  In the December 2020 VA treatment record it was documented that the Veteran reported right arm pain and numbness.  The physician obtained an x-ray of his right arm and cervical spine.  X-rays showed spondylosis of the cervical spine.  A February 2023 VA treatment record also provides a diagnosis of arthritis of the neck based on an MRI.  Such lapse in time between separation from service and the earliest documentation of a current disability is a factor that weighs against the service connection claim.  See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  

The Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of a neck disability in service, however, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis, determine that any symptoms he may have experienced in service were manifestations of a spondylosis or arthritis of the cervical spine, or provide a nexus opinion regarding whether his current arthritis of the cervical spine is related to active service.  The etiology of arthritis is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of interpreting diagnostic medical testing.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The diagnoses and etiology of spondylosis or arthritis of the cervical spine cannot be competently addressed by the Veteran as a lay person based on personal observation, such as, visual observation or by any other senses.  The current diagnoses were based on interpretation of symptoms, and clinical and diagnostic tests, to include x-rays and an MRI, which require medical knowledge.  

Regarding the issue of whether service connection is warranted based on the presumption of service connection for arthritis of the neck, the weight of the above evidence is against finding that manifestations of arthritis of the cervical spine began in service or to a compensable degree within the one-year presumptive period.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1101(3), 1112(a)(1), 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a).  

With respect to whether the Veteran's current arthritis of the cervical spine is caused by active service, the Veteran was not provided a VA examination or medical opinion.  In this case, there is no competent medical or lay evidence indicating that there may be any relationship between his current cervical spine disability and his active service.  Thus, the low threshold under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) was not met and VA's duty to provide a VA examination had not been triggered at the time of the February 7, 2024 rating decision that was subject to higher-level review in the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 3.326; McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Based on the foregoing, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current diagnosis of arthritis of the cervical spine had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, active service and it may not be presumed to have had its onset during service.  Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for cervical spine arthritis is not warranted.

Increased Rating

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected PTSD.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating higher than 50 percent for his service-connected PTSD.  In this regard, he asserts that his VA treatment records reflect symptoms of persistent hallucinations about the motivations of his mental health provider, social isolation, inability to establish and maintain relationships, inability to trust others and participate in social situations, gross impairment in thought process, and avoidance behaviors that affect his ability to function independently.  See May 2024 letter from the Veteran's attorney.

When evaluating a mental disorder, VA shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  38?C.F.R. § 4.126.

The Veteran's service-connected PTSD is currently rated as 50 percent disabling under 38?C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411 for PTSD.  PTSD is rated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Id.  Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 10 percent disability rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating is prescribed for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptomatology contemplated for each rating.  The use of such terminology permits consideration of items listed as well as other symptoms and contemplates the effect of those symptoms on the Veteran's social and work situation.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16?Vet. App.?436 (2002).  In determining whether the Veteran meets the criteria for a 70 percent rating, the Board must consider whether the Veteran has deficiencies in most of the following areas: work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  Bowling v. Principi, 15?Vet. App.?1, 11 (2001).  Entitlement to a 70 percent disability rating requires sufficient symptoms of the kind listed in the 70 percent requirements, or others of similar severity, frequency or duration, that cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as those enumerated in the regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Further, VA must engage in a "holistic analysis" of the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's mental disorder, determine the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms, and assign an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?10, 22 (2017).

The medical evidence of record consists of VA treatment records and a November 2023 VA examination.  The evidence, the most pertinent of which is summarized below, does not support that the Veteran's PTSD is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood or total occupational and social impairment warranting a rating in excess of 50 percent at any point during the appeal period.

The overall evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms do not meet, or more nearly approximate, the criteria for a 70 percent or 100 percent disability rating at any time during the appeal period.  The evidence does not show that the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD include characteristics such as suicidal or homicidal ideation; persistent danger of hurting self or others, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; gross impairment in thought processes or communication; grossly in appropriate behavior; persistent delusions or hallucinations; spatial disorientation; disorientation to time and place; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, own name.  In addition, the Veteran's PTSD symptoms do not include characteristics or symptoms of a similar nature or frequency to those listed above. 

Throughout the appeal period the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, isolation tendencies, feelings of hopelessness, hypersomnolence, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  See November 2023 VA examination.  He also sometimes spends his day in bed, has low self-esteem, decreased motivation, and poor insight.  See VA treatment records dated in October 2023, November 2023, and December 2024.  He also perseverates on how the military treated him.  See January 2024 VA treatment record.  

The medical evidence shows that the Veteran was consistently oriented to person, place and time throughout the appeal period.  See VA treatment records dated in October 2023, November 2023, December 2023, and January 2024 and October 2023 VA examination.  Thought process was linear, goal-directed, normal, and coherent.  Id.  Insight was described as fair in October 2023 and January 2024 and poor in November and December 2023.  The Veteran's judgement was fair.  Id.  His speech was within normal limits. The Veteran was consistently described as appropriately dressed and groomed in appearance in the medical records.  The October 2023 VA examiner observed that the Veteran's registration (ability to recall or repeat back information after hearing it) was intact.  Short term recall was three out of three after five minutes.  Concentration was fair by spelling "world" backwards.  Abstraction reasoning was intact.  VA treatment records show that his memory was good during his mental health sessions, although it was not formally tested.  

Although the evidence shows that the Veteran's PTSD results in depressed mood, anxiety, and suspiciousness, it does not affect the Veteran's ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively.  His symptoms do not interfere with him engaging in activities of daily living to include taking care of his home and himself. 

The evidence consistently reflects that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms do not result in suicidal or homicidal ideation and persistent danger of hurting self or others.  Throughout the appeal period the Veteran has denied experiencing suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation.  Furthermore, while the November 2023 and December 2023 VA treatment records document that his affect was angry, there is no indication that he had impaired impulse control with periods of violence.  Acute and chronic risk for lethality to include risk of homicide and violence were evaluated as low  

Thought content was normal in January 2024.  However, a December 2023 VA treatment record documented that the Veteran perseverated on the military's treatment of him.  Specifically, he stated that he did not want to have to testify or prove to the military that the military took him in with disability and he has never been the same.  The Veteran stated that his previous military service despite his disability has caused him pain and he believed he had no control.  He also thought that his VA psychologist was an instrument of the military to get him to calm down and to forget what happened.  This is evidence of the Veteran's suspiciousness, which is included in the criteria for a 30 percent disability rating.  

The medical evidence reveals that the Veteran's symptoms result in some occupational impairment.  In this regard, the Veteran retired in 2011 after working 40 years as a driver for the Unites States Postal Service.  See September 2022 VA treatment record.  His PTSD symptoms manifest in depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, isolative tendencies, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships resulting in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  See November 2023 VA examination.  Accordingly, the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD did not result in occupational impairment in most areas or total occupational impairment.

Regarding social impairment, the evidence indicates the Veteran's PTSD results in mild to moderate social impairment.  The Veteran has been married and divorced four times.  He is currently single.  See October 2023 VA treatment record.  He has one adult daughter and he has grandchildren.  The Veteran stated that has a positive relationship with his daughter.  See October 2021 VA examination.  He has a few friends.  See October 2023 VA treatment record.  VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran engaged in yoga.  A June 2023 VA treatment records documents that the Veteran was able to engage in activities of daily living to include maintaining his house alone, preparing his own meals, cleaning his own laundry, traveling independently, managing financial matters, and he was responsible for his own medication.  An October 2022 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran played golf every Sunday with some Vietnam Veterans, swam in his pool in his backyard, and he would occasionally socialize with some female friends.

Finally, the Board has considered whether the evidence of record raises the issue of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU).   See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) (holding that a claim for a total rating based on unemployability due to service- connected disability; either expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability and is part of the claim for an increased rating).  In this case, a TDIU claim is neither explicitly nor implicitly raised by the record.  The Veteran is retired after working 40 years with the United States Postal Service, and he has not contended that he retired from the United States Postal Service because he was unable to continue working due to his service-connected disabilities, and the record does not suggest otherwise.  Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU has not been raised as part of the Veteran's increased rating claim for PTSD.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In conclusion, the Veteran's overall disability picture, including the frequency and severity of symptoms reported in VA treatment records and VA examination shows that the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD do not more nearly approximate the criteria for a higher 70 percent or 100 percent disability rating at any time during the appeal period.  Thus, entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected PTSD is not warranted.

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Berry, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.