Citation Nr: A25033530
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240515-517766
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance and/or housebound status is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran had a chronic disability manifested by ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1111, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2019 to January 2020.  He passed away in May 2024, and his mother has been recognized as the substitute claimant.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 and March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With regard to the claim for service connection for ringing of the ears, if the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

With regard to the claims that are being remanded, however, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The requirement of a current disability is "satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim." See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When a Veteran seeks benefits and the evidence is in relative equipoise, the Veteran prevails. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran was exposed to loud noises while in service. The Board is bound by this favorable finding.

Regardless, the first question the Board must address is whether the Veteran had a current disability manifested by ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus during or proximate to when he filed his claim for service connection. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints related to ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus. Additionally, post-service records are silent as to any treatment for, complaints of, or diagnosis of ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus.

In November 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination; however, he denied recurrent tinnitus.  The examiner explained that, when the Veteran was asked about ringing in the ears, he stated that it did not occur often, that it occurred at night, and that it occurred only for a few seconds.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's reports were not consistent with chronic recurrent tinnitus, but rather transient ear noise that occurred in the general population.  There was also no functional impact associated with the claimed disability. 

Therefore, the Board finds that, even though the Veteran reported ringing in the ears on the initial claim form, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding he has, or during the pendency of the claim has had, a chronic disability manifested by ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus. As there is no current disability, service connection for tinnitus must be denied.  Based on the foregoing, the claim for service connection for ringing of the ears and/or tinnitus is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Prior to his passing, the Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability as secondary to his service-connected lumbosacral strain with kyphoscoliosis.

In connection with his claim, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2023, and the examiner indicated that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with a respiratory condition.  Thereafter, the examiner indicated that the Veteran experienced a pulmonary condition, pertinent physical findings, or scars due to a pulmonary condition; however, the examiner did not complete the section of the examination report where the examiner was to address this finding.  The examiner also indicated that pulmonary function testing was less than normal.  In an accompanying opinion, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's respiratory disorder could be related to kyphosis and nicotine dependence.

In January 2024, the AOJ obtained an addendum opinion to address whether the Veteran experienced a current respiratory disability given that the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis, but his respiratory problems were secondary to his kyphosis.  Unfortunately, the opinion was once again unclear as the examiner stated that the Veteran's respiratory problems were most likely as combination of smoking-related lung diseases with restrictive lung disease, but that the abnormal pulmonary function test may also be associated with poor effort during the test.

The Court has held that a medical examination report must not contain only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions.").

Because the December 2023 and January 2024 opinions are unclear as to whether the Veteran experienced a current disability associated with his claimed respiratory disorder, an addendum opinion is necessary. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The claim for SMC based on the need for aid and attendance and/or housebound status is inextricably intertwined with the claim for service connection for a respiratory disability, and must therefore be remanded as well. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision on one issue cannot be rendered until the other issue has been considered).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion addressing whether any respiratory disability was secondary to the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain with kyphoscoliosis.  Following a review of the entire record, the examiner should address the following:

a) Please identify any respiratory disability present since August 2023 when the Veteran filed his claim. Please note that, while the December 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with a respiratory condition; the examiner also indicated that he experienced a pulmonary condition, pertinent physical findings, or scars due to a pulmonary condition.  Moreover, the examiner also indicated that pulmonary function testing was less than normal, and that his respiratory disorder could be related to kyphosis and nicotine dependence.

In a January 2024 opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran's respiratory problems were most likely a combination of smoking-related lung diseases with restrictive lung disease.

Furthermore, please note that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a veteran has a disability at the time he files his claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim.  Also, symptoms manifesting in functional impairment constitute a disability for VA purposes, even if such cannot be attributed to a formal diagnosis.

b) For each disability identified, including restrictive lung disease, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such was secondary to his service-connected lumbosacral strain with kyphoscoliosis? An opinion should still be provided even if the condition resolved during the appeal period.

In offering any opinion, the examiner must consider the full record, to include the Veteran's lay statements concerning the onset and progression of symptoms.

A clearly-stated rationale for any opinion should be provided.

 

 

Leetra J. Harris

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	James R. Springer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.