Citation Nr: A25033964
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240528-444463
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy.

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for hypertension.

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for high cholesterol.

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for asthma.

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for anxiety.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart condition to include congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, or coronary artery disease is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for high cholesterol is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for anxiety is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A March 2022 rating decision found new and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate entitlement to service connection for hypertension, congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, asthma, anxiety, and high cholesterol but denied these claims on the merits.

2. The new evidence received since the March 2022 rating decision is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a heart condition to include congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, or coronary artery disease.

3. The new evidence received since the March 2022 rating decision is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

4. The new evidence received since the March 2022 rating decision is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for high cholesterol.

5. The new evidence received since the March 2022 rating decision is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for asthma.

6. The new evidence received since the March 2022 rating decision is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for anxiety. 

7. The evidence shows that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides while serving at Fort McClellan in 1975 and 1976. 

8. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of coronary artery disease, which is presumptively linked to his conceded herbicide exposure, and coronary artery disease has caused congestive heart failure. 

9. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of atherosclerosis, which is presumptively linked to his conceded herbicide exposure, and atherosclerosis has caused hypertension.

10. High cholesterol is a laboratory finding and is not a disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. 

2. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for hypertension have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

3. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for high cholesterol have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

4. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for asthma have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

5. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for anxiety have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. 

6. The criteria for service connection for a heart condition to include congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, or coronary artery disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

7. The criteria for service connection for hypertension have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310. 

8. The criteria for service connection for a disability manifested by high cholesterol have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from October 1974 to September 1976, and from September 1976 to June 1982, with additional service in the National Guard.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran filed a February 2023 Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) following a March 2022 rating decision denying his claims. The June 2023 rating decision found no new and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate the claims. The Veteran appealed the June 2023 rating decision with a May 2024 VA Form 10182, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA). Under direct review, Board may only consider the evidence of record as of June 9, 2023, the date of the notification letter for the June 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the June 2023 rating decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for asthma and anxiety, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Previously Denied Claims

1. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy 

2. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for hypertension 

3. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for high cholesterol  

4. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for asthma 

5. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim for service connection for anxiety 

The AOJ previously denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for hypertension, congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy, high cholesterol, asthma, and anxiety on the merits in a March 2022 rating decision. However, the Veteran originally filed these claims in September 2018 and February 2019. He asserted that his claims were based on exposure to contaminated water at Fort McClellan in 1975 and 1976. The AOJ initially denied these claims in March 2019 and April 2019 rating decisions. In March 2019, the AOJ favorably found diagnoses for hypertension and asthma, but denied service connection for congestive heart failure, hypertension, asthma, and anxiety as neither occurring in nor caused by service. In April 2019, the AOJ found no event, injury, or disease in-service and that neither cardiomyopathy nor high cholesterol occurred in or were caused by service. 

In May 2019, the Veteran sought Higher Level Review of the March 2019 and April 2019 rating decisions. Later that month, the AOJ made favorable findings of current diagnoses for congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy, hypertension, high cholesterol, asthma, and anxiety based on treatment at the Washington VA Medical Center (VAMC) but found no evidence linking these conditions to the Veteran's service. The Veteran appealed the May 2019 Higher Level Review rating decision to the Board. In January 2020, the Board denied service connection for high cholesterol and remanded congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy, hypertension, asthma, and anxiety to determine the nature and etiology of these conditions. 

The Veteran attended examinations in February 2020. A February 2020 chest X-ray showed cardiomyopathy, and an examiner offered a negative nexus opinion for congestive heart failure and hypertension based on the Veteran's dates of diagnoses many years following his separation from service. The same examiner noted a May 2016 diagnosis for asthma, but offered no opinion. A February 2020 psychologist found no diagnosis for a mental disorder and therefore offered no nexus opinion. In June 2020, a different examiner offered a negative medical nexus opinion for asthma based on exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune rather than Fort McClellan. In November 2020, a third examiner offered negative medical nexus opinions for congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, hypertension, and asthma based on the Veteran's service at Fort McClellan. In November 2020, a different psychologist noted treatment for anxiety and offered a negative medical nexus opinion based on exposure to contaminated water at Fort McClellan. 

In December 2020, the AOJ issued a further rating decision. Confusingly, the rating decision listed a finding of no new and relevant evidence as its decision for each issue but, in the reasons given for the decision, readjudicated the merits of each issue after finding that new and relevant evidence had been received. In January 2021, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim, raising a new theory of service connection based on herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan. The Veteran also raised the theory that his anxiety should be service connected as secondary to the other claimed conditions. 

With his January 2021 claim, the Veteran filed extensive research showing the use of herbicides at Fort McClellan from 1974 to 1976 and argued that congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, hypertension, high cholesterol, asthma, and anxiety are related to this exposure. This research purports that several dioxin and dioxin-like compounds were stored, sprayed, and disposed of at Fort McClellan, Alabama. 

The AOJ obtained updated VA treatment records and requested VA's Compensation Service to research the use of herbicides at Fort McClellan. The Veteran also attended a further VA examination in February 2022. The examiner, the same examiner who performed the February 2020 VA examination, continued to note the existing diagnoses for congestive heart failure, hypertension, and high cholesterol. However, the examiner offered a negative nexus opinion, finding no link between these conditions and herbicide exposure. The examiner did not address asthma or anxiety. 

In March 2022 the AOJ issued the rating decision immediately prior to the June 2023 rating decision on appeal, denying each issue on appeal on the merits. 

Evidence received since the March 2022 rating decision includes a March 2023 VA examination report, wherein the examiner noted existing diagnoses for congestive heart failure, hypertension, high cholesterol, and asthma. The Veteran also submitted further research showing that the Board has, in the past, determined that herbicides were used at Fort McClellan in the 1970s and made factual findings of herbicide exposure for other Veterans on the basis of their service there. 

The June 2023 rating decision on appeal again listed a finding of no new and relevant evidence as its decision for each issue on appeal but, in the reasons given for the decision, readjudicated the merits of each issue on appeal after finding that new and relevant evidence had been received. The AOJ's finding that new and relevant evidence had been received would be binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103(f), 3.104(c). Because that finding is not clear in the June 2023 rating decision, the Board will address whether new and relevant evidence has been received. 

A claimant may request readjudication of a previously denied claim, if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. VA will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all the evidence of record if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d). New evidence means existing evidence not previously submitted to agency decisionmakers. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). Relevant evidence means evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. Id. Relevant evidence also includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed. Id. The new and relevant standard shall not be construed to impose a higher evidentiary threshold than the new and material evidence standard that was in effect prior to the date of the enactment of the AMA. See 38 U.S.C. § 5108; Pub. L. No. 115-55.

The Board finds that the March 2023 VA examination report and research showing that the Board has determined in other cases that herbicides were used at Fort McClellan, received since the March 2022 rating decision, is new and relevant. These records are new, in that they were not of record at the time of the March 2022 rating decision. Additionally, these records are relevant because they tend to prove or disprove a matter in issue, whether the Veteran was exposed to herbicides at Fort McClellan. The research submitted with the Veteran's February 2023 supplemental claim is legal, and the research as to the use of herbicides at Fort McClellan submitted with the January 2021 supplemental claim was scientific. Although the research addresses the same point, it is distinctly different. 

Moreover, the March 2022 rating decision did not readjudicate the issues on appeal based on herbicide exposure. The March 2022 rating decision referenced presumptive service connection, but clearly in terms of the presumptive service connection for certain chronic conditions as outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) rather than the presumptive service connection available for ischemic heart disease and hypertension as outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). Despite the new theory of service connection, the March 2022 rating decision does not reference the term "herbicide" in terms of either presumptive service connection for congestive heart failure and hypertension or direct service connection for asthma and high cholesterol. The March 2022 rating decision further does not address secondary service connection for anxiety as associated with the other claimed conditions. Therefore, the scientific research submitted prior to the March 2022 rating decision and the legal research submitted following the March 2022 rating decision, in concert, raise theories of entitlement to service connection for each issue on appeal that has not previously been addressed. § 3.2501(a)(1). 

To the extent that the legal research submitted following the March 2022 rating decision appears cumulative or redundant of the scientific research submitted in January 2021, the prohibition against cumulative or redundant evidence being used to reopen a previously denied claim is part of the Legacy appeals system in place prior to passage of the AMA. Compare 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a) with 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). The matters presently on appeal stem from rating decisions issued following AMA's passage. The standard of new and relevant evidence required to readjudicate a claim under the AMA is arguably lower than the standard of new and material evidence in the Legacy system. See 38 U.S.C. § 5108; Pub. L. No. 115-55. 

Readjudication of the claims for service connection for congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathy, hypertension, high cholesterol, asthma, and anxiety is warranted. 

Service Connection

Generally, to establish service connection, a claimant must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see also Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a heart condition to include congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, or coronary artery disease 

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension

Statements submitted with the Veteran's January 2021 and February 2023 supplemental claims raise the theory of service connection for congestive heart failure and hypertension associated with herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan in 1975 and 1976. Although the Veteran's exposure to herbicide agents may not be presumed based on his service at Fort McClellan, the presumption of service connection for herbicide-related diseases may still apply if exposure to herbicide agents is shown on a factual basis. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(6)(i), 3.309(e). The Board finds that the criteria for presumptive service connection for congestive heart failure and hypertension have been met.

The term "herbicide agent" means a chemical in an herbicide, specifically: 2,4-D; 2,4,5-T and its contaminant TCDD; cacodylic acid; and Picloram. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(i). If a Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents during service, certain diseases are presumed to be related to that exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). Prior to August 10, 2022, those diseases included ischemic heart disease, and the regulation specified that this included, but was not limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction; atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease (including coronary spasm) and coronary bypass surgery; and stable, unstable and Prinzmetal's angina. Id. Following August 10, 2022, Congress added hypertension to the list of diseases presumed to be associated with exposure to herbicide agents. 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e); Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (Aug. 10, 2022). 

Where the disability for which a Veteran seeks service connection is not directly associated with service, but information obtained during the processing of the claim reasonably indicates that the cause of the disability is a disease that may be associated with service, VA must investigate whether the causal disability is related to service to determine whether the claimed disability is related secondarily to service. DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 54 (2011). If VA determines that the causal disability is, in fact, related to service, then the claim for service connection for this disability "reasonably encompasses" a claim for that causal disability, such that no additional filing is necessary to initiate a claim for service connection for the causal disability. Id. 

Also, 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2) requires that, when entitlement to secondary service connection is raised, a formal claim for secondary service connection need not be filed, rather, VA must consider those "complications" in connection with the claim on appeal. Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203 (2021). Because the evidence from the February 2022 examination report has indicated a link between the Veteran's congestive heart failure and coronary artery disease and a link between hypertension and atherosclerosis, the Board has expanded these claims to encompass coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis. See also Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

First, the Veteran has a current diagnoses of coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, and hypertension. The AOJ's May 2019, December 2020, March 2022, and June 2023 rating decisions all conceded diagnoses of both congestive heart failure and hypertension. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings unless they are rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

After a thorough review of the Veteran's electronic claims file, the Board concludes that such clear and unmistakable evidence does not exist. Indeed, the February 2020, February 2022, and March 2023 VA examination reports each reflect existing diagnoses for hypertension. The February 2020, February 2022, and March 2023 examination reports also reflect existing diagnoses for congestive heart failure. The February 2020 examiner specified that the Veteran's congestive heart failure qualifies as ischemic heart disease. 

Second, as discussed above, the AOJ performed research with VA's Compensation Service as to the use of herbicides at Fort McClellan. In July 2021, VA's Compensation Service reported that the Department of Defense (DoD) has provided VA with a list of locations outside of Vietnam where Agent Orange was used, tested or stored and that no locations in Georgia appear on that list. In February 2022, VA's Compensation Service further specified that DoD has not identified Fort McClellan as a location where Agent Orange was used, tested or stored and found no evidence associating Agent Orange with the U.S. Army Chemical School or Chemical-Biological-Radiological Agency located at Fort McClellan. 

However, the scientific research the Veteran submitted with his January 2021 supplemental claim persuasively indicates that herbicide agents were used at Fort McClellan from 1974 to 1976. Specifically, Dr. Hannah Mathers, a former professor of horticulture at Ohio State University, reviewed the Fort McClellan Environmental Baseline Survey and opined that "it is more likely than not; in fact, it is to a reasonable degree of certainty, that those serving and/or living at FMTC [Fort McClellan] between 1974-1976 were exposed to the herbicide agents discussed herein-the same ones used in Vietnam," including agents 2, 4-D; 2, 4, 5-T; Picloram; and cacodylic acid. Moreover, she went on to state that those exposed at Fort McClellan "more likely received a greater exposure to the contaminants" than even those with Vietnam service. As rationale for this opinion, Dr. Mathers noted that "when comparing the total amount of active ingredients used in the herbicides in question, to the land mass in question, there was approximately 13.23 times more herbicides used on Fort McClellan than in Vietnam." She explained how the herbicides were used at approximately "13 times their labelled rates." 

The Board finds Dr. Mather's opinion more persuasive than VA's Compensation Service reports. Initially, VA's Compensation Service reports references that herbicide agents were not used in Georgia, but the Veteran is claiming exposure at Fort McClellan in Alabama. VA's compensation Service also relied on the fact that Fort McClellan does not appear on DOD's list of locations outside of Vietnam where Agent Orange was used. These generalized responses do not speak specifically to the circumstances of exposure that the Veteran has claimed. By contrast, Dr. Mathers's opinion speaks specifically to herbicide use at Fort McClellan, based on the Fort McClellan Environmental Baseline Survey, and the years that the Veteran served there. 

The Veteran's DD 214 for his first period of service verifies that he was stationed at Fort McClellan in 1976, and his service personnel records further corroborate his claim that he served at Fort McClellan in 1975 and 1976. Accordingly, the Board finds that-at the very least-the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents, as defined by VA regulation, while stationed at Fort McClellan in 1976. Here, that exposure has been shown on a facts-found basis, and therefore, the second element of service connection, which requires an in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, has been met.

As to the third element of service connection, the causal relationship between the present disability and the Veteran's service, that relationship may be established through a causal chain of diseases or disabilities. If the condition for which VA benefits are sought is not directly associated with service, but information obtained during the processing of the claim reasonably indicates that the cause of the condition is a disease or other disability that may be associated with service, the VA generally must investigate whether the causal disease or disability is related to service, in order to determine whether the claimed condition is related secondarily to service. DeLisio, 25 Vet. App. at 54.

Here, the evidence shows that the Veteran's congestive heart failure and hypertension are due to underlying ischemic heart disease. The February 2022 examiner offered a medical opinion linking congestive heart failure to coronary artery disease and, in a separate report, linked hypertension and atherosclerosis. As such, following the holding in DeLisio the Board has a duty to determine if there is a causal relationship between the Veteran's coronary artery disease, ischemic heart disease, atherosclerosis, and his service. 

The Board notes that even prior to August 10, 2022, the diseases subjective to presumptive service connection based on in-service herbicide exposure included ischemic heart disease, and the regulation specified that ischemic heart disease included, but was limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction; atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease (including coronary spasm) and coronary bypass surgery; and stable, unstable and Prinzmetal's angina). 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). Moreover, in February 2020, the VA examiner specified that this Veteran's congestive heart failure qualified within the generally accepted medical definition of ischemic heart disease. 

Because coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis qualify as ischemic heart disease, and ischemic heart disease is subject to presumptive service connection based on the Veteran's conceded in-service herbicide exposure, the Board finds that his congestive heart failure and hypertension are also related to service. See DeLisio, 25 Vet. App. at 54. Accordingly, all three criteria for service connection have been met, and the Veteran's claims for service connection for congestive heart failure and hypertension are granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-81 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

3. Entitlement to service connection for high cholesterol 

The Veteran seeks service connection for high cholesterol.

However, high cholesterol is a laboratory finding and is not a disability in and of itself for which VA compensation benefits are payable. See 61 Fed. Reg. 20,440, 20,445 (May 7, 1996) (Diagnoses of hyperlipidemia, elevated triglycerides, and elevated cholesterol are laboratory results and are not, in and of themselves, disabilities. They are, therefore, not appropriate entities for the rating schedule.). The term "disability" as used for VA purposes refers to impairment of earning capacity. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

In this case, a disability associated with high cholesterol that manifested in service or is related to service has not been shown. The Veteran is also seeking service connection for hypertension and congestive heart failure, and the Board has awarded service connection above. No other disability related to high cholesterol has been identified. As there is no disability, the Board does not reach the issue of whether the claimed disability is related to service. 

In the absence of a current disability, service connection cannot be established. See Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (holding that entitlement to service connection requires, among other things, evidence of a current disability); see also Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (upholding VA's interpretation of sections 1110 and 1131 of the statute as requiring the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes). As the evidence weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for asthma 

Statements submitted with the Veteran's January 2021 and February 2023 supplemental claims raise the theory of service connection for asthma as associated with herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan in 1975 and 1976. A February 2020 examiner noted a May 2016 diagnosis for asthma, but offered no opinion. In June 2020, a different examiner offered a negative medical nexus opinion for asthma based on exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune rather than Fort McClellan. In November 2020, a third examiner offered a negative medical nexus opinion for asthma based on the Veteran's service at Fort McClellan, but did not address his exposure to herbicides there. 

Although asthma is not a condition presumptively associated with herbicide exposure, 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e), VA must still determine whether the Veteran's asthma is directly related to his conceded herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Because the Veteran raised this theory of entitlement and the AOJ obtained etiology opinions without ensuring that the opinions addressed this theory, none of the examinations to date are adequate and remand is required to obtain an etiology opinion addressing direct service connection based on in-service herbicide exposure. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for anxiety 

Statements submitted with the Veteran's January 2021 and February 2023 supplemental claims raise the theory of both direct and secondary service connection for anxiety, direct service connection based on herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan in 1975 and 1976 and secondary service connection as due to the Veteran's physical conditions caused by herbicide exposure. A February 2020 psychologist found no diagnosis for an anxiety disorder and therefore offered no etiological opinion. Nonetheless, the AOJ's May 2019, December 2020, March 2022, and June 2023 rating decisions all conceded treatment for anxiety, if not a diagnosis of a specific anxiety disorder, and the Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

A November 2020 psychologist seemed to find the Veteran less than credible because he claimed anxiety on both direct and secondary bases, but failed to note that theories of direct and secondary service connection are not mutually exclusive. The psychologist's limited opinion as to direct service connection failed to consider the Veteran's in-service herbicide exposure and the doubt cast on his credibility based on his theory of secondary service connection stopped short of providing any opinion as to secondary service connection for anxiety caused or aggravated by physical conditions associated with in-service herbicide exposure. 

Although mental disorders are not presumptively associated with herbicide exposure, 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e), VA must still determine whether the Veteran's anxiety is directly related to his conceded herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan. Combee, 34 F.3d at 1043-44. Because the Veteran raised this theory of entitlement, and the theory of secondary service connection, and the AOJ obtained etiology opinions without ensuring that the opinions addressed these theories, none of the examinations to date are adequate and remand is required to obtain adequate examinations and opinions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to address the nature and etiology of his asthma. The entire claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

Following examination of the Veteran and review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's asthma began in active service or is it otherwise related to active service, to include as due to herbicide agent exposure (Note: Herbicide agent exposure is CONCEDED). 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, events, and injuries, including those that occurred in service, and that his assertions must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested medical opinions.

A robust rationale must be provided for all opinions. If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to address the nature and etiology of his anxiety. The entire claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Following examination of the Veteran and review of the claims file, the examiner should: 

a.	Identify all mental disorders diagnosed. In this regard, the examiner should note the ongoing treatment for anxiety in the Washington VAMC treatment records, and 

b.	Provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any mental disorder diagnosed began in active service or is it otherwise related to active service, to include as due to herbicide agent exposure (Note: Herbicide agent exposure is CONCEDED), and 

c.	Provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any mental disorder diagnosed is caused by a service-connected disability (to include, but not limited to, congestive heart failure and hypertension), and 

d.	Provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any mental disorder diagnosed is aggravated by a service-connected disability (to include, but not limited to, congestive heart failure and hypertension). The examiner is advised that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in nonservice-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment of earning capacity) resulting from service-connected conditions.

The Board emphasizes that in addressing secondary service connection and aggravation, please note that the primary disability need not be diagnosed or service-connected at the time the secondary condition (anxiety) is incurred to establish secondary service connection, and reliance on this fact will render any secondary opinion inadequate.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, events, and injuries, including those that occurred in service, and that his assertions must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested medical opinions.

A robust rationale must be provided for all opinions. If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Schonland, Avery M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.