Citation Nr: A25033996
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453849
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease, and spinal fusion of the lumbar spine is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran failed to appear, without good cause shown, for a scheduled VA examination in June 2023 to determine the current severity of his service-connected degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease, and spinal fusion of the lumbar spine. The examination was necessary to evaluate the Veteran's claim for increased rating.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

As the Veteran failed to report for a necessary VA examination without good cause shown, the appeal for a rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease, and spinal fusion of the lumbar spine, is denied as a matter of law. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from September 1988 to February 1998.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The record reflects that an examination was scheduled for the Veteran in connection with this claim. That examination was scheduled for June 2023, but was not attended by the Veteran. 

On his July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence that was on file at the time of the July 2023 rating decision on appeal.  Any evidence submitted after the promulgation of that rating action was not considered.  If the Veteran wishes for any evidence submitted after the rating action at issue to be considered, he may file a supplemental claim.  Instructions for doing so are attached to this decision.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease, and spinal fusion of the lumbar spine

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease, and spinal fusion of the lumbar spine because the severity of his symptoms and pain have increased since service connection was granted and the 10 percent rating was assigned. The Veteran asserts his current symptoms more closely align with the criteria for a 20 percent rating.

Service connection for the Veteran's disability was granted in a June 2013 rating decision, which assigned a May 2012 effective date and a 10 percent rating. The Veteran submitted a claim for increase in May 2022, which was denied in January 2023. In denying the Veteran's claim for increased rating, the RO considered a December 2022 VA examination, and that examiner's findings that the severity of the Veteran's symptoms had not increased to substantiate a higher rating. The Veteran submitted a supplemental claim in May 2023, which was denied in July 2023, leading to this appeal. 

In his May 2023 supplemental claim, the Veteran asserted that a higher rating was warranted for his degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease, and spinal fusion of the lumbar spine. The Veteran submitted a lay statement concerning his back symptoms and a private medical opinion by a nurse to support this contention. The May 2023 statement by the nurse, which she identifies as an "Independent VA Rating Evaluation", stated the rating criteria for evaluating diseases and injuries of the spine; recounted the Veteran's narrative of symptoms; declared her belief that the Veteran was credible; and concluded that based on the Veteran's description of muscle spasms, a 20 percent rating is warranted.

The Board notes that the Veteran's representative belatedly argued that this is not an increased rating claim, but rather an attempt to seek correction of the Veteran's January 2023 rating.  This argument does not accord with the procedural history of this appeal.  The Veteran did not disagree with the January 2023 rating action, but instead filed a supplemental claim seeking an increased rating.  No suggestion was made by the Veteran or his representative at the time, or indeed until after the July 2023 rating action in this case, that the Veteran was seeking anything other than an increased rating by submitting his supplemental claim in May 2023; no suggestion was made of seeking review instead of the January 2023 rating action.  The Veteran and the representative, in perfecting the instant appeal, referred only to the July 2023 rating action, which denied an increased rating, as the rating action for which review is sought.  Consequently, this appeal concerns an increased rating (as did the January 2023 rating action).  

The Veteran was scheduled for a new VA examination in June 2023. The Veteran did not attend the VA examination. Neither the Veteran, nor his representative, have offered an explanation as to why the Veteran did not attend.

When entitlement to a benefit in a claim for increase, like this one, cannot be established without a current VA examination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied. 38 CFR § 3.655 (a)-(b).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Here, the prior VA examination of record, conducted in December 2022, only substantiated the Veteran's current 10 percent rating. A new examination was therefore necessary to determine whether the Veteran's symptoms now substantiated a higher rating. Although the Veteran provided a long recitation of his lower back symptoms, it does not provide the information needed to determine whether a higher rating is warranted.  His statements do not, for example, provide information on his range of motion, other than obliquely when he mentions flare ups.  His statements mention gait disturbances and muscle spasm, but the Board notes that the credibility of those statements is highly questionable given that, just several months prior on VA examination in December 2022, there was no evidence of muscle spasm or of an abnormal gait.  A VA examination thus was necessary to examine the Veteran's sudden proliferation of symptoms.  The May 2023 statement by the nurse also provides insufficient information to evaluate the disability level.  From the context of the opinion, the nurse did not examine the Veteran, but rather was given the Veteran's statements to review, and from those statements made her own assessment of what she believed he warranted as a rating.  However, she never explains why she finds the Veteran's account of muscle spasms and altered gait to be credible, does not even appear to be aware of the December 2022 examination findings that make it questionable how he now exhibits such severe muscle spasms, and essentially her opinion is less of a medical opinion and more of an attempt to substitute her judgement for that of VA in terms of the appropriate rating.  The bottom line is that her opinion provides no medical information concerning the Veteran's symptoms, as she only reported the lay statements already on file, and did not provide any examination findings.  Her opinion simply does not establish any findings that can suffice to determine the proper disability rating.

In short, given the greatly increased number and severity of symptoms included by the Veteran in his May 2023 claim, an examination was necessary to provide findings to determine whether his back disorder met the criteria for a higher rating.  The Veteran frustrated that attempt by failing, without explanation to appear for the examination.  As he has not shown good cause for his absence, and as the record without such examination does not provide information that could substitute for an examination, the claim is denied as a matter of law. 38 CFR § 3.655 (a)-(b).

 

 

Thomas H. O'Shay

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Swanson, Attorney Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.