Citation Nr: A25033444
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-460552
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for adenomyosis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for endometriosis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served honorably in the United States Navy from October 2001 to November 2010.  

Procedural History

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an appeal of a January 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In July 2024, the appellant filed timely a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), electing the Direct Review Docket.  

Applicable Evidentiary Window

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.: See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (Vet. App. 2023).  However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is required in order to obtain an addendum opinion that satisfactorily addresses an otherwise unaddressed theory of entitlement. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for adenomyosis is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for endometriosis is remanded.

Preliminarily, the VA has afforded the appellant a single VA medical review of the claims file, wherein the clinician found that for this particular appellant, the claimed conditions are one and the same.  See VA Gynecological Examination, December 5, 2023.  For this reason, the Board now finds that these issues are inextricably intertwined such that a remand of one requires the remand of the other. 

The appellant has been afforded a single VA examination and opinion of her diagnosed adenomyosis.  Id.; VA Gynecological Opinion, December 5, 2023.  The examiner focused on the relationship between the diagnosed condition and the appellant's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  Id.  This is through no fault of the clinician, as the question presented by the AOJ to the clinician addressed only the appellant's TERA.  Id.  However, in the absence of a link between the appellant's diagnosis and her TERA, she may still prove a direct link on a facts-found basis.  See generally Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (holding that an appellant may establish service connection on a facts-found basis even if a presumption does not apply).  In fact, the appellant made no mention of her TERA on her claim form.  See VA Form 21-526EZ, August 11, 2023.  Moreover, the appellant reported that her abdominal pain "start[ed] in boot camp."  See VA Gynecological Examination, December 5, 2023.  However, the opinion, which focused upon TERAs, did not address these reports that the appellant's abdominal pain began during boot camp.  See VA Gynecological Opinion, December 5, 2023.  For these reasons, the appellant's representative raised the presumptive of soundness in his Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP), August 20, 2024.  The presumption of soundness is a legal presumption, promulgated by the United States Congress, which states generally that all veterans are presumed sound upon acceptance into service except disabilities noted at the time of acceptance.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.  In other words, the appellant's representative specifically raised a legal presumption addressing whether the appellant's service directly caused her disabilities.  Because the clinician addressed only the appellant's TERA, a direct opinion was not provided.  See VA Gynecological Opinion, December 5, 2023.  For these reasons, a remand is required in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error in the form of failure to obtain an opinion that addresses these disabilities on a direct basis.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (Vet. App. 2007); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 554 (Vet. App. 2008) (the Board has an obligation to address all theories reasonably raised by the record).  The Board makes no finding at this time regarding the TERA opinion other than the factual finding that it did not address a direct theory of entitlement.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the appellant for a VA examination for her adenomyosis/endometriosis.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this remand.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Diagnose all disabilities affecting the appellant's uterus. 

For each disability: did the disability clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) preexist the appellant's service? 

If the examiner finds the disability did clearly and unmistakably preexist service, was it clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service?  

If the examiner finds that the disability either did not clearly and unmistakably preexist service or was not clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service, the examiner must opine whether it is likely related to service (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence), including first manifesting during boot camp.    

Provide a rationale to support the opinions.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the appellant's description of the in-service symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the appellant's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the appellant's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the appellant's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the claims.  

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Alexander Maisel, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.