Citation Nr: A25033647
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-471036
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, caused by a service-connected disability, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran has obstructive sleep apnea that is due to, the result of, or caused by a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, caused by a service-connected disability, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1993 to February 1997.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In September 2024, the Veteran requested direct review of the appeal by the Board on VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).

The current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket by a Veterans Law Judge, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based upon the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the previous RO decision on the issue on appeal.  Therefore, only evidence of record on the date of the October 2023 rating decision will be considered.  VA will not seek additional evidence on behalf of the Veteran as part of the review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, caused by a service-connected disability.

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that an injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in active service or, if pre-existing service, was aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), 3.304, 3.310.

To establish service connection for a disability, a veteran must show (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship, or nexus, between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection may be established for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

While the Board must provide reasons and bases supporting a decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the evidence submitted by or on behalf of the Veteran.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence of record.  The Veteran should not assume that the Board has overlooked evidence that is not explicitly discussed.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000).

The Veteran contends that currently diagnosed sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain.  Alternatively, the Veteran states that diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is the result of service.  The Veteran reports trouble sleeping, headaches upon awakening, frequent awakenings, snoring, pauses in breath while sleeping, and daytime fatigue.  

An October 2023 rating decision found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  The Board is bound by that favorable finding.  

The service medical records showed the Veteran denied having frequent trouble sleeping at an August 1993 service entrance examination.  At an August 1996 separation examination, the Veteran reported frequent trouble sleeping.  The service medical records show that the Veteran also reported sleeping difficulties in September 1996, before separating from service.  Service medical records noted the Veteran's weight was 168 pounds in July 1993 and increased to 201 pounds in August 1996.

In a June 2023 private medical opinion, a private physician and Fellow of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, reviewed the service medical records, civilian medical records, and lay statements concerning obstructive sleep apnea.  The private doctor diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea pursuant to a Questionnaire, a screening tool used to assess the level of risk of obstructive sleep apnea.  The private doctor opined that the Veteran's obesity was at least as likely as not (a 50 percent probability) due to service-connected lumbosacral strain.  The doctor opined that the Veteran's obesity led to, caused, and/or aggravated obstructive sleep apnea.  The doctor reasoned that lumbosacral strain can lead to and cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and overeating.  The doctor explained that those manifestations led to diminished activity and weight gain and obesity.  The doctor stated that medical literature demonstrated that obesity predisposed patients to and directly caused obstructive sleep apnea.  The doctor asserted that weight gain and obstructive sleep apnea cyclically caused one another from a pathophysiological perspective.

An October 2023 VA medical opinion concluded that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by any injury, event, or illness in service.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran's retirement physical was negative for chronic foot issues.  In the same October 2023 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of service connected lumbosacral strain.  The examiner stated that there was no pathophysiological correlation between a lumbosacral strain and the development of sleep apnea.  The VA examiner stated that obesity was the leading cause of sleep apnea and the Veteran was morbidly obese.  The October 2023 VA medical examination did not provide an analysis or opinion regarding aggravation.

The Board notes that, although obesity is not a disability for which VA may establish service connection, obesity may act as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

While the Board appreciates the analysis and discussion of the VA examiner, the VA examination is inadequate.  When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  A medical opinion that does not address whether a service-connected disability aggravated the claimed disability is inadequate to inform the Board on the issue of secondary service connection.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

Although the VA examiner provide opinions regarding the causation of obstructive sleep apnea by lumbosacral strain, the examiner did not offer an opinion regarding whether the obstructive sleep apnea disability was aggravated by service-connected disability.  Both opinions are needed.

Additionally, the VA medical opinions are conclusory because they do not provide an adequate rationale to support the opinions.  A mere conclusion without an underlying rationale is of no probative value.  Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998).  The examiner stated that medical literature did not support a causal relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and a lumbosacral strain disability, but offered no explanation or discussion concerning the Veteran's specific circumstances, claimed disability, or potential causation or aggravation by a service-connected disability.  The examiner merely stated that the Veteran's obesity was the cause of obstructive sleep apnea without explanation or discussion.

Additionally, the October 2023 VA medical opinion concerning direct service connection not only referred to a date during which the Veteran was not actively serving, but also incorrectly stated that the Veteran underwent a retirement physical.  Moreover, in rationalizing that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was not incurred in or caused by any injury, event, or illness in service, the VA examiner referred to a disability for which the Veteran is not service-connected and provided no other rationale.

Although the VA medical opinions are inadequate concerning the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea, the Board finds that is it not necessary to obtain a new VA medical opinion.  The Board finds the private medical opinion to be credible and persuasive.  The Board assigns great probative weight to the private June 2023 medical opinion because of the training, experience, and rationale provided in the report.  Among the factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the provider's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60 (1993) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility and weight to be given the evidence); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1992).  The probative value of medical evidence is based on the provider's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the ultimate medical conclusion reached.  As is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).

The private June 2023 opinion is consistent with the evidence in the case and provides adequate reasons and bases in support of the conclusion.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was at least as likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected disability.  The private doctor's opinion is highly probative because it is supported by rationale and provided by a trained medical professional.  The examiner specifically identified and discussed the Veteran's contention that obstructive sleep apnea was caused by a lumbosacral strain disability.  Thus, the Board finds the private June 2023 medical opinion to be competent and credible.

The Board cannot ignore the medical evidence opining that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to a service-connected disability.  Because of the private medical opinion, the Board finds the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether a current obstructive sleep apnea disability is related to active service.

The Board acknowledges that there may be contradictory evidence of record, such as the VA medical opinions from October 2023 that found that obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of service or service-connected disability.  However, the Board cannot ignore the medical evidence finding that the Veteran's sleep apnea is due to his service-connected disability.  Because of the detail and thoroughness of the June 2023 private opinion and reference to medical research, the Board finds that the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether obstructive sleep apnea is related to the service-connected lumbosacral strain disability.

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the competent medical evidence supports a finding that a current obstructive sleep apnea disability is due to, the result of, or caused by the Veteran's lumbosacral strain disability, with obesity caused by the lumbosacral strain serving as an intermediate step.  Therefore, service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to a lumbosacral strain disability, is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marissa R. Harper, Associate Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.