Citation Nr: A25033807
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 230728-365429
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date prior to January 21, 2022, for service connection for tinnitus, is denied.

Service connection for a right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, chondromalacia, chondrocalcinosis and degenerative arthritis is granted.

Service connection for a left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, chondromalacia, chondrocalcinosis and degenerative arthritis is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disorder, to include degenerative disc disease and a low back strain/thoracic herniation T10-12, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A claim of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus was first received by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) on January 21, 2022.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right knee disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right knee disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date prior to January 21, 2022, for the award of service connection for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400. 

2. The criteria for service connection for a right knee disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 1981 to March 1985. The Veteran also served in the United States Air Force Reserve from 1986 to June 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2022 rating decisions issued by a VA Regional Office.

In July 2023, the Veteran filed a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, electing the Direct Review docket. See VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 AOJ decisions, respectively.

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the September 2022 decisions, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

In one of the September 2022 rating decisions, the AOJ found, in part, that new and relevant evidence had been received to warrant readjudication of the claim. These favorable findings are binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

1. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for service connection for tinnitus is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an earlier effective date for service connection for tinnitus. See July 2023 VA Form 10182.

Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date for a grant of service connection is the day after separation from service or day entitlement arose, if a claim is received within one year of separation from service; otherwise, the date of receipt of claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

Prior to March 24, 2015, a claim was "a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement, or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit." 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p) (2014). For claims filed on or after March 24, 2015, however, VA requires that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary, regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d). In addition, upon receipt of a form indicating the claimant's intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received if VA receives a complete application form for the benefit sought within 1 year of receipt of the intent to file form. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b). The Veteran's current effective date is based on the receipt of a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), request for service connection for tinnitus received January 21, 2022.

The essential requirements of any claim are: (1) an intent to apply for benefits, (2) an indication of the benefits sought, and (3) a communication in writing. See Sellers v. Wilkie, 965 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2020). A veteran's claim is required to identify the sickness, disease, or injuries for which compensation is sought, at least at a high level of generality. Id.

The Veteran does not contend, nor does the evidence show, that the VA received any claim indicating an intent to seek service connection for tinnitus prior to January 21, 2022. Prior to this date, the record does not include either an informal or a formal claim for benefits for tinnitus. See Sellers, supra. No claim for tinnitus could be incorporated into any claims received during this period by reference to medical records. Cf. Shea v. Wilkie, 926 F.3d 1362, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2019).

The Veteran does not dispute the date his claim was first received. Rather, he contends that because his service treatment records (STRs) were unavailable when he filed his first claims for service connection in 2005 (including claims for back problems, neck problems, carpal tunnel syndrome, and depression), he could not have filed a claim until 2018 when he learned his records had been found. He also contends that he was told his service connection dates would be retroactive should his records be found. These arguments are unpersuasive for numerous reasons.

First, and to the last argument, previously denied service connection claims will be readjudicated when new and relevant service records, that existed at the time of the prior denial, are added to the record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c). If the claim is later granted based in part on the newly received service records, then the effective date of the grant can be the date of original denial. Id. Here however, the Veteran did not file an earlier claim and there is no prior denial, and thus this provision is inapplicable.

Turning then to the other argument, that he was disinclined to file a claim or prevented from filing a claim due to missing records, the evidence contradicts this argument. First, the Veteran's STRs were in fact obtained and added to the record in May 2006, with additional records associated in 2014. Thus, it was not 2018 when the records were added or when he was notified. Specifically, the Veteran actually filed an additional claim for compensation in September 2006 and was notified of the existence of these STRs. Then, he filed another intent to file a claim in September 2016, with a complete claim following in March 2017. These facts contradict his arguments, and there is no reason given by the Veteran why he could not have included a claim for tinnitus in any of the earlier claims.

To the extent that he is contending he was estopped from filing a claim due to the lack of records, the actual facts above do not bear this out, and he has not shown any active interference in his claim by VA. Initially, equitable estoppel cannot override 38 U.S.C. § 5110. Taylor v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 909 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (en banc). Further, the Veteran has not shown that the opportunity to litigate an underlying legal entitlement is no longer available due to active interference on the part of the government that is undue. See Ley v. McDonough, U.S. Vet. App. No. 23-1547 (Jan. 2, 2025). The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believed his claims would be denied without records and that he felt precluded from filing a claim; however, such does not rise to the level of active interference by VA. See generally id., at 24. Moreover, he did in fact file earlier claims, and his records were in fact, added to the file earlier than claimed, which refutes his contentions.

To the extent that the Veteran experienced symptoms prior to his January 2022 claim, there is no evidence that he filed a claim for benefits related to such symptoms until January 2022. As noted, the effective date for a grant of service connection is still the later of the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose. VA cannot assign an effective date for an award of service connection based on the earliest medical evidence showing a disability or a causal connection between service and a claimed disability; rather, it must assign the date that it received the application upon which service connection was eventually awarded. Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1999). Here, the Veteran's initial claim of service connection was not received until January 21, 2022. Thus, January 21, 2022, is the earliest allowable effective date.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the evidence is neither evenly balanced so approximately so with regard to whether effective dates prior to January 21, 2022, are warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against earlier effective dates for any period on appeal. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 4.3, is therefore not for application for these claims during this time period. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

SERVICE CONNECTION

Entitlement to service connection on a direct basis requires (1) evidence of current nonservice-connected disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the in-service disease or injury and the current nonservice-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018).

For specific enumerated diseases designated as "chronic" there is a presumption that such chronic disease was incurred in or aggravated by service even though there is no evidence of such chronic disease during the period of service. In order for the presumption to attach, the disease must have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of separation from active duty. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a). The presumptive chronic diseases include arthritis.

Presumptive service connection for the specified chronic diseases may alternatively be established by way of continuity of symptomatology under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has held that the theory of continuity of symptomatology can be used only in cases involving those conditions explicitly recognized as chronic in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Generally, lay evidence is competent with regard to identification of a disease with unique and readily identifiable features which are capable of lay observation. See Barr v. Shinseki, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007). A lay person may speak to etiology in some limited circumstances in which nexus is obvious merely through observation, such as sustaining a fall leading to a broken leg. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir 2007). Lay persons may also provide competent evidence regarding a contemporaneous medical diagnosis or a description of symptoms in service which supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. However, a lay person is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions, i.e., those which are not capable of lay observation. Lay statements are not competent evidence regarding diagnosis or etiology in such cases. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (concerning rheumatic fever); Jandreau, at 1377, n. 4 ('sometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer'); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).

After the evidence has been assembled, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. This standard does not require the evidence to be exactly equal; rather, it includes "scenarios where the evidence is not in equipoise but nevertheless is in approximate balance. Put differently, if the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Service connection for a right knee disorder is granted.

3. Service connection for a left knee disorder is granted.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for a bilateral knee condition. Specifically, the Veteran reports that he was diagnosed with knee problems while on active duty and received physical therapy for six months. He was diagnosed with chondromalacia of the knees and was told his knee condition was due to walking on concrete and ladders as an airplane technician. See October 2018 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

As an initial matter, the AOJ made several favorable findings in its September 2022 rating decision. As to the first element of service connection, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability: a VA examination dated August 29, 2022, diagnosed the Veteran with patellofemoral pain syndrome of the bilateral knees.

As to the second element of service connection, the AOJ determined that service treatment records (STRs) document a complaint of knee pain in September 1984. The Board is bound by these favorable findings absent clear and convincing error. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Turning to STRs, at his January 1981 enlistment examination, there was no indication of abnormality in the Veteran's knees. Treatment records in April 1984 documented that the Veteran had pain over the left leg for one to two years. The pain was described as piercing and sharp, located behind the knee, shooting down into the heel. In another treatment record that same month in April 1984, the Veteran was diagnosed with chondromalacia of the left patella. It was noted there was left patellar crepitus, pain, and tenderness. He was referred for exercises for the knees. In September 1984, treatment records show that the Veteran injured his knee while climbing out of an aircraft several months past. The Veteran reported pain of the right knee. It was noted that the Veteran continued to have pain in the bilateral knees. The Veteran did not report knee pain again in later medical evaluations.

Post-service records show that in May 2014, the Veteran reported chronic bilateral knee pain. At the time, he reported chronic chondromalacia of the knees. In July 2014, the Veteran again reported chronic knee pain. An x-ray showed mild arthritis of the knees, and the Veteran requested to trial knee braces.

The Veteran was afforded several VA examinations and opinions. First, the Veteran was afforded a VA medical opinion in April 2017. The examiner determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's knee condition is due to his military service duties and activities that ended 32 years ago. In rationale, the examiner noted that the Veteran's STRs were silent for any chronic, recurring, or persistent knee complaints. The examiner also pointed out that the Veteran's separation exam was also silent for knee complaints. Thus, there was no objective evidence of any continuity of the Veteran's symptoms that would provide a nexus between the Veteran's current symptoms and the Veteran's active military service duties. The examiner also pointed out it has been 32 years since the Veteran separated from the military, and other unknown, intercurrent events could have played a role, in addition to the natural process of aging that occurs in all joints.

The Board finds the opinion of the April 2017 VA examiner inadequate. First, it is not entirely correct that the Veteran's STRs are silent for chronic knee conditions. In April and September 1984, it was noted that the Veteran suffered continuous pain over several years while in service. Further, post-service records in May 2014 show that the Veteran again reported chronic bilateral knee pain and a history of chondromalacia, which was his knee diagnosis in April 1984. The examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disability. Moreover, the examiners' opinions are basically predicated on the lack of any documented treatment. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the appellant's report of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in the service medical records to provide a negative opinion); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (a lack of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay testimony not credible.)

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2019. See Knee and Lower Leg Conditions DBQ. The Veteran was diagnosed with chondrocalcinosis and degenerative arthritis of the right knee, and knee strain of the left knee. The Veteran again reported that his condition began in 1984, experiencing pain in both knees due to walking on hard surfaces and climbing ladders. As a result of the examination, the examiner determined it was less likely than not that the bilateral knee conditions were caused by service. In rationale, the examiner noted that the records indicate that the Veteran was treated for knee pain in 1984, but there are no other complaints in the years following active service. 

The Board finds the opinion of the December 2019 VA examiner inadequate. The examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disability. Moreover, the examiner's opinions are basically predicated on the lack of any documented treatment. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). The examiner also did not address the opinion of Dr. J. F, that military activities of the Veteran worsened the Veteran's bilateral knee arthritis.

The Veteran was afforded a final VA examination in August 2022. See Knee and Lower Leg Conditions DBQ. The Veteran was diagnosed with patellofemoral pain syndrome of the bilateral knees, and degenerative arthritis of the right knee. The Veteran again reported that his knee pain began in 1985 due to walking on concrete and stairs during service. As a result of the examination, the examiner determined it was less likely than not that the bilateral knee conditions were caused by service. In rationale, the examiner determined that due to a large time gap, it was not possible to rule out activities of daily living or natural progression of age as a cause of the condition, and therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not the result of service.

The Board finds the opinion of the August 2022 VA examiner inadequate. Again, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disability. The examiner also did not address the opinion of Dr. J. F, that military activities of the Veteran worsened the Veteran's bilateral knee arthritis.

Finally, the Veteran submitted two private opinions. The Veteran submitted a statement from private provider Dr. J. F. in June 2019. Dr. J. F. opined that it is more likely than not that the initial injury to the right knee and repeated injuries to the bilateral knees from military service materially worsened an underlying rheumatological condition, resulting in more severe knee arthritis.

Similarly, in January 2022, Dr. S. B. opined that it is more likely that not that the Veteran's bilateral knee disease is due to his in-service injury and obese body habitus. Dr. S. B. also noted that increased stress on the joints of the knees could accelerate degeneration of those joints or exacerbate a pre-existing condition.

In light of the above, the Board finds the evidence to at least be approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran's current bilateral knee disorders is due to his service. Although the VA examiners provided negative opinions, the June 2019 and January 2022 private medical opinions both concluded that the Veteran's service was at least as likely as not the cause of his bilateral knee condition. The Board finds these opinions, in particular, to be the most probative medical opinion of record as to the issue of service connection because it is supported by a fully articulated rationale with consideration of the Veteran's medical history and established medical literature. Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence indicates that the bilateral knee condition is caused, at least in part, by service. Therefore, service connection is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The appeal is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

4. Service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disorder is remanded.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for a back condition, that he contends was incurred during service in March 2004. See December 2005 VA Form 21-526 Veteran's Application for Compensation. Treatment records in March 2004 demonstrate that the Veteran suffered an injury at work when a canopy crushed his upper body into the canopy of an airplane.

As an initial matter, the AOJ made a favorable finding in its September 2022 rating decision. As to the first element of service connection, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability: a VA examination in August 2022 diagnosed the Veteran with a disability of degenerative disc disease of the thoracolumbar spine.

Turning to STRs, at his January 1981 enlistment examination, there was no indication of abnormality in the Veteran's thoracolumbar spine. In October 1984, the Veteran was assaulted by four individuals, suffering lacerations to the eyes. In March 1992, the Veteran suffered a ten foot fall off a scaffold. It was noted that the Veteran suffered lower back pain and had trouble ambulating without support. On examination, there was a mild right paraspinous muscle tenderness. He was diagnosed with a healing contusion on his right back. In March 2004, an air jet door closed on the Veteran's back four times. Imaging of the spine showed bulging discs. In November 2004, it was noted that the Veteran's back sprain was related to a work injury in March 2004.

Post-service records show that in May 2014, the Veteran reported chronic back pain since 2004, when a canopy lid closed on him.

The Veteran submitted two private medical opinions. In the statement from private provider Dr. J. F in June 2019, Dr. J. F. opined that the Veteran's general military service had a 70 percent role in causing lumbar and thoracic disc disease, primarily related to the worsening of an underlying autoimmune disc disease. Dr. J.F. stated that an autoimmune reaction to the intervertebral discs caused a worsening in disc pathology. The Dr. opined that disc worsening at one level can and is expected to cause disc worsening at another level, but that the research stated it was not on its own enough to cause separate disc disease. J.F. then gave a positive nexus opinion based on an unsubstantiated and theoretical injury that could have occurred during the fight.

In January 2022, Dr. S. B. opined that the Veteran's lumbar spine disease is at least as likely as not due to his high impact activities while enlisted in the military. He noted that while the Veteran did not have chronicity of care and nor did he suffer an injury to his back while on active duty, the Veteran's lumbar spine disease was caused by his military activities.

The Board finds that the private opinions merely notate the Veteran's subjective history. Moreover, the private opinions fail to provide any objective medical assessment regarding the etiology of the Veteran's back disability. See LeShore v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 406 (1996) (mere recitation of the veteran's self-reported lay history does not constitute competent medical evidence). Thus, the Board does not find the private opinions probative.

In May 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination wherein he was diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine. The Veteran reported his back pain began in 1984 when he was assaulted. He reported that he did not mention his back pain because he did not want to be removed from his job working with on aircrafts. As a result of the examination, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not for the Veteran's back condition to have been incurred or caused by service. The examiner gave a confusing rationale for direct service connection: the examiner opined that more than 10 years after separation from military service, the Veteran had an accident during military service in 2004 which resulted in a thoracic sprain. Later images in 2014 demonstrated the continued existence of disc herniation in the thoracic spine.

The Board finds the opinion of the May 2021 VA examiner inadequate. First, the direct service connection opinion was confused on whether the 2004 civilian work injury occurred during military service or not, and whether the condition was chronic and continuous since that injury. It also does not address the 1992 fall from the scaffold. 

For secondary service connection, the May 2021 examiner determined medical literature does not suggest that degenerative disc disease of the cervical spine causes degenerative disc disease of the thoracic spine. The examiner also determined that it was unlikely that the 1992 fall aggravated any back condition because the x-ray after the fall in 1992 was normal, and the Veteran did not show any degenerative changes until 2014. The examiner determined that examinations after 1992 of the spine are silent for back pain or symptoms. X-rays at the time of the 1992 injury were normal. Thus, due to the lack of objective evidence, signs, and symptoms, it is less likely that that Veteran's claimed condition of the back was aggravated beyond natural progression by the 1992 injury.

The Board finds that the secondary service opinion is inadequate because it only addresses whether degenerative disc disease of the cervical spine causes degenerative disc disease of the thoracic spine. This opinion does not address aggravation. Finally, the aggravation opinion given from the 1992 injury is not factually accurate. STRs clearly document that the Veteran suffered lower back pain as a symptom after his fall.

In September 2022, the Veteran was afforded a new VA examination wherein he was diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine. The Veteran reported his pain began in 2004 when the aircraft canopy closed on his back. As a result of the examination, the examiner determined it was less likely than not that the back condition was caused by service. In rationale, the examiner determined that multiple risk factors are linked to the development of osteoarthritis of the back, and therefore, it was not possible to rule out the natural progression of age, genetics, and obesity as a cause of the condition, and therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not the result of service. It was also found to not be proximately due to his right knee degenerative arthritis, which was not then a service-connected disability. The examiner also found it was less likely that not caused by enlistment activities due to the time gap.

The Board finds the opinion of the May 2021 VA examiner inadequate. First, right knee arthritis was not a service-connected disability. The opinion required is whether the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine disability aggravated his thoracolumbar spine disability. The examiner also failed to address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disability. Moreover, the examiner's opinions are basically predicated on the lack of any documented treatment. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). Lastly, no VA examiner directly addressed the explicitly contradictory medical opinion that disc degeneration at one level causes it at another level as stated by Dr. J.F., or whether aggravation could have occurred under this same theory.

As such, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred and a remand is necessary in order to obtain an adequate medical examination and opinion in this case. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007)

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate examiner to address the etiology of the Veteran's degenerative disc disease of the thoracic spine. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be reviewed by the examiner. The need for a new examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should then opine whether any identified thoracolumbar spine disorders found, including degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine, began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service, to include the incident in October 1984.

In addressing the above, the examiner must address the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset of symptomatology and any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology, particularly pain, since onset and/or since discharge from service. In this regard, the examiner must specifically address the Veteran's statements regarding pain and self-medication for his symptoms from the incident in October 1984. And whether the later incidents worsened an existing disability.

Finally, the examiner should address the contentions in the medical opinions of Dr. J. F. in 2019 and Dr. S. B. in 2022 that alleges a nexus between the Veteran's military activities and his thoracolumbar spine disorder, particularly in that the cervical disc disease worsened an underlying rheumatological condition that contributed to his later developing a back disorder.

The examiner should also opine whether any identified thoracolumbar spine disorders found, are at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) etiologically related to the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine disability. In addressing this matter, the examiner must address both causation and aggravation.

A complete rationale with supporting explanations should be provided for all opinions rendered.  

 

J.M. ESTES

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brown, B. D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.