Citation Nr: A25033194
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240624-450256
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for hypertension is denied.

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder (MDD) with insomnia, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current disability of hypertension or obstructive sleep apnea, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of any such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

2. Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, his current acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as MDD with recurrent anxious distress and insomnia, is related to his military service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1978 to January 1984 and from March 1984 to April 1993.

By way of background, in an August 2023 rating decision, a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office denied the claims on appeal. In December 2023, the Veteran timely filed a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) seeking review of the foregoing decision.

In a February 2024 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) performed such higher level review based on the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision and confirmed the denial of his claims for service connection. In June 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by filing a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

As to the claims denied herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, as the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of a current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service. Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992). Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

In McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time he files his claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim. However, in Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013), the Court held that when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to a claimant filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that, unfortunately, there is very little medical evidence available for review. Regarding the Veteran's reported outstanding medical treatments, the Board observes that, in January 2024, the Veteran submitted the requisite authorization form so as to allow VA to attempt to obtain his records from Saint Joseph of London and Mercy Clinic of Jackson for the period from 2001 to 2024. However, the AOJ contacted such medical facilities on multiple occasions in January and February 2024, and has not received a response to date. Additionally in January and February 2024 letters, the Veteran was notified that the AOJ was unable to obtain such records and provided an opportunity to submit such records; however, he did not do so. Thus, as VA has satisfied its duty to assist in such regard, the Board's review is limited to the evidence already of record. 

Furthermore, the record does not show that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of hypertension or obstructive sleep apnea at any time proximate to his May 2023 supplemental claim. Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for such claimed disorders is not warranted.

While the Veteran is competent to report his symptomatology, he, as a lay person, is not competent to diagnose or determine the etiology of either condition, as such requires the administration and interpretation of specialized clinical and diagnostic testing. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (explaining that while the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions).

Consequently, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that at no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current disability of hypertension or obstructive sleep apnea and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim. Therefore, given the lack of a current diagnosis of the claimed disorders, the threshold requirement for establishing service connection has not been established. See Brammer, supra. Thus, service connection for such disorders is not warranted.

In reaching such decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claims for service connection for these claimed disorders, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his claims must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran claims that he has an acquired psychiatric disorder, which is currently diagnosed as MDD with recurrent anxious distress and insomnia, as a result of events that occurred during his military service. Specifically, the Veteran has claimed that his in-service work as a correctional specialist and dog handler frequently exposed him to stressful and intense experiences.

As an initial matter, the Board acknowledges the AOJ's favorable finding from the February 2024 rating decision that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of MDD with recurrent anxious distress and insomnia. As the Board is bound by this favorable finding, the pertinent question remains whether such acquired psychiatric disorder is related to the Veteran's reported in-service stressors. 

Specifically, the Veteran explained in an in-service performance report from March 1988 that he had recently helped firefighters navigate the base during an active fire, which produced blinding smoke and heat. Next, he reported stopping an inmate from committing suicide, when he found him trying to cut his wrists with a razor. Finally, he reported frequently helping to subdue violent and hysterical inmates, which he found disturbing and emotionally upsetting.

A VA examiner acknowledged these service records documenting stressful experiences, but then offered a negative nexus opinion based solely on the lack of in-service treatment for any mental health condition. 

In contrast, a private examiner, Dr. L.C., also interviewed the Veteran in April 2023, considered these reported in-service stressors, and found that such was the most likely cause of the Veteran's currently diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder. Specifically, the examiner noted that the Veteran's in-service reports, his recent lay statements, and his in-service MOS in corrections supported his finding that the Veteran's current mental health conditions had onset during his military service in the Marine Corps.

Thus, after a careful review of the record, the Board finds that service connection is warranted for the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder. In this regard, the Dr. L.C. is a competent medical professional who considered the totality of the evidence, citing specific evidence in the record, and provided a rationale for their opinion. The VA examiner failed to similarly support the negative nexus opinion.

The Board also finds the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his symptoms highly probative. In this regard, he is competent to report the onset of his psychiatric symptoms, as they are directly and readily observable through his own senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). The Board also has no reason to doubt the veracity of his statements. Notably, the Veteran's stressful in-service work in corrections was contemporaneously documented. Therefore, the Board finds the Veteran's statements to be competent and credible. Thus, the aforementioned lay statements, in connection with Dr. L.C..'s April 2023 private opinion, indicate that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms, eventually diagnosed as MDD with recurrent anxious distress and insomnia, had their onset during service and have continued since such time. Accordingly, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that his current acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as MDD with recurrent anxious distress and insomnia, is related to his military service. Thus, service connection for such disorder is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

4. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction based on a lack of current diagnosis. However, the Veteran is competent to report on matters observed or within his personal knowledge, including the presence of erectile dysfunction. See Layno, supra. Therefore, there is competent evidence of a current disability of erectile dysfunction, as the Veteran reported experiencing the condition during the pendency of the claim. 

Accordingly, in light of the Veteran's lay statements, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed erectile dysfunction, to include whether such might be caused or aggravated by his concurrently claimed acquired psychiatric condition. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record and a copy of this Remand to a clinician for completion of an addendum medical opinion pertaining to the Veteran's erectile dysfunction. If the clinician determines that a new examination is necessary to provide the requested opinion, then such examination should be scheduled. The clinician is asked to determine the following:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran developed any current erectile dysfunction during or as a result of military service?

(B) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's currently diagnosed erectile dysfunction is caused or aggravated by his acquired psychiatric disorder, to include the medications taken for such disability?

For any aggravation found, the examiner should state, to the best of his or her ability, the baseline symptomatology and the amount, quantified if possible, of aggravation beyond the baseline symptomatology by the aggravation.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Breckenridge

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.