Citation Nr: A25033690
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-424812
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Compensation pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for status post (s/p) cholecystectomy due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022 is denied.

Compensation pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a trocar/puncture injury to the liver due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022 is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran incurred additional disability of trocar injury to the liver and gallbladder because of surgery performed at the VA medical facility in September 2022. 

2. The proximate cause of the gallbladder injury (s/p cholecystectomy) was not the carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, other instance of fault on the part of VA and was an event reasonably foreseeable. 

3. The proximate cause of the liver injury was not the carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, other instance of fault on the part of VA and was an event reasonably foreseeable.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria to establish disability compensation for gallbladder injury (s/p cholecystectomy) due to surgery at a VA medical facility in September 2022 pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1151; 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

2. The criteria to establish disability compensation trocar/puncture injury to the liver due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022 pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1151; 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1989 to October 1992.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 higher-level review rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to compensation pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for s/p cholecystectomy due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022

2. Entitlement to compensation pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a trocar/puncture injury to the liver due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022

The law provides that compensation may be paid for a qualifying additional disability not the result of the Veteran's willful misconduct, caused by hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination furnished the Veteran either by a VA employee or in a VA facility when the proximate cause of the disability was: (A) carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA in furnishing the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination; or (B) an event not recently foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151.

To warrant compensation benefits under 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a) for additional disability due to hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, examination, actual causation is required, not the result of continuance or natural progress of a disease or injury for which the care, treatment, or examination was furnished, unless VA's failure to timely diagnose and properly treat the disease or injury proximately caused the continuance or natural progress. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

If additional disability is shown, VA must consider whether the causation requirements for a valid claim have been met. To establish actual causation, the evidence must show that the medical or surgical treatment rendered resulted in the Veteran's additional disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c)(1).

In addition, the proximate cause of the disability claimed must be the event that directly caused it, as distinguished from a remote contributing cause. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d). It must be shown that the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination caused the Veteran's additional disability, and that (i) VA failed to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable health care provider, or that (ii) VA furnished the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination without the informed consent of the Veteran or the Veteran's representative.

To establish the proximate cause of an additional disability or death, VA's carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault in furnishing hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination must be demonstrated. Whether the proximate cause of a Veteran's additional disability or death was an event not recently foreseeable is to be determined based on what a reasonable health care provider would have foreseen. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d). 

VA treatment records reflect the Veteran had a history of chronic left lower quadrant (LLQ) abdominal pain and received treatment on multiple occasions for recurrent diverticulitis. Accordingly, in September 2022, the Veteran elected to undergo robotic assisted sigmoid/left colectomy, splenic flexure takedown. A September 13, 2022, VA surgical treatment record documents that the surgeon advised the Veteran of the risks and benefits of the procedure. The Veteran was advised that specific risks of the procedure included bleeding, infection, recurrence, perforation, missed lesions and inability to complete. The Veteran understood the explanation of the risks and benefits and gave informed consent for the procedure (i.e., the Veteran consented to the treatment plan). In addition, on September 13, 2022, the anesthesiologist advised the Veteran of the risks of the anesthesia administered for the surgery. Specifically, the anesthesiologist advised the Veteran that minor risks included nausea, vomiting, and pain where an injection is given. Rare, but severe complications of anesthesia included injury to blood vessels, drug reactions, bleeding, blood clots, loss of sensation or limb function, infection, paralysis, stroke, brain damage, heart attack, and death. The Veteran gave informed consent.

A September 14, 2022, surgical treatment record documents that the Veteran was in stable condition s/p sigmoid colectomy, splenic flexure takedown. The surgeon advised the Veteran that he sustained a trocar injury to liver and gallbladder during the procedure. A September 15, 2022, surgical treatment record reiterates the Veteran underwent robotic assisted sigmoid colectomy with takedown splenic flexure. The surgeon noted that the visiport entry was complicated by a non-bleeding liver puncture. A drain placement was made for possible bile leak. The Veteran complained of epigastric discomfort but no right upper quadrant (RUQ) or generalized pain. He reported some bilious drainage around the JP drain in the right subcostal site that morning, but it was now dry. He was tolerating full liquid diet and experienced no nausea.

A September 25, 2022, surgical note reflects the Veteran was still having intense RUQ abdominal pain s/p xi sigmoid colectomy. The surgeon advised the Veteran and his sister that the options were to continue the Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain for several weeks or undergo robotic cholecystectomy. The Veteran and his sister desired to pursue the surgical option. The surgeon explained the risks, benefits, and alternatives of robotic assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Risks included infection, major and minor venous and arterial bleeding requiring transfusion or reoperation, hernia, missed lesions, intraabdominal organ injury, cystic duct leak, common bile duct injury or transection, inability to complete, perforation, sepsis, or death. Medical risks included urinary tract infection (UTI), deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism (PE), myocardial infarction (MI), pneumonia requiring prolonged ventilator, sepsis, or death. The surgeon also explained to the Veteran that, since he had recent surgery, surgical risks were higher due to intraabdominal adhesions. The Veteran understood the explanation of the risks and benefits and gave informed consent (i.e., the Veteran consented to the treatment plan).

The September 28, 2022, surgical pre-operation treatment record documents that the Veteran underwent xi sigmoid colectomy and had inadvertent trocar injury to the gallbladder with post operative bile leak. The surgeon noted that the Veteran still had high bilious output via the JP drain and explained to the Veteran, his sister, and mother that his options were: do nothing and continue observation until bilious output was minimal, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for stent placement, or robotic cholecystectomy. The surgeon reiterated the risks, benefits, and alternatives of robotic assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Risks included infection, major and minor venous and arterial bleeding requiring transfusion or reoperation, hernia, missed lesions, intraabdominal organ injury, cystic duct leak, common bile duct injury or transection, MI, pneumonia requiring prolonged ventilator, sepsis, or death. Again, the Veteran understood the explanation of the risks and benefits and gave informed consent (i.e., the Veteran consented to the treatment plan). 

The September 28, 2022, operation report reflects that the Veteran underwent robotic assisted cholecystectomy for his bile leak. There were no complications of the procedure.

The February 2023VA intestinal conditions (and intestinal surgery) examination reports document diagnosis of chronic gastritis with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS); trocar injury to liver and gallbladder; s/p cholecystectomy; and s/p sigmoid colectomy, splenic flexure takedown. The examination reports documents that the Veteran underwent sigmoid colectomy, splenic flexure takedown for his diverticulitis with intraabdominal abscess in September 2022. He suffered a trocar injury to the liver and gallbladder during the surgery and subsequently underwent gallbladder removal (cholecystectomy) later in September 2022. 

In the March 2023 VA medical opinion, the internist noted that VA diagnosis and treatment were appropriate and timely; accepted, appropriate protocols were followed; and the standard of care was met. The internist opined that it was less likely than not that the claimed conditions, gallbladder removal and liver damage (i.e., additional disability), were caused by or became worse due to VA treatment, carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel; or the additional disability resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider and/or failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease/disability allowed the disease/disability to continue to progress. The internist noted that informed consent for the colectomy was obtained, and the Veteran was notified of the risks, including major arterial and venous bleeding, perforation, and intraabdominal injury. The Veteran elected to proceed with the colectomy despite these known potential risks.

The internist explained that appropriate care was taken in the operating room and protocol was followed but noted that, during the surgery, it appeared to the surgeon that there was an inadvertent trocar injury that was promptly recognized and addressed. The internist noted there was also difficulty with insufflation and the insufflation tubing appeared to have small amount of bile draining so the trocar was slowly withdrawn until the abdomen was visualized and insufflation was good. The internist noted that it appeared that the trocar went through the liver and, if the gallbladder was entered, it was likely through the liver site of injury into the gallbladder. The area of trocar entry at the liver site was examined closely and there was a minimal amount of bleeding which had stopped and there was no bile leak. Because the injury appeared self-contained, the surgeon proceeded with the colectomy. The injury site was inspected at the end of the case and the Veteran had good hemostasis without any bile leakage.

The internist noted that the Veteran was closely monitored after the surgical procedure, and it was determined that he developed postoperative bile leak with high output from the trocar injury to the gallbladder. The Veteran, his sister, and mom were advised of his treatment options and the Veteran elected to undergo cholecystectomy. 

The internist summarized that a known complication of the colectomy surgery had occurred. The Veteran received and gave informed consent for the colectomy. The internist reiterated that he was advised of the potential risks and chose to proceed with the colectomy despite the potential risks. The internist explained that, in laparoscopic surgery, trocars are needed to seal the skin openings, while permitting entry and removal of the surgical instruments. The introduction of trocars through the skin into the abdominal cavity was usually safe, but in a minority of cases, life-threatening complications can occur, including puncture into a large blood vessel and puncture into abdominal organs (i.e., intestine, stomach, or liver). The internist reiterated that the inadvertent trocar injury was promptly recognized, and the Veteran was offered several treatment options of which he chose cholecystectomy. After the cholecystectomy, the liver bed where the trocar injury occurred was completely healed. The internist noted there was no failure to treat.

Accordingly, the internist opined that it was less likely than not that the gallbladder removal (cholecystectomy) and liver damage were caused by or became worse because of VA treatment, carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel. Nor did the additional disability result from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider. Moreover, there was no failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the disability and allow the disability to continue to progress.

Here, the Veteran incurred additional disability because of the VA treatment in September 2022, namely trocar injury to the gallbladder and liver (requiring cholecystectomy). The remaining inquiry is whether the proximate cause of the additional disability was carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or a similar instance of fault on the part of the VA; or an event not reasonably foreseeable. 

Here, the evidence documented shows that the Veteran's additional disability was not caused by carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or a similar instance of fault on the part of the VA. The inadvertent trocar injury was promptly recognized, and the Veteran was offered several treatment options of which he chose cholecystectomy. After the cholecystectomy, the liver bed where the trocar injury occurred was completely healed. The internist concluded there was no failure to treat. Thus, VA did not fail to exercise a degree of care expected by a reasonable treating provider in performing the cholecystectomy after the trocar injury to the gallbladder. In addition, the Board reiterates that, in performing the initial colectomy for the diverticulitis on September 13, 2022, the VA surgeon demonstrated a reasonable degree of skill, judgment, and care.

Moreover, the trocar injury to the gallbladder and liver was an event that was reasonably foreseeable. In the March 2023 VA medical opinion, the internist explained that a known complication of the colectomy surgery had occurred and noted that the Veteran received and gave informed consent for the colectomy and chose to proceed with the colectomy despite the potential risks. Thus, the additional disability was not an event not reasonably foreseeable. For these reasons, compensation benefits, pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 are not warranted and the benefits sought on appeal are denied.

The Veteran is not competent to establish that he has an additional gallbladder (s/p cholecystectomy) and liver disabilities due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022 that was the result of VA's carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or other instance of fault. Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience. Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Lay evidence may be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when:

(1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition (i.e., where the medical condition is simple, for example a broken leg);

(2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or;

(3) lay testimony describing symptoms that supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. 

Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  

Because the determination of additional disability due to carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment or other instance of fault is a complex medical issue that cannot be addressed by a layperson, the Veteran's allegations are non-specific and are no more than conjecture. They do not rise to the type of evidence addressed by Jandreau.

					(CONTINUED ON THE NEXT PAGE) 

As such, the claims of disability compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for additional gallbladder (s/p cholecystectomy) and liver disabilities due to treatment at a VA medical facility in September 2022 are denied. The evidence is not in approximate balance between that favoring the claims and against the claims. There is no reasonable doubt to resolve. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3rd 1391 (2021). 

 

L.M. YASUI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jackson, Graig

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.