Citation Nr: A25033709
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240201-417839
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from a December 2023 rating decision that granted service connection for a right hip disability; the appeal is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's appointment of the appellant as their attorney, and the associated fee agreement, are valid.

2. In August 2023, the appellant, acting as the Veteran's authorized representative, submitted a supplemental claim seeking service connection for a hip disability. 

3. Service connection for a hip disability had previously been denied by rating decisions in June 2017 and December 2017. 

4. A December 2023 rating decision then awarded service connection for the Veteran's right hip strain with painful motion and assigned an initial 10 percent rating effective from the August 2023 date of claim, resulting in an award of past-due benefits of approximately $498.

5. The December 2023 rating decision was not the initial decision on the issue of service connection for a disability of the right hip.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria have been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the December 2023 rating decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty for training in the United States Army National Guard from January 2013 to June 2013, a period that now constitutes active military service based on the incurrence of the service-connected hip disability during this period of service. 38 U.S.C. § 101(24). 

The appellant is the Veteran's attorney, appointed to represent her in other matters before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The present matter is a simultaneously contested claim because the Veteran and the attorney have a competing financial interest in the monetary amount involved. For that reason, the attorney does not represent the Veteran in this matter due to their opposing financial interests. 

The fee decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision in the matter of eligibility for attorney fees arising from the December 2023 rating decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, both the Veteran and the appellant were notified of the relevant rating and fee decisions issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran was also provided a copy of the appellant's February 2024 Notice of Disagreement in March 2024 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Therefore, the Board now proceeds with direct review of the appeal. 

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from a December 2023 rating decision that granted service connection for a right hip disability; the appeal is granted.

Legal Criteria

A claimant may have attorney or agent representation for the prosecution of claims for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5904. 

A power of attorney, executed on either VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, is required to represent a claimant before VA. The power of attorney shall contain the signature of the claimant and the signature of the agent or attorney and shall be presented to the appropriate VA office for filing in the Veteran's claims folder. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(a). A power of attorney may be revoked at any time, and an agent or attorney may be discharged at any time. Unless a claimant specifically indicates otherwise, the receipt of a new power of attorney executed by the claimant and the organization or individual providing representation shall constitute a revocation of an existing power of attorney. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f)(1).

All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney. To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following: the name of the Veteran; the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the Veteran; the name of any disinterested third-party payer and the relationship between the third-party payer and the Veteran, claimant, or appellant; the applicable VA file number; and the specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined. Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past-due benefits. A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the AOJ within 30 days of its execution. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). Fee agreements must be reasonable; those which do not exceed 20 percent of past-due benefits are presumed reasonable. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(f).

Agents and attorneys may not charge fees for services provided before the date on which a claimant or appellant is provided notice of the AOJ's initial decision with respect to the case. This limitation does not apply to fees charged, allowed, or paid for services provided with respect to proceedings before a court. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). An attorney or agent may charge fees when past-due benefits are awarded after a Veteran has filed a supplemental claim because the decision after the supplemental claim is not the initial decision with respect to the case. See Military Veterans Advocacy v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 7 F.4th 1110, 1138-1141 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (MVA). 

A case, for fees purposes, encompasses all potential claims raised by the evidence, applying all relevant laws and regulations. See, e.g., Perciavalle v. McDonough, 74 F.4th 1374, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2023). 

When a claimant or appellant and an attorney or agent have entered into a fee agreement under which the total amount of the fee payable to the agent or attorney (i) is to be paid to the attorney by the Secretary directly from any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim, and (ii) is contingent on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant, the total fee payable to the attorney or agent may not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim. A claim shall be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 14.636(h)(1), 14.636(h)(2).

The term "past-due benefits" means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a readjudicated claim after a denial by an AOJ or the Board or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award and the date of the grant of the benefit by the AOJ, the Board, or an appellate court. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3). The fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable to the Veteran. See Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264 (2020); see also Gumpenberger v. Wilkie, 973 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Snyder v. Nicholson, 489 F.3d 1213 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the "past-due benefits" will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the AOJ following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased rating is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability rating initially assigned by the AOJ, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3)(i).

The "benefit-of-the-doubt" rule is not for application in a contested claim such as this case because the benefit of the doubt cannot be given to both parties who have competing interests. See Elias v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 259, 263 (1997).

Analysis & Conclusion

The relevant factual timeline is as described in the findings of fact above. 

The Board finds that the attorney is eligible for attorney fees based on the past-due benefits awarded by the December 2023 rating decision that awarded service connection for a right hip disability because this rating decision was not the initial decision with respect to the case, and the other necessary requirements to establish eligibility to receive a fee were met.  

First, the Board finds that the representation and fee agreements between the parties are valid because they contain all the necessary components described above.

Next, the Board finds that the December 2023 rating decision created a retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits that could be subject to fees. Specifically, this rating decision established the Veteran's sole service-connected right hip disability (assigned as a 10 percent rating for right hip strain with painful motion, and additional noncompensable ratings based on the specific limitations of motion in extension and rotation) and awarded the initial disability rating to be assigned, effective as of the date that the August 2023 supplemental claim seeking service connection was received. 

The Board also finds that the December 2023 rating decision was not the first decision to adjudicate whether service connection was warranted for the Veteran's right hip disability. The governing statutory and regulatory authorities make clear that in VA disability claims adjudications, attorney fees are not warranted when past-due monetary benefits arise from the AOJ's initial adjudication with respect to the case. See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). In plain terms, Congress established this system because "Congress doesn't want veterans to pay fees before VA denies them a benefit. But once VA denies a claim, attorneys can be compensated for helping veterans get the benefits they deserve." Chisholm v. Collins, No. 22-7028, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336, *10 (Mar. 13, 2025). One might also think of this as VA having the first opportunity to reach a grant of the benefit sought on their own, without attorney or representative costs to the Veteran, and then, only if VA denies the claim, a fee may be charged in correcting that denial. 

Here, a claim of service connection for the right hip was previously denied by VA in June 2017 and December 2017. So, the December 2023 rating decision that produced the past-due benefits from which the attorney now seeks a fee was not the initial decision with respect to the case and fees for the representation services provided in obtaining that award of service connection are warranted. 

[CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE]

?

The attorney's appeal for eligibility to receive a fee based on the past-due benefits awarded by the December 2023 rating decision is granted. 

 

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.