Citation Nr: A25033919
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-426452
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disability is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric disability manifested in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but the evidence weighs persuasively against finding that his psychiatric disability manifested in symptoms productive of total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1990 through June 1994, with additional service in the Navy Reserve.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office, which was the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Preliminary Matters

The Board notes that the Veteran has a combined schedular rating of 100 percent, but does not have any, one, single disability rated at 100 percent (total) disability nor is he in receipt of special monthly compensation housebound benefits (SMC(s)).  

As such, the Board gave consideration as to whether his increased rating claim here reasonably raised the issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) based solely on the underlying PTSD. See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008) (a schedular 100 percent rating does not render TDIU moot when granting TDIU based solely on one disability may result in the grant of SMC(s)).

Here, however, the Veteran does not have a separate disability (aside from PTSD) rated 60 percent or higher and, therefore, even if entitlement to a TDIU were found solely premised on his PTSD, it would not qualify him for SMC(s) benefits. Under these circumstances, TDIU is moot insofar as being part and parcel of the underlying increased rating claim on appeal here. Cf. id. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury only where the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; see also Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991); Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1995). Whether the issue is one of an initial rating or an increased rating, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Psychiatric conditions are rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, which provides that a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent evaluation is assignable where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); and disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms associated with the psychiatric rating criteria are not intended to constitute exhaustive lists, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 443 (2002). Thus, the Board will consider whether "the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code," and, if so, the "equivalent rating will be assigned." Id. In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, the Federal Circuit held that a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating "by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail. See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal). To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disability is denied.

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with substance abuse disorder, currently rated at 70 percent. See March 2024 VA Form 10182. This appeal stems from his December 2023 application for an increased rating, which was filed within one year after a May 18, 2023, Intent to File a Claim. See May 2023 Intent to File Letter; December 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. Accordingly, the Board will consider entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent from May 18, 2023. The Board will also consider up to one year prior to receipt of the Veteran's increased rating claim, to the extent an increase in severity is factually ascertainable. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's VA treatment records during this period show that he consistently reported feeling depressed and that the results of a depression screening were positive. See June 2023 Primary Care Note; June 2023 Preventative Medicine Note; September 2023 Mental Health Telephone Encounter Note. He repeatedly denied suicidal and homicidal ideation, and the results of a suicide screening were negative. Id. He also denied experiencing visual or audial hallucinations. See September 2023 Mental Health Telephone Encounter Note. He did report one suicide attempt about two years in the past. Id. He also described feeling aggravated, anxious, and sometimes hopeless. Id. A treating clinician described him as alert and fully oriented. Id.

There are no relevant private medical treatment records during the appeal period.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination for PTSD in December 2023. The examiner noted diagnoses of PTSD and alcohol use disorder, and he indicated that it is not possible to distinguish which symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis. The Veteran reported that he alternates living with his mother and his wife, and was currently living with his mother, with whom he has a good relationship. He stated that he and his wife are not separated, but that their relationship has been "kind of distant." He had no hobbies, activities, or friends. He was not employed and had not worked since 2015. He denied current suicidal ideation.

The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. He also indicated that the Veteran may possibly experience auditory perceptual disturbances when drinking alcohol. The examiner described the Veteran as functionally dressed and groomed, poorly engaged, alert, and without current suicidal or homicidal ideation. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's psychiatric disability resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

Based on the above, the Board finds the Veteran is appropriately rated as 70 percent disabled under DC 9411 throughout the period on appeal. His psychiatric disability manifested in many symptoms that are contemplated by the assigned 70 percent rating: near-continuous panic or depression, impaired impulse control, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. These symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment in most areas, including significant deficiencies in work, family relations, judgment, and mood. For example, although he remained married to his wife, he described their relationship as distant. He had no friends, hobbies, or activities. He described feeling depressed, aggravated, anxious, and sometimes hopeless.

However, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against a rating in excess of 70 percent at any point during the appeal period.

The Veteran's psychiatric disability has not manifested in any symptoms contemplated by the 100 percent rating. The December 2023 VA examiner described him as alert, functionally dressed, and functionally groomed. A VA clinician described him as alert and fully oriented. There is no evidence that he presented a persistent danger of hurting others, and instead he repeatedly denied homicidal ideation. While he had mild memory loss, there is no evidence that this was as severe as memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported one past suicide attempt, which is similar to persistent danger of self-harm. While the Board does not wish to minimize the gravity of this experience, the evidence shows that it was an isolated incident that occurred before the appeal period. During the relevant VA treatment records and the December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran regularly denied suicidal ideation. Thus, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's psychiatric disability caused a persistent danger of hurting himself as contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria.

The Board also notes that the December 2023 VA examiner stated that the Veteran may experience auditory perceptual disturbances while drinking alcohol. However, there is no evidence that these auditory hallucinations (if they occurred at all) were persistent, as contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria. Indeed, during VA treatment, the Veteran denied experiencing visual and auditory hallucinations. Further, his possible hallucinations have not been attributed to deficits in executive functioning, attention, or concentration. On the contrary, he was repeatedly found to be alert and fully oriented. Such findings demonstrate that the Veteran's possible, transient hallucinations had minimal effect on his occupational and social functioning, and do not warrant an increased rating.

In sum, the Veteran's psychiatric disability has not approximated total occupational and social impairment at any time during the appeal period. Although he reportedly does not have friends, he has maintained a good relationship with his mother and a long-term (even if distant) relationship with his wife. Additionally, he does not present a persistent danger of hurting others. In other words, he does not have total social impairment. The criteria for a 100 percent evaluation requires both total occupational and total social impairment. See 38 C.F.R. 4.130, DC 9411. Accordingly, a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted.

The Board finds that the Veteran's disability is fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disability. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a total rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Harris, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.