Citation Nr: A25033348
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 210730-175811
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a left elbow condition is remanded.

Service connection for a nerve condition, left arm (claimed as severe nerve condition, left arm), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps during both the Vietnam War Era and Peacetime from April 1973 to April 1976.

In his timely July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence docket.

Service Connection for a Left Elbow Condition

Service Connection for a Left Arm Nerve Condition

The Veteran asserts that his current left elbow and left arm nerve conditions were caused by an injury he sustained during service.

After a review of the record, the Board determines that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when it is necessary to make a decision on a claim. 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A (d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159 (c)(4). VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination and a medical opinion was not obtained. The AOJ conceded that the Veteran has a current ulnar neuropathy disability. The Veteran asserts that he fell 15-20 feet from a cargo net during training at Camp Lejeune and landed on his left arm, which has led to his current left arm conditions. See November 2020 Veteran Statement. While the Veteran's service records do not reflect any complaints of, or treatment for, a left arm injury, the Veteran explained that although his superiors were aware of the fall, he did not seek treatment because the atmosphere in the Corps at the time was to "carry on" if you were "bleeding but still breathing," and because he was months away from discharge. Id. He further submitted a corroborating statement from a fellow servicemember confirming the in-service injury and events afterward-including obtaining a sling for the Veteran-and describing the general reluctance of the Marines to report to sick call and the stigma associated with going to medical. See Undated Buddy Statement.

The Board finds that the low threshold under McLendon is met. There was sufficient evidence at the time of the rating decision on appeal to necessitate a medical examination of the Veteran to fully develop the record prior to adjudicating his claim. This deficiency means that the decision denying service connection is based on a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Therefore, it is necessary to remand the claim to correct this duty to assist error and obtain a medical examination and opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Arrange for a clinician to provide an examination and opinion to determine the nature and likely cause of any left arm disability and/or neurological impairments. The clinician should review the claims file. Based on a review of the record and examination of the Veteran the clinician should provide an opinion with a rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) Identify all left arm disabilities, including any disabilities of the left elbow joint and any left upper extremity neurological impairments.

For each left arm and neurological disability diagnosed, was such disability either incurred in or otherwise related to the Veteran's service?

All opinions should be accompanied by a rationale.

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Meadows, Samantha A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.