Citation Nr: A25033765
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-430831
DATE:  April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability, to include major depressive disorder, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's psychiatric disability did not manifest during active service and there is no indication that it is causally related to his active service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a psychiatric disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps Reserve (USMCR). He had active duty for training (ADT) from May 1988 to October 1988 and served on active duty from January 1991 to April 1991.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2023 and April 2023 decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In April 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and selecting the Direct Review option. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the AOJ at the time of the March 2023 and April 2023 decisions with respect to the issues addressed in each. 38 C.F.R. §?20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Regarding the claim herein decided, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Regarding the claims remanded herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the claims for service connection for a left knee disability and a back disability were previously denied. In the April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been submitted and readjudicated the claims on the merits. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable finding. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

On his April 2024 NOD, the Veteran also indicated that he disagreed with the April 2023 decision's denial of a right knee disability; however, that decision did not address the right knee. Furthermore, there is no decision of record dated one year prior to the NOD that addressed the right knee. Therefore, that issue is not before the Board. The Veteran also listed the issue of diabetes mellitus; however, the AOJ has not addressed that issue. If the Veteran wants to pursue those claims, he should file a claim for those benefits on the proper form. 

Service Connection - Psychiatric Disability 

The Veteran maintains that his current psychiatric disability was incurred in or is related to his active service. 

The Veteran's service treatment records are unremarkable for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to a psychiatric disability. A September 1988 Reserve examination report indicated that his psychiatric evaluation was normal. 

Post service, a July 2015 VA treatment record indicated that the Veteran's depression screening was negative. In March 2018, his depression screening was positive, but it was noted that there was no mental health condition requiring further evaluation. In August 2021, a depression screening was negative. In September 2022, he was referred to the mental health clinic for depression. An October 2022 psychology note indicated that he reported that his wife and adult son noticed his irritability and told him that he needed help. He stated that he was easily angered by things people said or did, and that this had been going on since he left the Marines but was more pronounced now. The preliminary diagnosis was major depressive disorder, single, moderate. In November 2022, he reported increased depression. He stated that he had been physically abused in basic training, 30 years ago, and noticed that the ideas of himself as a failure had persisted since then. 

The report of a December 2022 VA examination confirmed a diagnosis of major depressive disorder with mild anxious distress. It was noted that there was no relevant military history reported during the examination or upon review of the available medical records. It was noted that the Veteran had been receiving individual counseling with the VA for approximately three months. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. The examiner stated that the Veteran current symptoms were less likely than not caused by or related to any depression or anxiety difficulties during his military service. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not receive any treatment and was not diagnosed with a mental disorder during service, and that there was no nexus between his current symptoms and any depression or anxiety difficulties he experienced during his military service. 

In this case, the Board finds the most probative evidence weighs against the claim. The Veteran's service treatment records are unremarkable for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to a psychiatric disability. At a September 1988 Reserve examination, his psychiatric evaluation was normal. Post service, a July 2015 depression screening was negative. The first indication of a psychiatric disability was a positive depression screening in March 2018, over 26 years after he was discharged from active service. The length of time between active service and the initial documentation of the claimed disability is a factor that tends to weigh against a claim for service connection. 

In addition, the December 2022 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's current psychiatric disability was incurred in or was related to service. The examiner reviewed the claims file, considered and addressed the Veteran's contentions, and provided rationale for the opinion. For those reasons, the Board finds the VA examiner's opinion significantly probative. There are no medical opinions to the contrary.

The Board has also considered the lay evidence of record. The Veteran is competent to describe what he has personally observed or experienced; however, to the extent his statements conflict with the contemporaneous medical evidence, the Board does not find them credible. Furthermore, the ultimate question of etiology in this case extends beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and is beyond the competence of lay witnesses.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection - Left Knee

An August 1988 service treatment record indicated that the Veteran reported having pain on the lateral side of his left knee for one day following physical training. The assessment was patella femoral dysfunction of the left knee. The report of a September 1988 Reserve examination indicated that his lower extremities were normal. 

Post service, an August 2022 VA treatment record indicated that the Veteran complained of pain in his back and knees. In October 2022, X-rays of the knees showed degenerative changes, right greater than left. 

During a January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that during service, his duties included carrying heavy weight, 65 pounds or more, for long distances over rough and uneven terrain. He stated that both his knees began having pain and stiffness in the morning after increased physical demand. The diagnosis was bilateral degenerative arthritis. In March 2023, a different examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. As rationale, the examiner noted that the Veteran had one visit for knee pain in August 1988, but that there were no indications of a knee problem on a September 1988 separation examination. Therefore, the examiner concluded that the knee pain had resolved by the time of military discharge and a nexus had not been established. 

In this case, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's contention that carrying heavy weight for long distances during service caused his current left knee disability. Therefore, the Board finds the March 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate, which constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. Accordingly, a remand is necessary to correct that error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Back Disability

A November 1989 service treatment record indicated that the Veteran complained of lumbar pain, possibly the result of lifting boxes at his job. A note was made to refer to "last NPO August 18, 1988, Possibly herniated disk." The Board notes that no treatment records dated in August 1988 referring to the Veteran's low back or a possible herniated disk have been associated with the claims file. Although his service treatment records have been obtained, the AOJ did not request any in-patient clinical records that may be stored separately, which constitutes a pre-decision duty-to-assist error. Therefore, a remand is necessary to correct that error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In addition, the Board finds that a remand is also necessary for an additional VA medical opinion. During a January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his back pain started during service while carrying heavy artillery rounds. He reported that he would hump heavy gear over uneven terrain for long distances. In March 2023, a different examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. As rationale, the examiner noted that at a September 1988 physical, there was no report of any back issues, and the only notation of back pain was in November 1989, outside the period of ADT. The examiner, however, did not address the Veteran's contention that his back disability was caused by carrying heavy weight over long distances or the notation referencing a possible herniated disk in August 1988. Therefore, the Board finds the March 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate, which constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. Accordingly, a remand is necessary to correct that error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should attempt to obtain any separately stored in-patient (clinical records) related to the Veteran's low back and possible herniated disk referenced on August 18, 1988.

2. Obtain a medical opinion from an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left knee disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Based on a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present left knee disability is etiologically related to the Veteran's service, to include carrying heavy weight over long distances. 

A rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

3. Obtain a medical opinion from an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Based on a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present back disability is etiologically related to the Veteran's service, to include carrying artillery and heavy weight over long distances. The examiner should also address the reference to an August 18, 1988, record, which indicated possible herniated disk.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Mishalanie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.