Citation Nr: A25033422
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 220801-264640
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to October 14, 2019, for the temporary total evaluation for pes planus, bilateral with left foot residuals s/p surgery (foot disability) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle stain is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran had right foot surgery on October 14, 2019. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to October 14, 2019, for the temporary total evaluation for the Veteran's foot disability have not been met.   38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.30.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1985 to May 1988 and February 1989 to June 2006.  The Board thanks the Veteran for his honorable service to our Nation!

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2021 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

By way of background, in June 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2020 rating decision.  In August 2021 the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran subsequently filed the August 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the direct docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2020 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right ankle strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of these issues.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an effective date prior to October 14, 2019, for the temporary total evaluation for the Veteran's foot disability.

The Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted for the temporary total evaluation for his foot disability.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30, a temporary total rating will be assigned effective the date of hospital admission or outpatient treatment. 

On October 28, 2019, the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, requesting temporary total disability due to convalescing following a right foot surgery related to his foot disability.  

Private treatment records from October 2019 document that the Veteran had surgery on his right foot on October 14, 2019. 

In March 2020, the Veteran reiterated that he was seeking entitlement to a 100 percent, temporary total disability rating for recovering from his October 14, 2019, surgery. 

In the August 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to a temporary total disability rating effective October 14, 2019, the date of the Veteran's right foot surgery. 

Upon review, the Board finds that an effective date prior to October 14, 2019, for a temporary total disability rating for the Veteran's foot disability is not warranted. Here, the Veteran was granted a temporary total disability rating for his foot disability following his right foot surgery.

As noted above, VA regulations provide that a temporary total rating may be assigned effective the date of hospital admission.  There is no legal basis under the applicable VA laws and regulations pertaining to convalescent ratings for the assignment of an effective date for convalescence prior to the date of hospital admission or treatment.

The Veteran does not contend, nor does the evidence reflect, that the Veteran's right foot surgery was performed prior to October 14, 2019.  Because an effective date may not be assigned prior to the date of the Veteran's surgery, the claim seeking entitlement to an effective date prior to October 14, 2019, must be denied.  38 C.F.R. § 4.30.

The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service, and this decision in no way is meant to detract from that service. However, given the record before it, an earlier effective date for the temporary total disability rating is not warranted at this time.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for left ankle strain is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle stain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection for left and right ankle strain is warranted secondary to his service-connected foot disability.

In August 2021, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran was diagnosed with left and right ankle strain.  The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings under the AMA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  In support of this finding, the Board also notes that the April 2019 VA examination documents that the Veteran has current diagnoses of left and right ankle strain. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for a bilateral foot disability. 

As to the nexus element, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the June 2020 rating decision on appeal. 

During the December 2016 VA examination, the Veteran reported decreased range of motion, numbness, and tingling in his feet and the examiner noted that it interfered with his ability to stand, walk, and climb.  

March 2019 VA treatment records document chronic foot and ankle pain, limping, and right knee pain related to bone spurs from 2010. 

During the April 2019 VA examination, the Veteran reported experiencing ankle pain beginning in 2006 after years of prolonged running and hiking on uneven terrain.

In June 2019, during a private examination, the Veteran reported difficulties with his ankles and feet beginning in 2010.  Specifically, the Veteran noted that he had to alter his gait to alleviate his foot pain. 

In November 2019, the Veteran stated that his foot disability caused him to have difficulty walking and standing and altered his gait, and that these symptoms caused "strain to the ankles which are directly connected to the feet."

In December 2019, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left and right ankle strains are less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his bilateral foot disabilities.  The examiner reasoned that "there is no medical documentation of the veteran falling due to foot pain and injuring his ankle" and that "[w]hile it is noted the veteran is unable to stand for long periods of time due to the pain, this does not in turn lead to falls, but simply the need to sit down and rest due to the pain."  Further, the examiner noted that "there is no documented reports of falls in the medical record due to foot pain" and the Veteran noted in a prior examination that his ankle pain began in 2006 following "years of prolonged running and hiking on uneven terrain" rather than a fall. 

Upon review, the Board finds that the December 2019 VA medical opinions are inadequate because the examiner provided an opinion addressing solely whether the Veteran's left and right ankle strains were causally related to his bilateral foot disability.  Absent from the examiner's opinions is any discussion of whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral foot disability aggravated his left and right ankle strains.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 138-40 (2013).  Thus, a duty to assist error has occurred and an addendum VA medical opinion is necessary before this matter can be adjudicated.  

Further, although the examiner did address the Veteran's lay statements regarding falls, the examiner did not address the Veteran's statements that his bilateral foot disability caused an altered gait and weakness that he asserts put additional pressure on his ankles and caused his left and right ankle strain.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) (Noting that an "examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion.").  

The Board acknowledges the April 2019 negative VA medical opinions.  However, the AOJ previously found these medical opinions inadequate for failure to adequately address the Veteran's lay statements.  See June 2021 rating decision.  As such, each is afforded little to no probative value.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from a clinician who can provide a medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left ankle strain.  A copy of the claims file, to include this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  

The examiner is asked to provide a medical opinion addressing the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's left ankle strain causally related to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral foot disability? 

(b.) Was the Veteran's left ankle strain aggravated (has undergone a measurable increase in its severity as shown by comparing the current disability to medical evidence created prior to any aggravation) by his service-connected bilateral foot disability?

(c.) If the Veteran's left ankle strain has been aggravated by his service-connected bilateral foot disability, the examiner must also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability. This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time.

In doing so, the examiner should explicitly consider and discuss the Veteran's reports of an altered gait and weakness due to his bilateral foot disability and what, if any, impact that had on the development of his left ankle strain.  

A rationale for any opinion must be provided.

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from a clinician who can provide a medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right ankle strain.  A copy of the claims file, to include this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  

The examiner is asked to provide a medical opinion addressing the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's right ankle strain causally related to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral foot disability? 

(b.) Was the Veteran's right ankle strain aggravated (has undergone a measurable increase in its severity as shown by comparing the current disability to medical evidence created prior to any aggravation) by his service-connected bilateral foot disability?

(c.) If the Veteran's right ankle strain has been aggravated by his service-connected bilateral foot disability, the examiner must also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability. This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time.

In doing so, the examiner should explicitly consider and discuss the Veteran's reports of an altered gait and weakness due to his bilateral foot disability and what, if any, impact that had on the development of his right ankle strain.  

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webster, Rebecca

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.