Citation Nr: A25033742
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 221109-293001
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to placement in a priority group status higher than priority group 5 for purposes of being copay exempt for prescriptions in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) health care system is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran does not have a singular or combined rating of 50 percent or greater based on one or more service connected disabilities or unemployability, nor was he awarded the Medal of Honor.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for eligibility for copay exempt status under priority group 1 within the VA health care system have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1710 ; 38 C.F.R. § 17.36.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1972 to July 1976. 

The decision on appeal was issued in October 2022 by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Health Eligibility Center (HEC).  In the November 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In his November 2022 VA Form 10182, the Veteran stated he was appealing the income verification methodology.  He submitted a statement where he contends the HEC determination methodology is flawed and he requested the VA to recognize the Internal Revenue System (IRS) deductions when determining income.   

Income Verification Match (IVM) is a secure procedure by which VA may obtain income information from the Social Security Administration and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), in order to verify income amounts that are reported to VA. However, to avoid disclosure of sensitive information, the Board's decision does not directly cite dollar amounts included in any IVM report that has not been verified by the Veteran.  Therefore, the text of this decision is not subject to the additional protections required under the IVM procedures.

Generally, VA outlines eligibility for enrollment into the VA health care system in 38 U.S.C. § 1710.  Following an application for enrollment, Veterans are placed in priority groups.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1722; 38 C.F.R. § 17.36; see generally https://www.va.gov/health-care/eligibility/priority-groups/ (last accessed April 10, 2025).  

In this case, the Veteran was placed in priority group 5.  It was determined the Veteran's total gross household income information was below the Means Test and Geographical Means Test thresholds and above the National Pension Threshold for income year 2021.  The Veteran was assigned priority group 5, resulting in the Veteran being responsible for prescription medications, effective February 9, 2022.  Additionally, the favorable finding in the October 2022 HEC determination letter advised the Veteran is not responsible for copayments for medical services received, effective February 9, 2022.

The only priority group that is not required to pay copayments for medications is priority group 1.  Priority groups 2 through 8 require a copayment for certain medications.  As such, since the Veteran is not responsible for copayments for medical services, the only issue is whether the Veteran should be in a higher priority group, specifically priority group 1, to be exempt from copays.

In order to be eligible for priority group 1, the Veteran must have a service connected disability rated at 50 percent or greater based on one or more service connected disabilities or unemployability or be awarded the Medal of Honor

Here, the Veteran was placed in priority group 5.  There is no evidence of record that the Veteran meets any criteria for enrollment in priority group 1 in order to be copay exempt for prescriptions.  The Veteran's DD-214 reports that for his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded the National Defense Service Medal.  The evidence of record reflects the Veteran is not service connected for any disabilities, does not have a service connected disability that VA has determined makes him unemployable, and is not in receipt of the Medal of Honor. 

As such, the evidence of record reflects the Veteran is not entitled to enrollment in priority group 1, to be exempt from copayments for medications.  

VA will reconsider enrollment status if criteria change.  However, this appeal for entitlement to a higher priority group cannot be granted, as the Veteran is ineligible for priority group 1 and therefore the Veteran is not exempt from copayments for prescriptions.

Accordingly, entitlement to placement in a priority group status higher than priority group 5 is denied and therefore, entitlement to eligibility for copay exempt status for prescriptions is denied.

[The Board notes the HEC records reflect the Veteran is enrolled in priority group 5 with an effective date of February 9, 2022, this appeal does not affect or disrupt the Veteran's current enrollment status.]

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Mouzakis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.