Citation Nr: A25033120
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240229-422884
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

The claim for eligibility for an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only (automobile allowance), is dismissed.

An effective date prior to September 16, 2023, for the establishment of basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 USC Chapter 35 (DEA) is denied.

Eligibility for assistance in acquiring a special home adaptation is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a gynecological disorder, to include female sexual arousal disorder (FSAD), claimed as female sexual dysfunction, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's appeal of the claim for an automobile allowance is an improper concurrent election because the Veteran had a pending supplemental claim at the time she submitted the instant appeal.

2. Prior to September 16, 2023, the Veteran did not have a permanent and total service-connected disability.

3. None of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities were caused by burns or inhalation injury, nor does any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for an automobile allowance are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(2)(A), 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

2. The criteria for an effective date prior to September 16, 2023, for basic eligibility for DEA benefits are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3501, 5107, 5113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.57, 3.400, 21.3021.

3. The criteria for eligibility for assistance in acquiring a special home adaptation are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2101(b), 5107, 7105(d)(5); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.809, 3.809a.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from September 2019 to September 2023.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from three rating decisions by a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office: (1) an October 2023 rating decision, which in pertinent part established basic eligibility for DEA; (2) a November 2023 rating decision that in pertinent part denied service connection for FSAD and an automobile allowance and that resulted from a November 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review of two October 2023 rating decisions issued on the same day, including the one previously identified; and (3) a November 2023 rating decision, which in pertinent part denied eligibility for assistance in acquiring a special home adaptation.  

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, VA Form 10182.  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal (i.e., October 23, 2023 with regard to the DEA, FSAD, and auto allowance claims, and November 30, 2023 with regard to the claim for special home adaptation).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  

With regard to the claim for special home adaptation, if the Veteran wishes VA to consider any evidence that falls into any period that the Board may not consider in this case, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim within one year of the Board's decision and submit or identify this evidence for review.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

With regard to the FSAD claim, the Board has broadened the scope of this claim to any gynecological disorder, in order to comport with Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  Additionally, because this case is being remanded, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the AOJ upon readjudication of this claim.  

Dismissal of the Claim for an Automobile Allowance

Concurrent review of the same VA decision under different appeal lanes is prohibited by law.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b); Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1 (2023) (holding that "a claimant is able to select a second administrative review option with respect to a decision on the claim, so long as the 1-year period from that decision has not run and the second administrative review option does not run concurrently with the first administrative review option").  In other words, only one administrative review option can be pursued at a time for any given issue or issues.  Id.

?

By way of background, the Veteran was denied an automobile allowance in a November 2023 rating decision, which is the rating decision on appeal in this matter.  Following this rating decision, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, on February 7, 2024.  Later that same month, on February 29, 2024, prior to a decision on the pending Supplemental Claim, the Veteran submitted the VA Form 10182 at issue in this matter, attempting to appeal the same issue arising from the same rating decision.  In April 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision on the February 7, 2024 supplemental claim.  Accordingly, because the Veteran's Supplemental Claim was pending at the time she submitted the VA Form 10182 at issue in this matter, the appeal to the Board is an improper concurrent election.

As the Court noted in Hall v. McDonough, although the Board cannot dismiss an appeal for lack of jurisdiction, it may dismiss an appeal for a procedural defect.  See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2021) (holding that the Board may not dismiss an appeal for lack of jurisdiction but may consider dismissing it for other non-jurisdictional reasons such as a procedural defect).  In this regard, as the Board docketed an impermissible concurrent election as to the issue of eligibility for an automobile allowance in this appeal, such is a procedural defect, and the Board may dismiss this claim at this time.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(b), 20.104; Terry, supra; Hall, supra.  The claim is accordingly dismissed.

The Board notes the Veteran is not without recourse as a result of this dismissal.  The Veteran has continued to pursue this claim at the AOJ, which was most recently denied in a September 2024 rating decision.  She may appeal this issue to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 identifying that rating decision, provided the Veteran has not already filed a different review option that is still pending at the time she submits the VA Form 10182.

Earlier Effective Date for DEA

The Veteran contends she is entitled to an effective date prior to September 16, 2023, for the award of basic eligibility for DEA.

?

Basic eligibility for Chapter 35 benefits for the child or surviving spouse of a veteran may be established if: (1) the veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, or died in service; and (2) the veteran has a permanent total service-connected disability; or (3) the veteran has a permanent total service-connected disability was in existence at the date of the veteran's death; or (4) the veteran died as a result of a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.807.  Generally, the effective date of an award under Chapter 35 shall correspond to the effective dates relating to the awards of disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 5113.

In the present case, the Veteran was awarded service connection for multiple disabilities on September 16, 2023, the date following her separation from service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (establishing the effective date of service connection as the day following separation from service if the claim is received within one year of separation).  The evidence of record is against finding the Veteran was permanently and totally disabled due to service-connected disabilities prior to this date for two reasons.  First, the Veteran was in active service prior to September 16, 2023.  Second, the Veteran was not service connected for any disabilities prior to September 16, 2023.  See March 2025 Rating Decision Codesheet.  The Veteran cannot be eligible for DEA while on active service or prior to being service connected for any disabilities.  The earliest possible date of eligibility for DEA, then, is September 16, 2023.

Accordingly, an effective date prior to September 16, 2023, for the grant of basic eligibility for DEA benefits is not warranted by the evidence of record at this time, and the Veteran's claim must therefore be denied.

Special Home Adaptation

The Veteran contends she is eligible for assistance in acquiring a special home adaptation based on the following disabilities: a severe respiratory illness, schizophrenia, chest pain, heart arrythmia, vasovagal syncope, heart palpitations, periodic headache syndrome, migraines, depression, anxiety, primary insomnia, obstructive sleep apnea with calcified granuloma of the lung and long COVID.  See September 2023 VA Form 26-4555, Application in Acquiring Specially Adapted Housing or Special Home Adaptation Grant.  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that while the underlying application submitted by the Veteran covers both specially adapted housing and special home adaptation, the issue on appeal is related only to eligibility for a special home adaptation grant.  The Veteran pursued eligibility for specially adapted housing in a different review stream and did not include that claim on the VA Form 10182 at issue in this appeal.  See February 2024 VA Form 20-0995 (including the issue of eligibility for specially adapted housing); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b); Terry, supra.  Accordingly, the Board will address only the issue of eligibility for special home adaptation in this decision.

As a threshold matter, the Veteran has not established eligibility for specially adapted housing, which is a requirement for eligibility for special home adaptation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(a).  In this regard, the Board reflects that a Special Home Adaptation grant is a "lesser benefit" than a Specially Adapted Housing grant; therefore, a grant of Specially Adapted Housing would render the Special Home Adaptation issue moot.  However, as noted, the Veteran is not in receipt of the Specially Adapted Housing grant at this time, and therefore, the Board can proceed with the Special Home Adaptation appeal at this time.  

If eligibility for specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran may qualify for assistance in acquiring necessary special home adaptations only if the veteran has a compensable, service-connected disability rated permanently and totally disabling that: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of one or more extremities or the trunk; or (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)).  38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b), (c).  For purposes of this section, an inhalation injury is one that results from breathing steam or toxic inhalants present in a fire environment.  See 74 Fed. Red. 67145, 67148 (Dec. 18, 2009).

Generally, in order to qualify for a special home adaptation grant, the Veteran must be in receipt of a single disability rated at 100 percent or a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) based on a single disability or a combination of multiple disabilities with the same etiology.  An exception to this general requirement exists for veterans who served on or after September 11, 2001.  This exception applies to veterans who incurred a permanent disability on or after September 11, 2001 that results in the loss of use of one or more extremities such that ambulating without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or wheelchairs is precluded, regardless of whether the disability is evaluated at 100 percent.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a)(2)(C).

In this case, the Veteran is in receipt of DEA, so the AOJ has made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a compensable, service-connected disability rated permanently and totally disabling.  See, e.g., March 2025 Rating Decision Codesheet.  The AOJ did not specify which of the Veteran's disabilities is permanently and totally disabling.  See October 2023 Rating Decision.  However, the Board need not make that determination because none of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are due to burns or inhalation injuries and do not result in the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands.  

The Veteran is service-connected for the following disabilities: chest pain, not otherwise specified with palpitations and syncope; eczema; obstructive sleep apnea with calcified granuloma of the lung with long COVID; migraines with headaches and cerebellar tonsillar ectopia; unspecified anxiety disorder; lumbosacral strain with partial sacralization of L5; pes planus with plantar fasciitis; irritable bowel syndrome with gastroesophageal reflux disease; conjunctivitis with dry eye syndrome and photophobia; tinnitus; hypertension; hyposmia; hypogeusia; and plantar warts.  See, e.g., March 2025 Rating Decision Codesheet.  

There is no indication in the file that any of these disabilities affect the use of the Veteran's hands, nor have her hands been amputated.  There is also no indication the Veteran's disabilities result from burns or from exposure to fire-related inhalation injuries.  In this regard, although the Veteran reported that she first noticed a shortness of breath during a fire drill while in service, this fire drill was not an actual fire.  See February 2023 VA Respiratory Conditions Examination.  In addition, while the list of disabilities resulting from inhalation injury is not exhaustive, the Board finds the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is not substantially similar to the kinds of examples listed in the regulation, which are continuous in nature and do not occur only while sleeping; likewise, a calcified granuloma is a condition with a clearly defined area affecting only a portion of the lung, while disorders like pulmonary fibrosis and COPD are systemic in nature and affect the entirety of both lungs, and COVID is caused by a virus, not fire-related toxic inhalants.  In short, although the Veteran has a respiratory disorder, it is not one contemplated by 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(c)(4).  Thus, the Veteran is not eligible for assistance in acquiring special home adaptations because she does not meet any of the additional remaining requirements outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(c)(1)-(4), which are reproduced above.

In addition, although the Veteran served after September 11, 2001, the Veteran does not have a disability that results in the loss of use of one or more extremities.  In this regard, the Board observes the Veteran has two service-connected disabilities affecting her extremities-pes planus and plantar fasciitis; however, a January 2023 VA foot conditions examination indicates the Veteran does not require the use of a wheelchair, brace, crutches, or cane as a result of these disabilities, and these disabilities do not result in any functional impairment.  The Veteran therefore does not fall within the exception to the single-disability requirement.

While the Board understands the Veteran's claim for a special home adaptation grant is based on her combined 100 percent evaluation, the Board cannot consider this combined evaluation when determining eligibility for a special home adaptation grant.  Rather, in order to be eligible for this grant, the Veteran must have a single disability evaluated at 100 percent or a TDIU based on a single disability or a combination of multiple disabilities with the same etiology.  Alternately, the Veteran must have a disability that results in the loss of use of one or more extremities such that ambulating without a specified assistive device is precluded.  Such is not shown here.  

The Veteran is encouraged to apply for a housing grant at such time as she does have a single service-connected disability evaluated as totally disabling.  To the extent she has not yet done so, the Veteran may consider working with the VA Prosthetics and Sensory Aids Service through a VA care facility, which can assist in obtaining prosthetic devices and mobility modifications for the home.  The Veteran may also want to discuss with VA care providers whether the Veteran should apply for a Home Improvements and Structural Alterations (HISA) grant, which provides grants for medically necessary home improvements and structural alterations, including ramps to allow entrance into the home, allowing accessibility into the kitchen or bathroom, and creating an accessible bathroom and shower.

As the record stands before the Board at present, however, eligibility for assistance in acquiring a special home adaptation must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

As an initial matter, prior to the rating decision on appeal, it does not appear that the AOJ requested any of the Veteran's service treatment records.  The service treatment records associated with the claims file were submitted by the Veteran herself, and it is unclear if those records are complete.  Although it appears that the AOJ has since requested these records, such records fall outside the evidence window in this appeal and cannot be considered by the Board.  Moreover, failing to request the records prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  A remand to obtain the outstanding records is therefore necessary.

In addition, although the Veteran was afforded a VA gynecological conditions examination, further clarification is required.  In this regard, the Board notes that the examiner indicated the Veteran does not have FSAD simply by checking a box on the examination report.  No explanation for this determination was provided.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"); see also Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993) (the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the physician reaches); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998) (the failure of the physician to provide a basis for his/her opinion affects the weight or credibility of the evidence).  

The Board finds this omission particularly troubling as the Veteran is competent to convey symptoms related to her lack of sexual arousal, even if she is not competent to determine whether these symptoms can properly be diagnosed as FSAD.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis); see also Jones v. West, 12 Vet. App. 383, 385 (1999) (where the determinative issue is one of medical causation or a diagnosis, only those with specialized medical knowledge, training, or experience are competent to provide evidence on the issue).

Finally, even though the Veteran was diagnosed with several gynecological disorders, the AOJ did not obtain any opinion regarding whether these disorders were related to the Veteran's military service.  Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error exists, and a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate examination.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (holding that once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's complete service records, including service treatment and personnel records.  Any negative search should be noted in the record and communicated to the Veteran.  Additionally, in the event records are not obtained, if it is determined that additional research requests would be futile, then a memorandum of unavailability should be drafted and added to the record.

2. After records development is completed to the extent possible, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed gynecological disorder.  The claims folder must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail. 

After review of the claims file (and examination if deemed necessary), the examiner should opine whether the Veteran has a distinct diagnosis for a gynecological disorder, to include female sexual arousal disorder (FSAD).  If the examiner determines the Veteran does not have a distinct diagnosis for a gynecological disorder, the examiner should consider whether any reported symptoms (including pain) result in functional impairment of the Veteran's earning capacity.  If the symptoms do not result in such impairment, the examiner should provide an explanation for this conclusion.  If the symptoms do result in such impairment, the examiner should describe the nature and severity of the impairment.

If the examiner concludes the Veteran has a disability, either as a distinct diagnosis or as symptoms causing functional impairment in earning capacity, the examiner should opine whether such gynecological disorder began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service.  In addressing the above, the examiner should discuss any and all lay statements regarding onset of symptomatology as well as any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service.

If service connection cannot be granted on a direct basis, the examiner must address whether the Veteran's gynecological disorder is (a) caused by, or (b) aggravated (i.e., worsened) by any of her service-connected disabilities, including any medications taken therefor.  

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  In this regard, the examiner is reminded that secondary causation and secondary aggravation are two different theories of entitlement, and that separate rationales must be provided for each theory.  If more than one disability is diagnosed, the examiner must provide opinions for each disability.

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Kuhns

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.