Citation Nr: A25033458
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240610-446693
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum is dismissed.  

The appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for scar tissue on the Veteran's face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma, is dismissed.  

The appeal seeking entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is dismissed.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for major neurocognitive disorder (claimed as Alzheimer's dementia) is remanded.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On March 24, 2023, the Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision, in relevant part, denying service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum.  The RO sent a notification letter, dated in March 2023, to the Veteran (with his representative copied on the correspondence) explaining to the Veteran the proper forms required to request review of his denied sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum claim, including an explanation of the timeframes and procedural requirements for each form, and the website and phone numbers for the Veteran to request assistance.  The Veteran submitted his VA Form 10182 on June 10, 2024.  

2. On March 24, 2023, the RO issued a rating decision, in relevant part, denying service connection for scar tissue on the Veteran's face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma.  The RO sent a notification letter, dated in March 2023, to the Veteran (with his representative copied on the correspondence) explaining to the Veteran the proper forms required to request review of his denied claim seeking service connection for scar tissue on his face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma claim, including an explanation of the timeframes and procedural requirements for each form, and the website and phone numbers for the Veteran to request assistance.  The Veteran submitted his VA Form 10182 on June 10, 2024.  

3. On January 27, 2023, the RO issued a rating decision, in relevant part, granting service connection for hypertension at 0 percent, effective August 10, 2022.  The RO sent a notification letter, dated in January 2023, to the Veteran (with his representative copied on the correspondence) explaining to the Veteran the proper forms required to request review of his granted hypertension claim, including an explanation of the timeframes and procedural requirements for each form, and the website and phone numbers for the Veteran to request assistance.  The Veteran submitted his VA Form 10182 on June 10, 2024, in which he indicated that he was seeking a compensable rating for hypertension.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for filing a timely appeal of the denial of the Veteran's claim seeking service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.4, 20.202, 20.203, 20.1103.  

2. The criteria for filing a timely appeal of the denial of the Veteran's claim seeking service connection for scar tissue on his face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.4, 20.202, 20.203, 20.1103.  

3. The criteria for filing a timely appeal of the rating assigned for the Veteran's hypertension have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.4, 20.202, 20.203, 20.1103.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from June 1967 to April 1969.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of January 2023, March 2023, and February 2024 rating decisions.  In his June 2024 appeal to the Board of those decisions (on VA Form 10182), the Veteran selected the evidence review option.  Therefore, the Board's review is limited to evidence received as of the January 2023 rating decision (for the hypertension rating), March 2023 rating decision (for the scar tissue and basal cell carcinoma claims), and February 2024 rating decision (for the major neurocognitive disorder claim) and any evidence received within 90 days of the Board's receipt of the Veteran's VA Form 10182.  

1. The appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum is dismissed.  

2. The appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for scar tissue on the Veteran's face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma, is dismissed.  

3. The appeal seeking entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is dismissed.  

VA regulations state that a claimant, or his or her representative, must file a properly completed Notice of Disagreement with a decision by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) within one year from the date that the AOJ mails the notice of the decision.  The regulations also state than an extension of the period for filing a Notice of Disagreement or a request to modify a Notice of Disagreement may be granted for good cause.  A request for such an extension must be in writing and must be filed with the Board.  Whether good cause for an extension has been established will be determined by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R.       § 20.203(c).  If no Notice of Disagreement is filed as prescribed by the regulations, the claim is final and shall not thereafter be readjudicated or allowed.  See            38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.  

The Board notes, regarding the claims seeking service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum and service connection for scar tissue on the Veteran's face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma, the AOJ notified the Veteran of the March 2023 rating decision by correspondence dated March 27, 2023.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(a)(1)(ii) and 20.202, a Veteran may appeal a rating decision to the Board on the form prescribed by the Secretary (here, VA Form 10182) within one year after the date of the mailing of the letter notifying the Veteran of the decision.  Therefore, in this case, the Veteran had until March 27, 2024, to file a VA Form 10182 to appeal the decision denying these claims.  The Veteran has not asserted that he did not receive the March 2023 rating decision.  The record shows that the notification letter and a copy of the decision were sent to the Veteran at his address of record and were not returned as undeliverable.  Additionally, the Veteran's representative has not raised any issues regarding the notification or requested an extension.  

Additionally, regarding the claim seeking a compensable rating for hypertension, the AOJ notified the Veteran of the January 2023 rating decision by correspondence dated January 30, 2023.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(a)(1)(ii) and 20.202, a Veteran may appeal a rating decision to the Board on the form prescribed by the Secretary (here, VA Form 10182) within one year after the date of the mailing of the letter notifying the Veteran of the decision.  Therefore, in this case, the Veteran had until January 30, 2024, to file a VA Form 10182 to appeal the decision denying this claim.  The Veteran has not asserted that he did not receive the January 2023 rating decision.  The record shows that the notification letter and a copy of the decision were sent to the Veteran at his address of record and were not returned as undeliverable.  Additionally, the Veteran's representative has not raised any issues regarding the notification or requested an extension.  

Although the Board may not dismiss these appeals for lack of jurisdiction due to an untimely VA Form 10182, it may dismiss the appeals due to non-jurisdictional reasons, such as a procedural defect, where the claimant did not substantially comply with proper claims processing rules.  See Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262, 269 (2024) (stating VA can require a claimant to fill out a particular form and can dismiss nonconforming or untimely filings, but a failure to follow claims processing rules does not affect the Board's jurisdiction); see also Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333 (2021).  

Regarding the claims seeking service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum and service connection for scar tissue on the Veteran's face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma, to the extent the Veteran attempted to appeal the denial of service connection in the March 2023 rating decision, he did not comply with the claims processing rules.  The March 2023 Notification Letter notified him that he must complete and return VA Form 10182 in the year following the date of its letter. The Veteran did not file VA Form 10182 within the requisite time period.  Alternatively, the March 2023 Notification Letter notified him that he could request Higher-Level Review of the denials by submitting VA Form 20-0996 within one year, but he did not do so.  The Board finds the Veteran was adequately informed and actually aware of how and by when to appeal the portion of the March 2023 rating decision as to these claims.  

Additionally, regarding the claim seeking a compensable rating for hypertension, to the extent the Veteran attempted to appeal the 0 percent rating assigned in the January 2023 rating decision, he did not comply with the claims processing rules.  The January 2023 Notification Letter notified him that he must complete and return VA Form 10182 in the year following the date of its letter.  The Veteran did not file VA Form 10182 within the requisite time period.  Alternatively, the January 2023 Notification Letter notified him that he could request Higher-Level Review of the denials by submitting VA Form 20-0996 within one year, but he did not do so.  The Board finds the Veteran was adequately informed and actually aware of how and by when to appeal the portion of the January 2023 rating decision as to the claim.  

The Board has considered the applicability of any waiver that would permit extending the filing period but finds no such evidence.  See, generally, Ferko, at *12-13; Hall, 34 Vet. App. at 332 (regulatory claims-processing rules may be waived without affecting jurisdiction to adjudicate appeal); Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37, 45 (2009) (VA may implicitly or explicitly waive any issue of timeliness in the filing of a Substantive Appeal).  The Veteran (and/or his representative) did not request an extension of the period for filing a Notice of Disagreement, nor has he (or his representative) offered any explanation for his delay in the submission of the Notice of Disagreement in this case.  See 38 C.F.R.  § 3.109(b) (Time limits within which claimants or beneficiaries are required to act to perfect a claim or challenge an adverse VA decision may be extended for good cause shown.); 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(c) ("An extension of the period for filing a Notice of Disagreement or a request to modify a Notice of Disagreement may be granted for good cause.  A request for such an extension must be in writing and must be filed with the Board.").  The Board finds that good cause has not been shown for the delay in its submission.  The Veteran did not file a timely appeal of the January 2023 or March 2023 rating decisions and the Veteran's representative has not raised any issues regarding the notification or requested an extension.  Notably, in the March 2025 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP) submitted by the Veteran's representative, only the claim seeking service connection for major neurocognitive disorder (which is being remanded below) was discussed.  

Finally, the Board has considered whether it waived its right to enforce the filing deadline by virtue of docketing the appeal.  See, e.g., Percy, 23 Vet. App. at 46-47 (holding VA waived any objection to the timeliness of the legacy substantive appeal because "VA consistently treated th[e] matter as if it was part of the timely filed Substantive Appeal[]" for over five years.").  The Board sent a letter in June 2024 acknowledging receipt of the VA Form 10182 and placement of the appeal on the Evidence Review docket consistent with his choice on the VA Form 10182.  The Board finds that this letter acknowledging receipt and the mere administrative act of assigning the attempted appeal a docket number, in and of itself, does not constitute a waiver of timeliness.  Indeed, whether the Board has waived any objection to the timeliness of a VA Form 10182 should be based on all facts and circumstances of that case.  Accord Percy, 23 Vet. App. at 46 (discussing VA's actions in that case in finding VA had treated the substantive appeal as timely filed).  Although the appeal was docketed as an automatic administrative action, unlike the circumstances of Percy, the Board did not continuously "engage in substantive and procedural development" of the appeal.  There is no action in which the Veteran would be under the impression that the merits of the case were examined and being developed in any substantive way.  The Board's notice of receipt of the Veteran's purported appeal did not convey any intent to forgo reliance on the laws applicable to docketing.  Thus, the facts herein are distinguishable from Percy and the Board finds the mere sending of the docketing letter did not constitute a waiver of the timeliness of a VA Form 10182.  

Based on the foregoing, as no good cause has been shown and no waiver (implicit or explicit) was made as to the June 2024 VA Form 10182 to the extent the Veteran sought to appeal the January 2023 or March 2023 rating decisions, the Board finds the June 2024 VA Form 10182 was, and remains, untimely.  As such, the present appeals seeking service connection for sclerosing basal cell carcinoma of the nasal dorsum, service connection for scar tissue on the Veteran's face from Mohs surgery for squamous cell carcinoma, and a compensable rating for hypertension, must be dismissed based on his failure to comply with the claims processing rules.  

To have the claims readjudicated, the Veteran is directed to submit VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

One of the effects of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

4. Entitlement to service connection for major neurocognitive disorder.  

The Veteran and his wife assert that his major neurocognitive disorder, likely due to Alzheimer's disease, was caused by his exposure to Agent Orange during service and/or was caused or aggravated by his service-connected hypertension.  

Under the relevant laws and regulations, service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to establish: (1) a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a) - (b).  

Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disorder was caused by the service-connected disability in either a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  

Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability is not caused by a service-connected disability but would be less severe if not for the service-connected disability.  Id. at 1364.  For example, secondary aggravation may be established when the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id.  

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted various medical articles to support his claim.  A January 2020 medical article notes that hypertension, particularly midlife high blood pressure, has been related to a higher risk of cognitive decline and dementia, including Alzheimer disease.  A January 2021 medical article notes that in this study of more than 300,000 Veterans, those with Agent Orange exposure in their medical records were nearly twice as likely as those without exposure to receive a dementia diagnosis, even after adjusting for medical and psychiatric comorbidities and other variables.  A July 2023 medical article notes that within the last 2 or 3 years, further evidence suggests that Agent Orange exposures also heightened the risk for Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases.  

In a January 2024 VA Alzheimer's opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran was administered the BDI-II, which showed borderline clinical depression, the WHODAS 12-item, which showed moderate functional impairment, the PCL-5, which showed that the PTSD cutoffs were not met, and the BAI, which showed low anxiety.  He noted that the Veteran reported short-term and long-term memory impairments and that the best description of his symptoms met the criteria for major neurocognitive disorder, mild, likely due to Alzheimer's disease.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was claiming that his neurocognitive disorder was due to his hypertension and opined that it was less likely than not due to his service-connected hypertension or directly to his service.  He noted that although the Veteran had a current mental disorder diagnosis and that the disorder began subsequent to the service-connected diagnosis, it was not related to that condition either as a means of coping with the condition or as a psychological reaction to the condition.  Rather, the current disorder was a separate entity entirely from the identified service-connected condition and unrelated to it.  Therefore, there was no nexus between the service-connected condition and the current mental health disorder.  

In an April 2024 private provider statement, which was submitted in June 2024, he indicated that he has been treating the Veteran for Alzheimer's and vascular dementia and noted that there was growing evidence that exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam was associated with a long list of illnesses, including hypertension, which is a strong risk factor for vascular and Alzheimer's dementia.  The provider suggested, that since the Veteran had a diagnosis of Alzheimer's, vascular dementia, and hypertension, he should follow up with his local VSO to consider filing a PACT Act claim if he was exposed to Agent Orange.  

The Board finds, unfortunately, that the January 2024 VA opinion is inadequate because the VA examiner did not address the medical articles that the Veteran submitted which suggest a link between a neurocognitive disorder such as Alzheimer's and Agent Orange and/or hypertension.  Additionally, although the examiner attempted to address direct service connection, in regard to hypertension, he did not address aggravation and did not furnish adequate rationale.  Also, he did not provide a likely etiology for the Veteran's neurocognitive disorder.  Failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate opinion under these circumstances is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  Therefore, development to obtain an adequate medical advisory opinion regarding service connection for major neurocognitive disorder is necessary.  

The Board also notes that although the April 2024 private provider did seem to suggest that the Veteran's neurocognitive disorder is related to his exposure to Agent Orange and/or his service-connected hypertension, he simply noted that exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam was associated with a long list of illnesses, including hypertension, which is a strong risk factor for vascular and Alzheimer's dementia and recommended that he confer with his local VSO to file an appropriate claim.  Therefore, the Board finds that this medical statement is inadequate for rating purposes.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following:

Arrange for the Veteran's record to be forwarded to an appropriate clinician (other than the January 2024 VA examiner) for further review and an opinion to determine the likely etiology of his major neurocognitive disorder.  If another examination is necessary to address such questions, it should be arranged.  The provider should review the Veteran's claims file, to include this remand, and respond to the following:

(a) Identify the likely etiology for the diagnosed major neurocognitive disorder and opine whether it is it at least as likely as not that it is directly related to his military service (was incurred therein), to include as due to his conceded exposure to herbicide agents.  

(b) If the major neurocognitive disorder is found to be less likely than not directly related to his service, opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the major neurocognitive disorder was caused or aggravated (aggravation must be addressed, regardless of permanence) by the Veteran's service-connected hypertension.  In addressing aggravation, the provider must indicate whether (1) Is it at least as likely as not that, but for the Veteran's service-connected hypertension, he would not have a current major neurocognitive disorder?  (2) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's major neurocognitive disorder would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for his service-connected hypertension?

(c) If aggravation is shown, the provider should indicate to the extent possible, the baseline level of severity of the neurocognitive disorder (that is, the approximate level of severity of the disorder prior to the onset of the aggravation).

(d) If the Veteran's hypertension did not cause or aggravate the major neurocognitive disorder, identify the etiology for the major neurocognitive disorder that is considered to be more likely (to the extent the record permits), and explain why that is so.  

All opinions must include rationale.  The provider must acknowledge that the medical articles that the Veteran submitted in September 2023 were reviewed and considered, specifically the January 2020 medical article which notes that hypertension, particularly midlife high blood pressure, has been related to a higher risk of cognitive decline and dementia, including Alzheimer disease, the January 2021 medical article which notes that in this study of more than 300,000 Veterans, those with Agent Orange exposure in their medical records were nearly twice as likely as those without exposure to receive a dementia diagnosis, even after adjusting for medical and psychiatric comorbidities and other variables, and a July 2023 medical article which notes that within the last 2 or 3 years, further evidence suggests that Agent Orange exposures also heightened the risk for Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases.   

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bayles, James J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.