Citation Nr: A25033419
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230119-316057
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for left knee instability is granted.

REMANDED

Service connection for lumbar spine disability, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, is remanded.

Service connection for right foot disability, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, is remanded.

Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is in relative balance as to whether the Veteran has left knee instability due to his service-connected left knee disability.    

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for left knee instability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army infantry from June 1977 to June 1980.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2023 rating decision of an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the January 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board recognizes the Veteran's February 2023 statement that he wanted to elect a different evidentiary record option.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  However, he did not submit a new NOD.  Moreover, in July 2024, the Veteran's attorney confirmed the January 2023 NOD, wherein the Veteran selected the direct review option, and requested that the benefits sought on appeal be granted or remanded for corrective action.  Given the attorney's July 2024 argument, the Board will continue to review the Veteran's appeal under the direct review option.  On remand, all evidence will be considered by the AOJ when issuing a new rating decision.  Additionally, since the claims here are either being granted or remanded, there is no prejudice to the Veteran by proceeding with adjudication.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a lumbar spine disability, right foot disability, tinnitus, and bilateral hearing loss disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Service connection for left knee instability.

Entitlement to service connection on a direct basis requires (1) evidence of a current nonservice-connected disability; (2) evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the in-service disease or injury and the current nonservice-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

Initially, the evidence shows that the Veteran is service-connected for left knee sprain, limitation of extension with arthritis, and left knee strain, limitation of flexion with arthritis.  The Board acknowledges that the November 2022 VA examination report only reflects a diagnosis of right knee instability.  However, the section of the report addressing instability of the left knee determined that the Veteran required a prescription by a medical provider for a walker and brace for ambulation with patellar instability.  The Veteran also reported instability of both knees, see English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347 (2018), and VA medical treatment records show that the Veteran needed a walker due to his "knees" giving out.  Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence is in relative balance as to whether the Veteran has left knee instability due to his service-connected right knee instability disability.  Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for left knee instability is granted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-82 (2021). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for lumbar spine disability, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, is remanded.

The Board finds that the claim of service connection for lumbar spine disability, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, must be remanded due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

A December 2, 2022, VA treatment record shows that the examining physician determined that the Veteran's knee pain was causing back and foot pain.  However, the Veteran was not provided a VA examination for his claimed back disability.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Healey v. McDonough, 33 Vet. App. 312, 319 (2021).

Here, the record reflects a currently diagnosed disability (see January 2023 rating decision); the evidence indicates that his lumbar spine disability may be related to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities; and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  This information was of record at the time of the decision on appeal, and the AOJ's failure to obtain a VA examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Remand is required to provide a VA medical examination.  

2. Service connection for right foot disability, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, is remanded.

The Board finds that the claim of service connection for a right foot disability, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, must be remanded due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

A December 2, 2022, VA treatment record shows that the examining physician determined that the Veteran's knee pain was causing back and foot pain.  The AOJ did not obtain an opinion as to secondary service connection.   

In this case, the evidence reflects a currently diagnosed disability; the evidence indicates that his disability may be associated with his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities; and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  This information was of record at the time of the decision on appeal, and the AOJ's failure to obtain a VA opinion concerning secondary service connection represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Remand is required to obtain an addendum opinion as to secondary service connection.  

In addition, the Board finds the December 2022 VA examiner's opinion regarding direct service connection is inadequate.  The AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error by relying on this inadequate opinion.  The VA examiner found that there was no evidence in the service records regarding the right foot injury.  The examiner stated that tendinopathy referred to localized tenderness and swelling with or without redness, compression of neighboring structures, or documented rupture.  It was further explained that tendinopathy was a subacute to chronic musculoskeletal condition which was common with history of injury, repetitive trauma or chronic overuse (ie, training overload).  The Veteran claimed that he had a fall in a foxhole in 1970s and experienced right foot pain in 2000s.  No records of either event were located.  Due to a large time gap, nexus could not be established.

However, the AOJ favorably found that there was treatment for the right foot during active service.  See January 2023 rating decision.   In this respect, a November 1978 service treatment record (STR) noted calcification of the right foot.  Though the entry indicates a diagnosis of athlete's foot, the VA examiner did not address the November 1978 STR.  Remand is required for a new opinion.    

3. Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

4. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

The Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by relying on inadequate medical opinions concerning the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss disability.  

In December 2022, the Veteran was provided a VA audiological examination.  The examiner provided a negative etiological opinion for hearing loss, finding that there was normal hearing at separation and no complaints of hearing loss while in service.  Regarding tinnitus, the examiner provided a negative etiological opinion, noting that there was a normal audiogram at entrance and separation, and no complaint of tinnitus in the record.  

The December 2022 VA examiner did not address the medical articles submitted by the Veteran regarding noise-induced hearing loss or the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of Infantryman which has a high probability of exposure to hazardous noise.  Remand for new VA etiological opinions is required.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination as to the nature and etiology of his lumbar spine disability.     The Veteran's claims folder and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.

The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following:

a. Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability was caused or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  In other words, would the Veteran's lumbar spine disability have occurred "but for" the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities or whether "but for" the Veteran's service-connected disability, the functional impairment would have improved/worsened. 

If the clinician opines that the lumbar spine disability would result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  If the clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination as to the nature and etiology of his right foot disability.     The Veteran's claims folder and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.

The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following:

a. Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right foot disability was incurred in or caused by active service, to include a fall in a foxhole, the November 1987 treatment for calcification of the right foot, and reports of leg aching.

b. Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right foot disability was caused or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  In other words, would the Veteran's right foot disability have occurred "but for" the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities or whether "but for" the Veteran's service-connected disability, the functional impairment would have improved/worsened. 

c. If the clinician opines that the right foot disability would result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  If the clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss disability.  The Veteran's claims folder and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.

The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following:

a. Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss disability was incurred in or caused by active service, to include his high probability of exposure to hazardous noise as a result of his MOS of Infantryman.

b. Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's tinnitus was incurred in or caused by active service, to include his high probability of exposure to hazardous noise as a result of his MOS of Infantryman.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  The clinician must address the medical articles submitted by the Veteran.  If the clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Seay, Jessica M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.