Citation Nr: A25033426
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-463320
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left shoulder strain with labral tear is denied.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

3. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is denied.

6. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot pain is denied.

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral toenail fungus is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the period under review, the appellant's service-connected left shoulder strain with labral tear more nearly approximated, at worst, limitation of motion to 25 degrees from the side.  There was not left shoulder ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, symptoms which more nearly approximated ankylosis, nor was there other impairment of the humerus or impairment of the clavicle or scapula.

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the appellant's service-connected bilateral hearing loss has been manifested by hearing loss of no greater than Level I in the right ear and no greater than Level I in the left ear.

3. The appellant is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for tinnitus.

4. In an October 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the appellant's diagnosed PTSD is the result of in-service stressors.

5. The appellant does not have a low back disability, or functional impairment in earning capacity, which was incurred in, or is otherwise causally related to, an in-service disease or injury; arthritis did not manifest to a compensable degree within the presumptive period; and continuity of symptomatology is not established. 

6. The appellant does not have a disability manifested by bilateral foot pain, or functional impairment in earning capacity, which was incurred in, or is otherwise causally related to, an in-service disease or injury; arthritis did not manifest to a compensable degree within the presumptive period; and continuity of symptomatology is not established. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left shoulder strain with labral tear have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5201.

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.385, 4.85, DC 6100.

3. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.87, DC 6260.

4. The criteria for service connection for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a low back disability?have not been met. ?38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303,?3.307, 3.309.

6.  The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot pain have not been met. ?38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303,?3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Navy from April 2003 to March 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In a February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ, in pertinent part, granted service connection for left shoulder strain with labral tear and assigned an initial 30 percent rating; awarded service connection for tinnitus and assigned an initial 10 percent rating; and granted service connection for bilateral hearing loss and assigned an initial noncompensable rating.  All awards were effective July 6, 2023.  In addition, the AOJ denied service connection for bilateral foot pain, a left knee disability, and a low back disability.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on February 20, 2024.

In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ, in pertinent part, denied service connection for PTSD, bilateral toenail fungus, and migraine headaches.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on March 5, 2024.

Received on August 14, 2024, was a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), upon which the appellant identified the February and March 2024 rating decisions, the issues set forth above, and the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal for the issues of entitlement to higher initial ratings for the left shoulder, tinnitus, and bilateral hearing loss, and the issues of service connection for bilateral foot, left knee and low back disabilities.  The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision on appeal for the remaining issues discussed above.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board, with respect to those particular issues.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a left knee disability, migraine headaches, and bilateral toenail fungus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Initial Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations should be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if that disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).

Where a claimant appeals the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an [initial] rating on appeal was erroneous. . . ."  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, "staged" ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found.  Id.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left shoulder strain with labral tear.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left shoulder strain with labral tear is not warranted for any portion of the period under review.   

The appellant was afforded a contracted shoulder and arms conditions examination in January 2024.  The claims file was reviewed.  The appellant reported pain with loss of range of motion and stiffness.  He had previously done physical therapy before moving but he was currently unable to get scheduled for additional physical therapy.  He also takes Ibuprofen every five to six hours.  The appellant described an inability to lift and limited range of motion.  He is unable to do certain activities.  He had difficulty with personal hygiene and putting shirts on.  Flare-ups were described as occurring constantly and never going away.  They are precipitated by sometimes lying on the left side, certain movement, and activity.  They are decreased by bio freeze, ibuprofen, and massage.  Range of motion testing revealed left flexion to 15 degrees, abduction to 50 degrees, internal rotation to 20 degrees, and external rotation to 20 degrees.  The appellant could not lift his arm above shoulder height.  The examiner indicated that there was additional limitation of motion after repetitive-use testing, in the form of pain and weakness.  Range of motion was not further limited, with left flexion to 15 degrees, abduction to 50 degrees, internal rotation to 20 degrees, and external rotation to 20 degrees.  The examination was performed immediately after repeated use over a period of time and during a flare-up.  Pain and weakness significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time and flare-ups.  In terms of range of motion, left flexion was limited to 15 degrees, abduction to 50 degrees, internal rotation to 20 degrees, and external rotation to 20 degrees.  Additional factors contributing to disability were less movement than normal and weakened movement.  Strength was decreased but there was no atrophy.  There was no ankylosis.  Hawkins' impingement, empty can, external rotation/infraspinatus, and lift-off subscapularis tests were all positive.  Crank apprehension and relocation test was positive, but there was no shoulder instability, dislocation, or labral pathology.  There were no mechanical symptoms.  There were no current residuals of recurrent dislocation (subluxation) of the glenohumeral (scapulohumeral) joint.  Cross-body adduction test was positive.  There was no clavicle, scapula, AC joint, sternoclavicular joint condition or other impairment.  There was no loss of head (flail shoulder), nonunion (false flail shoulder), or fibrous union of the humerus.  There was no malunion of the humerus with moderate or marked deformity.  There had been no surgical procedures and no assistive devices were used.  Amputation with prosthesis would not equally serve the appellant.  

The appellant's left shoulder disability has been assigned an initial 30 percent rating from July 6, 2023, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5201.

DC 5201 pertains to limitation of motion of the arm.  Limitation of motion at the shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees) warrants a 20 percent rating for both the major and minor extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees) warrants a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity and a 30 percent rating for the major extremity.  Flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from the side warrants a maximum 30 percent rating for the minor joint and a maximum 40 percent rating for the major joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201.  DC 5201 "does not provide separate ratings for limitation of motion in the flexion and abduction planes, but rather is addressed generically to limitation of motion of the arm."  Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d 1355, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Board also has considered other potentially applicable DCs; however, as the record reflects that the appellant's disability is not manifested by ankylosis, the functional equivalent of ankylosis (i.e., immobility of the joint), impairment of the humerus on the shoulders, or impairment of the clavicle or scapula, DCs 5200, 5202 and 5203 regarding the shoulders do not apply in this case.

The normal range of motion of the shoulder is forward elevation (flexion) from zero to 180 degrees; abduction from zero to 180 degrees; and internal and external rotation to 90 degrees.  Lifting the arm to shoulder level is lifting it to 90 degrees. Id., Plate I.  Handedness for the purpose of a dominant rating will be determined by the evidence of record, or by testing on VA examination. Only one hand shall be considered dominant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.69.  The evidence establishes the appellant is right-handed, so his left shoulder disability is rated for impairment of the minor upper extremity.

Applying the facts to the criteria set forth above, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left shoulder strain with labral tear is not warranted for any portion of the period under review.

The appellant has been in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for limitation of motion of the arm under DC 5201 since the award of service connection.  The appellant is right-handed, which means that the service-connected left shoulder disability is the minor joint.  30 percent is the maximum schedular rating under DC 5201 for the minor joint.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the requirement of ankylosis in the General Rating Formula for Injuries and Diseases of the Spine can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis (i.e. functional immobility of the joint) during a flare-up.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

In this case, however, the clinical evidence of record reflects that the appellant's disability is not productive on ankylosis.  The January 2024 VA examiner expressly concluded that ankylosis was not present and there is no other clinical evidence to the contrary.  The Board has considered the appellant's reports that he is unable to perform certain activities and that he has flare-ups during which his symptoms increase.  The examination report, however, reflects that the appellant retains movement during a flare-up and provided estimated range of motion values which do not meet the criteria set forth in DC 5200.  Additionally, the Veteran has not reported symptoms which meet the functional equivalent of ankylosis as described in DC 5200 during a flare-up.  Thus, the Board concludes that the record does not show that the appellant's disability produces symptoms which more nearly approximated ankylosis.  

The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has held that the Board is required to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular diagnostic code.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (March 12, 2025).  Here, there is no indication that the January 2024 examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report.  The appellant reported that he takes Ibuprofen every five to six hours.  While that report would tend to indicate that the Veteran had at least some Ibuprofen in his system at the time of the examination, that is unclear.  Regardless of whether he was on any pain medications at the time of the examination, however, the examiner recorded his lay descriptions of flare-ups, functional impairments due to pain, and estimated range of motion limitations at their worst.  Additionally, the record contains no indication, nor is it contended, that the appellant does not have any motion in his left shoulder without the use of Ibuprofen or that he would exhibit unfavorable ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation without the use of Ibuprofen.  

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted for any portion of the period on appeal.

Impairment of auditory acuity (hearing loss) is evaluated pursuant to the provisions set forth at 38 C.F.R. § 4.85. Under that regulation, an examination for hearing impairment must be conducted by a state-licensed audiologist and must include a controlled speech discrimination test (Maryland CNC) and a pure tone audiometry test.  Examinations are to be conducted without the use of hearing aids.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85(a).

To evaluate the degree of disability from defective hearing, the Rating Schedule establishes 11 auditory acuity levels from Level I, for essentially normal acuity, through Level XI, for profound deafness.  These are assigned based on a combination of the percent of speech discrimination and the pure tone threshold average, as contained in a series of tables within the regulations.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85(b).  The "puretone threshold average" is the sum of the pure tone thresholds at 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz (Hz), divided by four.  This average is used in all cases to determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from Table VI or VIA.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85(d).

Table VII, "Percentage Evaluations for Hearing Impairment," is used to determine the percentage evaluation by combining the Roman numeral designations for hearing impairment of each ear.  The horizontal rows represent the ear having the better hearing and the vertical columns the ear having the poorer hearing.  The percentage evaluation is located at the point where the row and column intersect.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85(e).  In cases where impaired hearing is service-connected in only one ear, in order to determine the percentage evaluation from Table VII, the non-service-connected ear will be assigned a Roman Numeral designation for hearing impairment of I, subject to the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.383.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85(f).

The regulatory provisions also provide two additional circumstances under which alternative tables can be employed.  One is where the pure tone thresholds of the frequencies of 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hz are 55 decibels or greater.  The second is where pure tone thresholds are 30 decibels or less at frequencies of 1000 Hz and below, and are 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hz.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.86.

The appellant was afforded a contracted audiological examination in January 2024.  The claims file was reviewed.  Pure tone threshold testing revealed:

			HERTZ		

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	10	20	30	40	40

LEFT	15	20	30	45	35

The 1000-4000 Hertz average was 32.5 decibels in the right ear and 32.5 in the left.  Speech recognition using the Maryland CNC word list was 96 percent in the right ear and 94 percent in the left.  These findings are equivalent to Level I hearing loss in the right ear and Level I in the left.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Table VI.  Such equates to a zero percent rating.  Id., Table VII.  Regarding functional impact, the appellant described difficulty understanding speech in background noise.

Applying the facts to the rating criteria set forth above, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating is not warranted for bilateral hearing loss for any portion of the period under review.

As set forth above, audiometric findings show a noncompensable rating is warranted.  The Board has carefully reviewed the remaining record in its entirety, but finds no other probative evidence of record showing that the appellant's hearing loss disability is more severe for compensation purposes during the period under review than demonstrated on the above-discussed audiological evaluation.

The Board has considered the appellant's description of his hearing loss disability, to include his competent reports that he has difficulty understanding speech in background noise.  Although the Board finds his reports to be credible, disability ratings for hearing impairment are derived by a mechanical application of the rating schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometric evaluations are rendered.  Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992). In this case, as explained above, the numeric designations correlate to the current disability ratings.

Moreover, the rating criteria contemplate the appellant's reported decreased hearing acuity and difficulty in understanding conversational speech.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) ("[W]hen a claimant's hearing loss results in an inability to hear or understand speech or to hear other sounds in various contexts, those effects are contemplated by the schedular rating criteria").  The Board further finds that other than difficulty hearing or understanding speech, the record on appeal contains no evidence of other symptoms attributable to the service-connected hearing loss, such as dizziness, vertigo, or ear pain, not contemplated by the rating criteria.  

In addition, the Board has considered the appellant's reports of tinnitus, but notes that service connection has been awarded for such and a separate rating is in effect.  The Board may not consider symptoms associated with other service-connected disabilities in rating the appellant's hearing loss as that would result in impermissible pyramiding.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is not warranted for any portion of the period under review.

The appellant was afforded a contracted audiological examination in January 2024.  The claims file was reviewed.  With respect to tinnitus, there was no functional impact.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260, recurrent tinnitus warrants a maximum 10 percent rating.  See also Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 (b) and Diagnostic Code 6260 limit a veteran to a single disability for tinnitus, regardless of whether the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral).

The appellant's service-connected bilateral tinnitus has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available for the period under review.  See Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (affirming VA's long-standing interpretation of Diagnostic Code 6260 as authorizing only a single 10 percent rating for tinnitus, whether unilateral or bilateral).  Accordingly, no higher schedular evaluation is warranted.  The record contains no indication, nor has the appellant contended, that his tinnitus produces symptoms not contemplated by the schedular criteria.  Because the rating criteria adequately contemplate his disability picture, the issue of extraschedular consideration was not reasonably raised.

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases, including arthritis, will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

1. Entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that service connection for PTSD is warranted.

While this appeal was pending, in an October 2024 rating decision, the AOJ, in pertinent part, awarded service connection for PTSD, persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress and persistent depressive episode, insomnia disorder, and alcohol use disorder, effective August 15, 2024.  

The AOJ made a favorable finding in the October 2024 rating decision that the Veteran's diagnosed PTSD is the result of in-service stressors.  Favorable findings by the AOJ are binding on the Board, absent clear and unmistakable error.  It follows that service connection for PTSD is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that service connection for a low back disability is not warranted.

Service treatment records reveal that, on a June 2006 Medical Questionnaire for Potential Respirator Users, the appellant denied having ever had a back injury or currently having back pain.  He had no pain or stiffness when leaning forward or backward at the waist.  He had difficulty fully moving his arms and legs, bending at the knees, and squatting to the ground, in addition to extremity numbness.  On his February 2007 Report of Medical History, completed at separation, the appellant denied recurrent back pain or any back problem.  Based on a negative interval history, a clinician determined that a separation examination was not required.  Service treatment records are otherwise negative for complaints or abnormalities pertaining to the back.  

On his July 6, 2023, VA Form 21-526EZ, the appellant contended that he developed a low back disability from bending down and carrying heavy equipment on the flight deck.

Applying the facts to the criteria set forth above, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted for a low back disability.

With respect to the first element needed to substantiate a claim of service connection, a current disability, the record contains no clinical evidence of a diagnosis of a back disability.  There are no post-service treatment records reflecting a diagnosis of a back disability at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  The appellant has submitted or identified no such evidence.  Additionally, the appellant has not provided evidence that he has back manifestations of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2018); Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8, 15 (2020).  For example, the record contains no indication that he exhibits arthritis or loss of motion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Additionally, the appellant's service treatment records show that a chronic low back disability was not noted in service.  Again, during service and at separation, the appellant explicitly denied back pain and no back disability was ever diagnosed during service.  Additionally, there is no indication, nor is it contended, that arthritis manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation; and continuity of symptomatology is not established.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Board has considered the appellant's contentions that he has a back disability as a result of bending down and carrying heavy equipment on the flight deck.  The appellant, however, has not demonstrated that he has the competency to provide a current diagnosis or opinion on etiology because such an opinion would involve medical inquiry into biological processes, anatomical relationships, and physiological functioning.  Such internal physical processes are not readily observable and are not within the competence of the appellant in this case, who has not been shown by the evidence of record to have medical training or skills.  

A mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the claimant's current condition is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination.  See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010).  Therefore, the Board finds that a medical opinion regarding service connection is not necessary to decide the claim.  See Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006).

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot pain.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that service connection for bilateral foot pain is not warranted.

Service treatment records reveal that, on a June 2006 Medical Questionnaire for Potential Respirator Users, the appellant endorsed weakness in any of his arms, hands, legs, or feet.  No further detail was provided.  On his February 2007 Report of Medical History, completed at separation, the appellant endorsed foot trouble, but such was noted to be a reference to toenail fungus only.  Based on a negative interval history, a clinician determined that a separation examination was not required.  Service treatment records are otherwise negative for complaints or abnormalities pertaining to the feet.  

On his July 6, 2023, VA Form 21-526EZ, the appellant sought service connection for "foot pain" and he explained that he had toenail fungus on both feet, which he attributed to the boots he wore in service.

Applying the facts to the criteria set forth above, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted for a disability manifested by bilateral foot pain.

With respect to the first element needed to substantiate a claim of service connection, a current disability, the record contains no clinical evidence of a diagnosis of a bilateral foot disability.  There are no post-service treatment records reflecting a diagnosis of a foot disability at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  The appellant has submitted or identified no such evidence.  Although the appellant reports bilateral foot pain, he has not provided evidence that his reported bilateral foot pain produces manifestations of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2018); Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8, 15 (2020).  For example, the record contains no indication that he exhibits arthritis or loss of motion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Additionally, the appellant's service treatment records show that a chronic bilateral foot disability was not noted in service.  Service treatment records contain no indication of the presence of a foot disability or symptoms, but for symptoms related to a toenail fungus.  Additionally, there is no indication, nor is it contended, that arthritis manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation; and continuity of symptomatology is not established.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Board has considered the appellant's lay history of symptomatology related to his claimed disorder throughout the appeal period.  He is competent to report such symptoms and observations because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes through an individual's senses.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  The appellant in this case is not competent to determine the cause of his symptoms because it would involve medical inquiry into biological processes, anatomical relationships, and physiological functioning.  Such internal physical processes are not readily observable and are not within the competence of the appellant in this case, who has not been shown by the evidence of record to have medical training or skills.  

There is no indication, aside from the appellant's lay contentions, that he has a current disability manifested by bilateral foot pain, or functional impairment in earning capacity, which was incurred in or is otherwise causally related to his active service.  Again, at separation, the appellant explained that his endorsement of foot trouble was meant to refer to toenail fungus.  

A mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the claimant's current condition is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination.  See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010).  Therefore, the Board finds that a medical opinion regarding service connection is not necessary to decide the claim.  Rather, there is sufficient medical evidence upon which to base a decision.  See Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006).

The Board observes that the appellant originally claimed service connection for "foot pain" and explained that he had "toenail fungus on both feet from boots worn during service."  The AOJ developed this as two separate claims: bilateral foot pain and bilateral toenail fungus, which appears to have been a mistaken interpretation of the appellant's contentions.  Service connection for bilateral foot pain was denied in the February 2024 rating decision while service connection for bilateral toenail fungus was denied in the March 2024 rating decision.  To the extent that the appellant contends that it is his claimed bilateral toenail fungus which is painful, such is part and parcel of the service connection claim for bilateral toenail fungus which is being remanded.

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the claim of service connection for a bilateral foot pain, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability.

The Board finds that the AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not affording the appellant an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left knee disability.

The appellant's service treatment records include his February 2007 Report of Medical History completed in conjunction with his separation examination.  This report reflects that the appellant endorsed knee trouble.  He described it as "a little soreness."

The post-service record on appeal includes an August 2023 VA clinical note documenting the appellant's complaint of chronic bilateral knee pain.  He declined triage when it was offered as he had had the pain for a while.

In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the appellant had a qualifying event, injury, or disease during service based on the February 2007 endorsement of soreness in the knee.  Favorable findings of the AOJ are binding on the Board, absent clear and unmistakable error.

VA's duty to assist also includes obtaining a medical examination or opinion when such is necessary to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  An examination or medical opinion is necessary if the evidence of record (1) contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability; and (2) establishes that the claimant suffered an event, injury, or disease in service; or has a presumptive disease or symptoms of such a disease manifesting during an applicable presumptive period; and (3) indicates that the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease in service; but (4) does not contain sufficient medical evidence for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  Id.; see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

In this case, given the appellant's report of knee pain at separation, as well as his post-service report of chronic knee pain, the Board finds that the record contains an indication that the appellant currently has persistent symptoms which may be associated with an established in-service event, injury, or disease.  As such, the appellant should be afforded an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left knee disability.

The Board makes no credibility findings at this juncture.

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches.

3. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral toenail fungus.

The Board finds that remand is warranted for the claims of service connection for migraine headaches and bilateral toenail fungus to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error in that the appellant was not adequately scheduled for examinations.

The appellant was scheduled for contracted examinations on February 28, 2024.  Records from the contractor indicate that the "contentions" were "cancelled" because the appellant relocated.

The Board notes that the appellant has lived in California, Kansas, and Missouri.  There is no indication from the record regarding the location(s) of the February 28, 2024, examinations or their proximity to the appellant's then-current address.  There is also no indication as to which of the appellant's addresses was provided to the contractor.

The record is negative for any indication of any attempt to reschedule the examinations by the contractor or VA.  As such, the appellant's examinations should be rescheduled.

Although the issue of service connection for migraine headaches was already pending, for reasons unclear to the Board, the AOJ accepted and developed an August 15, 2024, VA Form 21-526EZ, which, in pertinent part, also included service connection for migraine headaches.

As part of that development, a contracted examiner completed a headaches Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) in November 2024 based solely on a review of the record, without examining the appellant in person or via telehealth, or even communicating by telephone.  The Board is unable to consider this new, VA-created evidence as it was created after notification of the March 2024 rating decision, which is the close of the evidence window in the instant appeal, as explained above.  However, when the RO readjudicates the claim, it should consider whether the examination report and opinion already obtained are adequate. 

The Board makes no credibility findings at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the appellant for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left knee disability.  Access to the claims file should be made available to the examiner for review. 

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should delineate all left knee disabilities.  For each identified disability, the examiner should opine as to the following: 

2. Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current left knee disability identified on examination had its onset in service or is otherwise related to an in-service disease or injury, to include the appellant's report on his February 2007 Report of Medical History of knee trouble which he described as "a little soreness."

3. Schedule the appellant for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed migraine headaches.  Access to the claims file should be made available to the examiner for review. 

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should opine as to the following: 

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) any current migraine headache disability identified on examination had its onset in service, was manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation, or is otherwise related to an in-service disease or injury, to include toxic risk exposure activity? 

When preparing this opinion, the examiner must consider both the total potential exposure and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic risk exposure activities of the appellant. 

4. Schedule the appellant for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral toenail fungus.  Access to the claims file should be made available to the examiner for review. 

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should opine as to the following: 

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current bilateral toenail fungus disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to an in-service disease or injury, to include the appellant's report on his February 2007 Report of Medical History of toenail fungus, or his toxic risk exposure activity? 

When preparing this opinion, the examiner must consider both the total potential exposure and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic risk exposure activities of the appellant. 

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Behlen, Robert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.