Citation Nr: A25033296
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230810-368143
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is warranted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is warranted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) and Sjogren's syndrome, formerly claimed as hepatitis, is warranted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for reactive arthritis, formerly claimed as lupus, is warranted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for OSA is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for reactive arthritis is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New evidence has been received that is relevant to the claims of entitlement to service connection for OSA, a right knee condition, MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome, reactive arthritis, and IBS.

2. Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Veteran's OSA is caused by service-connected major depressive disorder (MDD).

3. The evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's right knee condition is caused by service-connected right foot plantar fasciitis.

4. The evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome was incurred in service.

5. The evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's reactive arthritis was incurred in service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d), 3.2501.

2.  The criteria for readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for right knee condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d), 3.2501.

3. The criteria for readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d), 3.2501.

4. The criteria for readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for reactive arthritis have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d), 3.2501.

5. The criteria for readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for IBS have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d), 3.2501.

6. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right knee condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome have been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for reactive arthritis have been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2001 to June 2006.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The July 2023 rating decision determined that the Veteran failed to submit new and relevant evidence for her claims for service connection for OSA, right knee condition, hepatitis, lupus, and IBS.

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the IBS claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

New and Relevant Evidence

Under the modernized review system, VA will readjudicate a previously denied claim if new and relevant evidence is present or secured after notice of the prior denial of a veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501. "New evidence" is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim. Id.

1. New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA is warranted.

2. New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is warranted.

3. New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome is warranted.

4. New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for reactive arthritis is warranted.

5. New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for IBS is warranted.

In the July 2023 rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's service connection claims for OSA, right knee condition, hepatitis, lupus, and IBS because new and relevant evidence had not been received and the claims could not be readjudicated.

The evidence received since the July 2023 rating decision includes evidence that is both new and relevant to the claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). The Veteran submitted a medical opinion from J.F., M.D., that provided nexus opinions for her OSA, right knee, and autoimmune conditions. In addition, the Veteran's VA medical records show a current diagnosis for IBS as well as a notation that the Veteran's diarrhea and constipation are due to her IBS. This evidence tends to prove or disprove an element of the claims on appeal and the OSA, right knee condition, MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome, reactive arthritis, and IBS claims should be readjudicated. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Secondary service connection may also be established for a disorder which is aggravated by a service-connected disability; compensation may be provided for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 374 (1995). In order to prevail on the issue of secondary service connection, the record must show: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998); see also Allen, supra.

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). Lay testimony is competent to prove that a claimant exhibited certain lay-observable symptoms and the time that those symptoms appeared. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the Veteran. See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39 40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990).

After the evidence is assembled, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record. See 38 U.S.C. § 7104. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.103.

6. Entitlement to service connection for OSA is granted.

The Veteran contends that her OSA is caused by or aggravated by her service-connected conditions. 

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of OSA and was granted service connection for MDD in a June 2020 rating decision. To establish service connection on a secondary basis, there must be evidence establishing nexus between the current OSA and a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). 

The Veteran was afforded VA medical examinations for her OSA claim in May 2020 and October 2022. The May 2020 VA examiner provided a negative secondary service connection opinion because the Veteran's service-connected migraines were not the cause of sleep apnea. The October 2022 VA examiner determined that sleep apnea was not related to the Veteran's service because there was no treatment for OSA while she was in service.

The Veteran was provided another VA medical opinion in December 2022. The VA examiner provided a negative secondary service connection opinion because the Veteran's obesity was not related to service and psychiatric conditions do not physically cause recurrent collapse of the pharyngeal airway during sleep. 

In a February 2023 statement, Dr. J.F. found that, among other things, medical studies and science showed that OSA has a high correlation with depression and anxiety, particularly in Gulf War era veterans and that this relationship was "strikingly evident." He opined that the Veteran's OSA was more likely than not due to her service in the military.

After a review of the evidence, the Board finds the evidence of record is, at worst, in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's OSA was caused by her service-connected MDD. A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Resolving the benefit-of-the-doubt in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for OSA is warranted on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is granted.

The Veteran contends that her right knee condition is related to service or is caused or aggravated by her service-connected conditions. 

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of a right knee condition, including tibialis anterior strain and chondromalacia patella, status-post arthroscopy and meniscectomy, and was granted service connection for plantar fasciitis of the right foot in a November 2006 rating decision. See also October 2021 VA Examination Report. As noted above, there must be evidence establishing a nexus between the current condition and a service-connected disability to warrant entitlement to secondary service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

The Veteran underwent a knee examination in October 2021. The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion because there was no right knee meniscal injury during service.

Dr. J.F. opined that that the cause of the Veteran's right knee condition was her service-connected right foot condition. The physician stated that extensive studies on the biomechanical role of improper or suboptimal body part alignment demonstrated that if the normal foot-ankle-knee-hip alignment is not present for any weightbearing activity, significant additional damage occurs at the proximal joints. The examiner concluded that plantar fasciitis was the major factor in the causation of the degenerative arthritis and meniscal tear of the right knee.

After review of the evidence of record, the Board finds Dr. J.F.'s medical opinion most probative. The examiner cited different studies and provided a detailed rationale as to how the mechanical role of the Veteran's service-connected plantar fasciitis caused her right knee condition. Dr J.F. found that the Veteran's plantar fasciitis is at least as likely as not, or at least 50 percent, the cause of her current right knee pathology. Thus, the evidence shows that the Veteran's right knee condition was caused by her service-connected plantar fasciitis of the right foot and service connection on a secondary service connection basis for right knee condition is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

8. Entitlement to service connection for a MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome is granted.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome. 

Dr. J.F. determined that the Veteran's hepatitis and autoimmune disorder could be more accurately diagnosed as MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome. He found that the onset of these conditions was during the Veteran's service when she experienced fever, a skin condition, and liver enzyme elevations. In October 2002, the Veteran had elevated liver enzymes during a blood test and she had a fever of indeterminate origin. The doctor stated that confirmed presence of the immune-mediated condition by blood testing is consistent with onset of MCDT and Sjogren's syndrome during the Veteran's years in service. The physician opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome had its onset during service and was due to service.

The Board finds that the evidence shows that the Veteran's MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome was incurred in service during the Veteran's active duty. Dr. J.F. provided a detailed explanation that the conditions began in service and that the October 2002 blood testing showing elevated liver enzymes as well as a fever and a skin condition reflect that the Veteran's MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome was caused by the Veteran's service. There is no evidence of record showing otherwise. Thus, the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's MCTD and Sjogren's syndrome was incurred in service and service connection is granted. 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.

9. Entitlement to service connection for reactive arthritis is granted.

The Veteran contends that her reactive arthritis had its onset in service and was due to or caused by active duty.

Dr. J.F. found that the Veteran's lupus and systemic autoimmune illness can also be diagnosed as reactive arthritis. He opined that the Veteran's chlamydia infection in service was a known cause of reactive arthritis and it was a delayed consequence of the chlamydia infection. The examiner also found that the fever present during active duty was of the type and degree that is typical of reactive arthritis and it is a generally recognized manifestation of the disorder. Finally, the examiner determined that the Veteran's vaccinations in service also played a significant role in the causation of reactive arthritis. Dr. J.F. opined that the Veteran's reactive arthritis had its onset during service and was caused by a combination of service-related events.

The Board finds the opinion by Dr. J.F. provides the most probative evidence in determining that service connection for reactive arthritis is warranted. The examiner found that the Veteran has a current reactive arthritis disability and that the condition had its onset in service. The physician also opined that the Veteran's reactive arthritis was caused by various events in service, including vaccinations, a specific infection, and fevers while the Veteran was on active duty. Thus, the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's reactive arthritis was incurred in service and service connection is granted. 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

In a December 2005 service medical record, the Veteran complained of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, and gastroenteritis was diagnosed. VA medical records also show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with IBS. A January 2023 treatment report indicates that the Veteran's diarrhea and constipation was due to IBS.  

The Board finds that an addendum opinion is required for the Veteran's IBS claim. A new opinion should be obtained as to whether the Veteran's IBS is due to an in-service incurrence, including the December 2005 notation of diarrhea and gastroenteritis diagnosis, and whether IBS is caused or aggravated by any service-connected conditions. 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in October 2021 and the VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, in part, because the Veteran did not have IBS. The examiner also determined that no opinion regarding a connection between the Veteran's service-connected MDD and IBS was appropriate since the Veteran did not have IBS. However, as noted above, newly received VA medical records show that that Veteran has an IBS diagnosis. Therefore, a new addendum opinion regarding nexus, both on a direct and secondary basis, of the Veteran's IBS claim should be obtained.

The omission noted above represents a pre-decisional error that must be resolved upon remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's IBS condition. The entire claims file must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner must opine as to the following:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's IBS is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the December 2005 in-service complaint of diarrhea and gastroenteritis diagnosis?

(b)	 Whether the Veteran's IBS is caused by any service-connected disability?

(c)	Whether the Veteran's IBS is aggravated by any service-connected disability? 

A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and he/she must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation. Additionally, the examiner must indicate whether any opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of knowledge in the medical community at large and not those of the particular examiner.

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Derr, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.