Citation Nr: A25033923
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-456910
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for osteoporosis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty in the U.S. Army from February 1974 to February 1976. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R.                       § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for osteoporosis is remanded.

Additional development of the record is necessary for the proper adjudication of these claims for service connection for migraines, and service connection for osteoporosis. 

The Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ. In this instance, the AOJ has found that (1) the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity based on the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of electronic instrument tester and was exposed to CS gas, RDX, phosphorous smoke, and rocket propellants and gases, (2) the Veteran has a diagnosis of migraines, and (3) the Veteran has a diagnosis of osteoporosis. 

An August 11, 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum indicates the Veteran participated in a TERA. Specifically, the August 2023 TERA memorandum notes that due to the Veteran's MOS, he had exposures to CS gas, RDX, phosphorous smoke, and rocket propellants and gases. 

The Veteran contends that his currently diagnosed migraine headaches and osteoporosis are due to his exposure to rocket propellants. As discussed above, it is conceded that the Veteran was exposed to rocket propellants, as well as other toxins as part of his MOS. 

In August 29, 2023 medical opinions, the clinician opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's migraine headaches and osteoporosis were related to the Veteran's service. The clinician also opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's migraine headaches and osteoporosis were caused by TERA activities in service. Notably, these opinions do not provide rationale for the TERA opinions offered, other than to state that "[a] toxic exposure is not in the etiology of [the conditions]." The failure to provide a well-reasoned explanation for the conclusion renders it inadequate.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

Additionally, in the August 2023 medical opinion, in section VIII question 5, the clinician was asked to provide a summary of the Veteran's TERA memorandum, and the clinician incorrectly indicated the Veteran's TERA memorandum stated "no service related toxic exposure. Non service related exposure to exposures to CS gas, RDX, phosphorous smoke, rocket propellent and gases." Given this incorrect summary of the contents of the TERA memorandum of record it seems that the clinician's opinion was based on an entirely inaccurate factual premise that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA while in service, when in fact it is conceded that the Veteran had participated in a TERA. An opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise is without probative value and cannot be used as the basis of adjudicating a claim on the merits. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993).

The failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed migraine disability and osteoporosis disability are related to the Veteran's conceded in-service participation in a TERA constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, a remand for adequate medical opinions as to the etiology of the Veteran's migraine headaches and osteoporosis is necessary. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must make copies of all pertinent records available to an appropriate clinician to provide a medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's (1) migraine headaches and (2) osteoporosis. Upon review of the record (to include this Remand and the August 2023 TERA memorandum), the clinician must respond to the following: 

(a.) Whether it is as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any (1) migraine headaches and/or (2) osteoporosis is caused by service?

(b.) Whether it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's (1) migraine headaches and/or (2) osteoporosis is due to his established TERA? In providing an opinion regarding the relationship of (1) migraine headaches and (2) osteoporosis to the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity, the reviewing clinician must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(c.) If the opinion is that the Veteran's (1) migraine headaches and/or (2) osteoporosis was not caused by the Veteran's conceded TERA exposure, please provide the etiology considered more likely. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

*In rendering such opinions, the examiner must take into consideration and address the Veteran's conceded exposure to CS gas, RDX, phosphorous smoke, and rocket propellants and gases. See August 11, 2023 TERA Memomorandum.

The clinician must provide a CLEAR, UNDERSTANDABLE, AND COMPLETE RATIONALE for all conclusions reached and any opinion rendered. Medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Staskowski, Nichole

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.