Citation Nr: A25033724
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240825-469505
  DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for lumbosacral strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbosacral strain manifests in functional loss equivalent to favorable ankylosis.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his right shoulder strain was incurred during his active service. 

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his left shoulder strain was incurred during his active service. 

4. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his cervical strain was incurred during his active service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for lumbosacral strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (Code) 5237 (2024). 

2. The criteria for service connection for right shoulder strain have been met.       38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b) (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 3.304 (2024). 

3. The criteria for service connection for left shoulder strain have been met.         38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b) (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 3.304 (2024). 

4. The criteria for service connection for cervical strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b) (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 3.304 (2024). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2012 to August 2015. 

These maters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, for the issues related to the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain and right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  For the issues related to the Veteran's left shoulder strain, right shoulder strain, and cervical strain, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal, as applicable, cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims for an increased rating for lumbosacral strain and entitlement to service connection for right shoulder strain, left shoulder strain, and cervical strain, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular Code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining, including degree of disability, is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.  If the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, the claim is to be denied.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 37307, No. 2020-2067 (Fed. Cir., Dec. 17, 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

In any claim for an increased rating, "staged" ratings may be warranted where the factual findings show distinct time periods when the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, there must be consideration of functional loss caused by factors that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40.  Consideration must also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45; see DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 37 (2011) ("functional loss caused by pain must be rated at the same level as if that functional loss were caused by some other factor...that actually limited motion" (emphasis removed)).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in §§ 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under §§ 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 acknowledge that a claimant's disability may cause actual pain or painful motion but still not be severe enough to warrant a compensable rating under the appropriate Code.  Pain in, like deformity of or insufficient nerve supply to, a particular joint may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination and endurance.  Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. at 38-39.

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is rated pursuant to Code 5237 and the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Formula).  Under the General Formula, with or without symptoms such as pain, stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease, a 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent rating requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

"Unfavorable ankylosis" is defined, in pertinent part, as "a condition in which...the entire thoracolumbar spine or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching."  See id., Note (5).

The Board notes that the VA examination of record is not compliant with Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), but remand is not necessary because the Veteran must show unfavorable ankylosis to be entitled to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent.  The considerations in Correia do not apply to the symptoms that must be shown for unfavorable ankylosis, such as restricted opening of the mouth or a limited line of vision, and thus remand for a new examination would provide little probative value.  The record does not reflect, nor has the Veteran stated, that he has any of the requisite symptoms for a finding of unfavorable ankylosis.  Accordingly, the Board finds that remand for a new VA examination is unnecessary. 

As noted above, the VA examination of record is not compliant with Correia.  Thus, the range of motion measurements therein are given no probative weight.  However, in the June 2023 VA Back Examination of record, the Veteran reported that his back condition caused constant back pain and tightness.  In this examination, the Veteran also reported that he experiences flare-ups of the back that occur 3 to 5 days a week that are moderate to severe, last 12 to 24 hours, and are precipitated by anything, including standing, walking, bending, and turning. 

After considering the Veteran's credible report of constant pain and flare-ups that are precipitated by any kind of motion, the Board finds that such pain and fatigability results in functional loss equivalent to favorable ankylosis.  Notably, the Veteran cannot move his back without pain and has significant limitations with standing, walking, bending, and turning.  Such impairment reflects functional loss limiting his ability to perform the normal working movements of his back with strength and endurance.  Thus, a 40 percent rating is warranted.

To warrant a disability rating in excess of 40 percent, the evidence would need to show unfavorable ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine or the entire spine.  There is no evidence in the record that the Veteran suffers from the symptoms associated with unfavorable ankylosis.  Also, even though the Veteran reported that he takes over-the-counter pain medication for his back condition, a remand for an opinion based on the ameliorative effects of the medication would not impact the Board's analysis as, again, there is no evidence in the record that the Veteran suffers from the symptoms associated with unfavorable ankylosis and medication would not produce such symptoms that must be shown for unfavorable ankylosis mentioned above.  Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025).  As such the Board finds that a remand for an opinion on the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication is unnecessary and an increased rating in excess of 40 percent must be denied.

The Veteran is not noted to have any neurologic abnormalities associated with his back disability.  See, e.g., June 2023 VA examination.  As a result, a separate rating for any such abnormalities is not warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, Note (1).

Service connection 

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection requires evidence showing: (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  By reasonable doubt is meant one which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder strain.

The Veteran contends that his right shoulder strain was caused by extreme over-use during service, as he was not given enough time to recover between activities, and he frequently fell on his shoulders during airborne jumps.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran also reported that his right shoulder pain began during his service and has persisted since that time.  See October 2023 Medical Records. 

A Veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry into active service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the acceptance, examination, or enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the condition existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  The term "noted" refers to "[o]nly such conditions as are recorded in examination reports."  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).

When no pre-existing condition is noted upon examination for entry into service, a Veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry, and the burden then shifts to VA to rebut the presumption of soundness.  Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304.

To rebut the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111, there must be clear and unmistakable evidence that (1) a Veteran's disability existed prior to service, and (2) that the pre-existing disability was not aggravated during service.  Id.  When the presumption of soundness is not rebutted, the claim must be treated as a direct service connection claim.

The Veteran's June 2011 enlistment examination did not note that the Veteran had any conditions related to his right shoulder, therefore, the Veteran is presumed to be sound upon entry, and the burden shifts to the VA to rebut the presumption of soundness.  The Board notes that the Veteran reported in a September 2015 VA shoulder examination that he had an onset of right shoulder pain in 2011 when he was playing baseball in high school.  However, the Veteran also stated that it healed well by the time he enlisted.  Given that the Veteran provided a credible lay statement that his right shoulder pain had resolved prior to his enlistment, the Board finds that there has not been clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had a preexisting injury, and VA has not rebutted the presumption of soundness.  As such, the Board will proceed with the instant claim based on the contention of the Veteran mentioned above.

The Board notes that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right shoulder strain as evidenced by an October 2023 VA examination.  Further, the October 2023 rating decision on appeal contained a favorable finding that the Veteran was in receipt of a parachutist badge.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  The Board finds no clear and unmistakable error.  The Board infers from this favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a significant number of parachuting jumps during service.  As such, the remaining question before the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's currently diagnosed right shoulder condition and the injury incurred in service.  

Service treatment records from April 2014 document that the Veteran reported right lateral shoulder pain for the last 2 to 3 months and was assessed with right shoulder impingement symptoms.  Additionally, in the Veteran's separation examination from May 2015 the Veteran indicated that he had right shoulder pain on pulling and he reported that his overall health was worse compared to his last medical assessment/physical examination, as he had continuing right shoulder pain among other issues.  As mentioned above, the Veteran was provided a VA shoulder examination in September 2015.  In this examination the Veteran was noted to have a diagnosis of right shoulder strain from 2015, but no medical opinion was provided. 

The Veteran was provided an additional VA shoulder examination in October 2023.  The Veteran reported that he started having bilateral shoulder pain in 2015 due to strenuous activities and participating in airborne jumps.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right shoulder condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that even though one encounter for right shoulder pain was noted in 2014, no other encounters were noted since then and too much time has passed for it to be causing the same issues. 

The Board finds the October 2023 opinion to be inadequate as it is based on an inaccurate factual premise that no other encounters for right shoulder pain were noted since 2014.  As noted above, the Veteran attended a VA shoulder examination in September 2015, where he was noted to have a diagnosis of right shoulder strain from 2015 after his report of right shoulder pain on pulling in his May 2015 separation examination.  This opinion also relies solely on the absence of evidence in the Veteran's medical records.  See Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 272 (2015) (stating that the Board must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation); see also Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011) (stating that "[w]hen assessing a claim, the Board may not consider the absence of evidence as substantive negative evidence.").  As such, the Board affords the October 2023 opinion no probative value. 

After resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's right shoulder strain was incurred during service and continued from that time.  There is significant probative evidence reflecting right shoulder symptoms in service, including upon his separation examination and the Veteran provided competent and credible lay statements regarding his continued symptoms.  Moreover, the Veteran was diagnosed with right shoulder strain a month after separation from service.  Therefore, service connection for right shoulder strain is warranted. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder strain.

The Veteran reported the same contention for his currently diagnosed left shoulder strain as those mentioned above for his right shoulder strain.  Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran has a parachutist badge and is conceded to have a significant number of jumps during service.  

As discussed above, the Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination in October 2023 wherein it was noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral shoulder strain in January 2015.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's left shoulder condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that there are no encounters for left shoulder pain noted upon review of the Veteran's service treatment records. 

The Board finds the October 2023 opinion to be inadequate as it relies solely on the absence of evidence in the Veteran's service treatment records.  See Fountain, 27 Vet. App. at 272 (stating that the Board must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation); see also Buczynski, 24 Vet. App. at 224 (stating that "[w]hen assessing a claim, the Board may not consider the absence of evidence as substantive negative evidence.").  As such, the Board affords the October 2023 opinion no probative value. 

After resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that his left shoulder strain is related to service.  Although service treatment records do not reflect left shoulder symptoms, the Veteran provided a competent and credible lay statement that he began having pain during service and it has continued since that time.  The October 2023 VA examiner's diagnosis with a date of January 2015 supports the Veteran's statement.  Therefore, in light of the Veteran's conceded parachuting activities during service, the Board finds that the requirements of service connection for left shoulder strain have been met and service connection is warranted. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain.

The Veteran contended in the June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ that his currently diagnosed cervical strain was caused by his service-connected lumbosacral strain.  However, the Veteran later reported in an October 2023 VA neck examination that he began having neck pain in 2014 during his service due to constant wear and tear and bad landings during airborne jumps.  Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran has a parachutist badge and is conceded to have a significant number of jumps during service.  

In the October 2023 VA neck examination, it was noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of cervical strain with a date of diagnosis of January 2014.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's cervical strain was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's cervical symptoms are from constant wear and tear and that no direct relation to lumbosacral strain can be established as both are mutually exclusive.  The examiner did not otherwise provide an opinion regarding any relation to service. 

While the October 2023 examiner found that a nexus did not exist on a secondary basis, the opinion contains positive evidence that supports a direct connection between the Veteran's cervical strain and his active service.  The Board notes that, as mentioned above, the Veteran reported on the October 2023 VA examination that his cervical strain began in 2014 and occurred partly as a result of constant wear and tear, and the October 2023 examiner found that the Veteran's cervical symptoms are from constant wear and tear.  The examiner used the same language as the Veteran did when describing how his active service caused his cervical condition and therefore supports the Veteran's contentions. 

As a result, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's cervical strain is related to service.  Although service treatment records do not reflect cervical strain symptoms, the Veteran provided a competent and credible lay statement that he began having pain during service from constant wear and tear.  Additionally, while the October 2023 VA examiner did not provide an opinion on direct service connection, he did provide positive evidence that the Veteran's cervical symptoms are from constant wear and tear, which further supports the Veteran's contention, and provided a date of diagnosis of January 2014, during service.  Therefore, the Board finds that the requirements of service connection for cervical strain have been met and service connection is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to an increased rating for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome.

Evaluations of joint disabilities must include a consideration of functional loss due to the factors listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.45, including pain on movement.  With regards to joints, the testing for pain on motion must include assessment of active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and with non-weight-bearing, and must also make a proper evaluation of the Veteran's limitations due to pain, weakness, fatigability and incoordination and during flare ups.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59; see Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

In the June 2023 VA knee examination, it was noted during active and passive range of motion (ROM) testing that pain was exhibited on flexion and extension.  However, the examiner did not indicate in degrees of ROM where pain began.  The Board acknowledges the following instruction in the examination report pertaining to active and passive ROM testing: "If any limitation of motion is specifically attributable to pain, weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or other; please note the degree(s) in which limitation of motion is specifically attributable to the factors identified and describe."  However, in the space provided following the instruction, the examination report does not identify any of these specific factors, in particular, the impact of the noted pain in flexion and extension.  Accordingly, it remains unclear to the Board, if the active and passive ROM measurements reflect the point at which pain occurs.  Additionally, the Veteran reported in the examination that he experiences a strong achy soreness when he puts weight on his knees, however, the examiner did not indicate that there was evidence of pain on weight-bearing in active ROM or passive ROM and did not indicate in degrees of ROM where pain began.  As the VA examination of record does not fully comport with the requirements of Correia, the examination is inadequate, and a remand is required.  See Correia, 28 Vet. App. at 158.

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran takes over-the-counter pain medication for his right knee condition.  On remand, the examiner should note the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication on his right knee condition.  Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to evaluate the current level of severity of his right knee disability.  The examiner must review the entire record in conjunction with the examination and note such review was conducted. 

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

ROM measurements should be included for active and passive motion in both weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing circumstances.  Full ROM testing also must be conducted on the opposite joint unless the opposite joint is damaged, which includes any disorder that would make the joint in question abnormal.  If the opposite joint is determined to be damaged, and no ROM testing is conducted, this must be explained in the report.  If pain is noted, the exact point in the ROM (degree) at which pain starts should be clearly noted.

If feasible, the examiner must assess the additional functional impairment on repeated use or during flare-ups in terms of the degree of additional ROM loss, using lay observations specifically elicited from the Veteran.  If not feasible, the examiner must provide a detailed explanation and rationale for why such could not be accomplished.  Specifically, if the medical professional cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered; a rationale based on the fact that the Veteran is not having a flare-up at the time of the examination will not be deemed adequate.

The examiner is also asked to address whether there are any ameliorative effects from medication use demonstrated through ROM testing.  If the examiner finds that ROM testing exhibits more favorable results due to the use of prescribed medication, the examiner is requested to provide an opinion, if at all possible, on the estimated testing results absent medication use. 

			(Continued on next page)

If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Melissa Cook, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.