Citation Nr: A25033424
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-471548
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

REMANDED

The issue of service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran was not in receipt of a total service-connected disability rating for 10 continuous years immediately preceding his death; the total disability rating was not in place within 5 years of the Veteran's discharge from active service; and the Veteran was not a prisoner of war.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for DIC benefits pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1318 are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1318; 38 C.F.R. § 3.22.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from December 1966 to December 1968.  He died in August 2023.  The appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a January 2024 rating decision that denied DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 as well as service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  Based on a liberal construction of the appellant's notice of disagreement, the Board finds that she is appealing both aspects of the decision.

In her August 2024 VA Form 10182 (notice of disagreement), the appellant referenced the January 2024 decision and elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 5, 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the January 5, 2024 AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the appellant's claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that matter. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  For the claim being denied, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

The appellant seeks DIC following the Veteran's death in August 2023.  See DIC claim from October 17, 2023.  She asserts that she is entitled to DIC because the Veteran had a total disability rating at the time of his death.  See notice of disagreement from August 19, 2024.

DIC benefits are payable under certain circumstances if the service member was in receipt of, or entitled to receive, compensation at the time of death for a service-connected disability that had been totally disabling for a specified period of time.  DIC benefits granted to a surviving spouse under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 are paid in the same manner as if the Veteran's death were service connected.  38 U.S.C. § 1318.  Such benefits are warranted if any of the following are shown: (1) the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of 10 or more years immediately preceding death; (2) the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than five years from the date of such veteran's discharge or other release from active duty; or (3) the veteran was a former prisoner of war and the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding death.  38 U.S.C. § 1318(b)(1-3).

At the time of his death, the Veteran was rated as totally disabled based on individual unemployability (TDIU) from November 25, 2020.  Service-connected disabilities at that time included posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (rated as 70 percent disabling); a left knee disability (rated as 10 percent disabling); residuals of a right hand 5th digit fracture (rated as noncompensable); a right knee disability (rated as noncompensable); and a chronic skin disease (rated as noncompensable).

After review of the relevant evidence and consideration of pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that DIC benefits pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1318 are not warranted.  As shown above, at the time of the Veteran's death, he was not continuously rated as totally disabled for a period of 10 years or more.  Thus, he did not qualify for DIC under section 1318(b)(1).  His TDIU evaluation, effective November 25, 2020, was not instated within five years from the date of his discharge from active duty in December 1968, and thus section 1318(b)(2) does not apply.  Finally, there is no argument or indication that Veteran was a former prisoner of war.  Thus, 38 U.S.C. § 1318(b)(3) does not apply.  

The Board acknowledges the appellant's assertions, to include as noted on her August 2024 notice of disagreement; however, the law does not provide for a grant of DIC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1318 under the facts of this case.

In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, as the relevant competent and probative evidence is persuasively against the claim, that doctrine is not for application.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The issue of service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is remanded.

The death of a veteran will be considered as having been due to a service-connected disability when the evidence establishes that such disability was either the principal or a contributory cause of death.  The service-connected disability will be considered as the principal (primary) cause of death when such disability, singly or jointly with some other condition, was the immediate or underlying cause of death or was etiologically related thereto.  A contributory cause of death is inherently one not related to the principal cause.  In determining whether the service-connected disability contributed to death, it must be shown that it contributed substantially or materially; that it combined to cause death; that it aided or lent assistance to the production of death. It is not sufficient to show that it casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection.  38 C.F.R § 3.312.  

The Veteran's death certificate indicates that he died from systemic complications of multiple traumatic injuries due to or as a consequence of a motor vehicle crash.

Treatment records from the private facility where the Veteran received emergency treatment following the motor vehicle crash show diagnoses of an ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and motor vehicle crash.  Significantly, these records appear to indicate that the Veteran experienced chest pains prior to the motor vehicle crash.  See private treatment records from October 17, 2023.

As noted above, at the time of his death, the Veteran was rated as totally disabled based on individual unemployability (TDIU) from November 25, 2020.  Service-connected conditions included PTSD (rated as 70 percent disabling); a left knee disability (rated as 10 percent disabling); residuals of a right hand 5th digit fracture (rated as noncompensable); a right knee disability (rated as noncompensable); and a chronic skin disease (rated as noncompensable).

Additionally, VA treatment records show that, prior to the motor vehicle crash, the Veteran had a history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and diastolic congestive heart failure, among other conditions.  See CAPRI records from January 3, 2024.

A VA opinion was not obtained in this case.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(a).  For the reasons explained below, the Board finds that the evidence of record triggers VA's duty to obtain a VA opinion prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal.

As detailed above, the evidence suggests that the Veteran experienced a heart attack prior to his motor vehicle crash.  Arguably, any such heart attack materially contributed to the Veteran.  The evidence further suggests that the Veteran had a history of hypertension and heart conditions that predated the events surrounding motor vehicle crash.  Arguably, any of these conditions could have contributed to the heart attack that appears to have immediately preceded the Veteran's motor vehicle crash.

The Veteran served in Vietnam and as such is presumed to have experienced herbicide agent exposure.  See other from January 3, 2024 (TERA memorandum).  For VA purposes, hypertension and certain heart conditions are considered to be associated with herbicide exposure.  38 C.F.R § 3.309(e).  

Because these is some indication that the Veteran had potentially service-related conditions that could have contributed to the motor vehicle crash that led to his death, the Board finds that a VA medical opinion is warranted in this case.  Any future VA opinion should also consider the extent to which any heart condition found to have materially contributed to the Veteran's motor vehicle crash was secondary to (i.e., caused or aggravated by) his service-connected PTSD.

The AOJ's failure to obtain a VA opinion in this case is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error; a remand is required for correction of this error.  38 C.F.R § 20.802(a).

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the claim of service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  The opinion must address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran experienced a heart attack immediately prior to the motor vehicle crash that led to his death?

(b.) If so, did the Veteran have any diagnosed condition(s) that at least as likely as not caused or contributed to the heart attack?  VA treatment records show a history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation and diastolic congestive heart failure.

(c.) For any diagnosed condition that is found to have caused or contributed to the heart attack, is it one of the medical conditions presumed to be associated with herbicide exposure, per 38 C.F.R § 3.309(e)?

(d.) If not, is any such condition at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's presumed herbicide agent exposure?

(e.) If not, is any such condition at least as likely as not caused or made worse (i.e., aggravated by) the Veteran's service-connected PTSD?

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  Indeed, the rationale for each opinion must go beyond generalized statements. There must be some discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved in the Veteran's specific case for the opinion to be deemed adequate.  

If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion. 

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. López, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.