Citation Nr: A25033258
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240913-475012
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to accrued benefits is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

The appellant filed her claim for accrued benefits more than one year after the death of her Veteran spouse.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The appellant's claim for accrued benefits was untimely filed. 38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 5121, 5121A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1000, 3.1010

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The appellant is the surviving spouse of a Veteran who served on active duty in the United States Air Force from October 1964 to September 1968. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2021 decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied the claim on appeal. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ/RO) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ/RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Accrued Benefits - Laws and Regulations

The appellant seeks entitlement to accrued benefits. The AOJ/RO denied her application as untimely filed and noted that there were no open issues left unaddressed and determined no accrued benefits existed for the appellant. 

Periodic monetary benefits payable under laws administered by VA, to which a payee was entitled at his or her death under existing ratings or decisions or those based on evidence in the file at date of death and due and unpaid, will, upon the death of such person, be paid as follows: to the Veteran's spouse, the Veteran's children (in equal shares), or the Veteran's dependent parents (in equal shares) or surviving parent. 38 U.S.C. § 5121 (a)(2), (3), (5); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (a). An application for accrued benefits is required to be filed within one year after the date of death. 38 U.S.C. § 5121 (c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (c). See Shields v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 346, 348-49 (1995).

In determining eligibility for accrued benefits as well as for substitution, the term "child" is defined, in pertinent part, as a child of the Veteran who is under the age of 18 years, became permanently incapable of self-support before reaching the age of 18 years, or after reaching the age of 18 years until reaching the age of 23 years is pursuing a course of instruction at an educational institution approved by VA. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.57 (a), 3.1000(d)(2). In the case of an adult child, accrued benefits are payable only as necessary to reimburse the person who bore the expenses of last sickness or burial. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (a)(5).

By way of background, the Veteran died in August 2016. His surviving spouse applied for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) benefits in May 2017. See May 2017 VA Form 21-534 (Application for Dependency and Indemnity Compensation or Death Pension by a Surviving Spouse or Child). An August 2017 rating decision denied service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death. From here, the travel takes many turns and the appellant filed various claims seeking service connection for coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure and peripheral neuropathy. The Board acknowledges the appellant filed many, sometimes duplicate, forms in seeking compensation, accrued benefits and the like.

In the interim, the Board granted service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, central retinopathy and nephropathy. See February 2020 Board decision. A July 2020 rating decision granted service connection for cause of death and granted eligibility to Dependent's Educational Assistance. Following a remand, the Board denied service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), sleep apnea and lumbar disc disorder. See September 2020 Board decision. 

Specific to the appellant's claim for accrued benefits, the appellant filed a notice of disagreement (NOD) in June 2018, in which the appellant argued "My husband also had coronary artery disease, which I feel contributed to his death. Congestive heart failure, I feel exacerbated his COPD." The appellant attached an undated VAMC treatment record that noted: "There is cardiomegaly. There is coronary atherosclerosis." The treatment record further states: "a chest x-ray done on October 4th which does show increased vascular congestion and perihilar opacity, indicative of congestive heart failure." 

Likewise in September 2018, the Veteran filed a claim for benefits, VA Form 21-526, which included coronary artery disease and congestive heart failure. In a statement in support of the claim, the appellant noted that the Veteran's "coronary artery disease and congestive heart failure was discovered on VA medical record back in 2014. Also, he had a herbicide claim open when this was discovered. Therefore, this is an inferred claim, in accordance with liberalizing law."

In October 2020, the Veteran filed a notice of disagreement (NOD) seeking review of "bilateral neuropathy secondary to diabetes II" and "coronary heart disease congestive heart failure secondary to CAD."

In April 2021, the appellant filed a VA Form 21-601 application for accrued amounts due a deceased beneficiary. Later in April 2021, VA acknowledged the appellant's application and noted that there were no other claims pending at the time of the Veteran's death that had not already been decided. 

The appellant filed another application for accrued benefits in June 2021 noting that the Veteran had "boots on the ground" in Vietnam, therefore, he was entitled to "informal claims coronary artery disease, CHF, bilateral neuropathys [sic] secondary to diabetes" under Nehmer. A July 2021 rating decision confirmed and continued the assignment of 70 percent for the Veteran's psychological disability.

In August 2021, the appellant filed a claim for benefits, VA Form 21-526, for a "Nehmer award adjudication effective date for diabetes, coronary artery disease was an informal claim. Informal claim for bilateral neuropathy, since he was in Vietnam." In October 2021, the Veteran again sought accrued benefits. 

An October 2022 rating decision denied entitlement to an earlier effective date for Dependents' Educational Assistance and confirmed and continued service connection for the Veteran's cause of death. Likewise, an October 2022 notification letter informed the appellant that a special review of the Veteran's claim was conducted "as mandated by the United States District Court's orders in Nehmer v. US. Department of Veterans Affairs." The AOJ/RO found "no accrual exists." 

In January 2023 and May 2023, the appellant sought a supplemental claim seeking service connection for the Veteran's heart disease coronary artery disease and bilateral peripheral neuropathy secondary to diabetes. The appellant cited to the Veteran's medical records.

In a March 2024 notification letter, the appellant was advised that after a review of all the claims filed, there no open issues left unaddressed and "determined that no accrued benefits exist." The AOJ/RO noted that the appellant sought substitution for the claim of peripheral neuropathy, however, it was an issue that was never claimed by the Veteran. Therefore, VA could not accept a claim for substitution. Additionally, the notification letter advised the appellant that substitution must be claimed within one year of the Veteran's passing. 

The appellant filed a supplemental claim in June 2024 and appealed to the Board in July 2024 for accrued benefits for bilateral peripheral neuropathy and coronary artery disease (CAD). In an August 2024 letter, the Board advised the appellant that the claim was untimely and could not be docketed.

The appellant again appealed to the Board in September 2024 seeking review of bilateral peripheral neuropathy and coronary artery disease. The appellant argued that the claim of neuropathy "would be inferred claim."

First, the Board will address the appellant's claim for peripheral or diabetic neuropathy.

In her many filings, the appellant has provided a copy of the Veteran's June 2014 statement in support of the claim in which the Veteran sought service connection for several claims, to include "diabetes on insulin type 2 - diabetic neuropathy." 

The record showed that a January 2015 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim for diabetes mellitus type II. The Veteran filed an NOD in March 2015 that included "diabetes II/nephropathy." The Board notes the Veteran did not seek review for "neuropathy." A June 2016 statement of the case (SOC) denied the claims, including diabetes mellitus type II and nephropathy. Because the Veteran did not seek review of "neuropathy," it was not addressed on the SOC.

In August 2016, the Veteran appealed to the Board citing "all issues" and specifically appealed "lumbar disorder, sleep apnea secondary to COPD, COPD, diabetes secondary to jet fumes, retinopathy secondary to diabetes, nephropathy secondary to diabetes." The Board notes that the Veteran did not include neuropathy. As such, neither the February 2020 nor the September 2022 Board Decisions include claims for neuropathy. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that while the Veteran listed "neuropathy" in 2015, the Veteran did not continue or seek review of the claim. As such, the Board finds the claim for "neuropathy" was not pending at the time of the Veteran's passing and is not subject to accrued benefits. 

Turning to the appellant's claims for congestive heart failure (CHF) and coronary artery disease (CAD), the Board finds the Veteran did not claim such conditions. 

A review of the record are silent for any cardiac claims. In her many filings, the appellant notes an undated VAMC treatment record that cites "coronary atherosclerosis" and to symptoms that were "indicative of congestive heart failure." 

It is well-settled that "[t]he mere existence of medical records generally cannot be construed as an informal claim; rather, there must be some intent by the claimant to apply for a benefit." See Criswell v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 501, 504 (2006) (finding that a claim for benefits for trenchfoot did not contain an informal claim for cold weather residuals of the hands, despite a VA medical examination provided in connection with the claim for benefits for trenchfoot that demonstrated such residuals).

Accordingly, a medical record that noted coronary atherosclerosis and indicated congestive heart failure is not the same nor can it be construed as a claim for service connection for coronary artery disease or heart failure. As such, the Board does not find that the Veteran claimed CHF or CAD and, as such, CHF and CAD are not subject for accrued benefits. 

Turning to timeliness, following review of the record, the Board must conclude that the appellant is not entitled to accrued benefits. Her accrued benefits claim was received by VA in April 2021 and again in June 2021, more than a year after the August 2026 death of the Veteran. As noted previously, a claim for accrued benefits must be filed within a year of the date of death of the payee. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (c). As the claim for accrued benefits was received more than one year following the Veteran's death, there is no legal basis for an award of accrued benefits to the appellant in this case. The statute limits the time to apply for accrued benefits to one year after the death of the deceased beneficiary. 38 U.S.C. § 5121 (c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (c). There are no exceptions provided in the statute or the regulation.

The Board is sympathetic to the appellant's repeated attempts to seek service connection for the claims of neuropathy, CHF and CAD, however, as outlined above, the claims were not pending at the time of the Veteran's passing. The appellant's repeated attempts does not toll the one year requirement to seek accrued benefits. 

The Board also acknowledges that, on July 25, 2024, following the notification letter denying accrued benefits and substitution, the appellant filed a VA Form 10182, Board Appeal, wherein she listed the March 1, 2024 decision letter as the denial of entitlement to accrued benefits as the claim being appealed. However, the Board finds that there is no basis for the appellant's attempt to appeal the March 2024 decision as to the merits of her claim for accrued benefits, because her June 2021 claim for accrued benefits was untimely. To this point, the Board issued an August 2024 letter informing the appellant that her claim for "cause of death" was untimely. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (c). Likewise, the appellant's September 2024 appeal to the Board for accrued benefits was also untimely. Id. As such, the appellant's April 2021 and June 2021 claim for accrued benefits and October 2021 application for DIC, survivors pension and/or accrued benefits are deemed untimely. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, the Board lacks a valid appeal to review in this matter, and the appeal as to the claim of entitlement to accrued benefits must be dismissed as a matter of law. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, at 430 (1994) (where the law and not the evidence is dispositive, the claim should be denied or the appeal to the Board terminated because of the absence of legal merit or the lack of entitlement under the law). Thus, there are no remaining case or controversy as to this issue on appeal. Given that there remains no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration, the issue of entitlement to accrued benefits is dismissed.

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	MELNYK, H.        

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.