Citation Nr: A25033779
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210213-140854
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

The October 29, 2024 decision denying entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than major depressive disorder with anxious distress, an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, and an effective date earlier than November 30, 2020, for the award of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, is vacated. 

Entitlement to service connection for the nervous condition diagnosed as tardive dyskinesia is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include a mental disorder and/or mood disorders, separate from already service connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent rating for service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to November 30, 2020, for the award of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the time of the October 29, 2024 Board decision, there was outstanding pertinent evidence that had been received but was not yet associated with the file or reviewed prior to the Board's decision.

2. The competent and probative evidence weighs in favor of finding the Veteran's movement disorder-diagnosed tardive dyskinesia onset in service, or is otherwise related to service.

3. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric symptoms are contemplated by his service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress; the competent and probative evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a separate psychiatric disorder that onset in service, or is otherwise related to service.

4. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's mental health disorder symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

5. The November 2018 rating decision seeking entitlement to service connection for "mental disorders, mood disorders, major depressive disorder, nervous condition, depression" and "tremors of hands and neck" was final; the petition to reopen the previously disallowed claims was received on November 30, 2020.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Vacatur of the Board's October 29, 2024 decision addressing the issues of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than major depressive disorder with anxious distress, an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, and an effective date earlier than November 30, 2020, for the award of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress is warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 7103(c), 7104(a) (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1000 (2023).

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tardive dyskinesia have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§1110, 1131, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2023).

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include a mental disorder and/or mood disorders, separate from the already service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 4.14, 4.125 (2023).

4. The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for major depressive disorder with anxious distress have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434 (2023).

5. The criteria for an effective date prior to November 30, 2020, for the award of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400 (2023).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1970 to April 1974.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2021 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In February 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Hearing docket.  In July 2024, the Veteran testified before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge at a video conference hearing.  A transcript of that hearing is of record.  This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.902 (c).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) framework, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the present claims for service connection, increased rating, and an earlier effective date.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

In an October 29, 2024 decision, the Board denied the Veteran's claims for service connection, increased rating, and an earlier effective date.

The Board may vacate an appellate decision at any time upon request of the appellant or his representative, or on its own motion, when a claimant has been denied due process of law or has been granted benefits based on false or fraudulent evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1000.  For the reasons discussed below, the October 29, 2024 Board decision is vacated.

1. The Board's October 29, 2024 decision denying entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than major depressive disorder with anxious distress, an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, and an effective date earlier than November 30, 2020, for the award of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, is vacated.

In support of the claims, the Veteran's counsel submitted a private medical opinion to the Board that was received on October 8, 2024, but due to processing delays was not uploaded to the case file until November 7, 2024.  As this evidence was not addressed by the October 29, 2024 Board decision and is pertinent to the issues at hand, the Veteran's due process rights would be violated if the prior decision were allowed to stand.

Accordingly, regarding the matters raised in the Veteran's February 2025 motion to reconsider, the Board vacates the Board's October 2024 decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show:  (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service - the so-called 'nexus' requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  In McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) held that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a Veteran has a disability at the time he files a claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim.  However, in Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013), the Court held that when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to a Veteran filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.

Service connection for certain chronic diseases may also be established based upon a legal "presumption" by showing that the disease manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  In addition, service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after service when all the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected condition.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

2. Entitlement to service connection for nervous condition, tardive dyskinesia is granted.

The Veteran initially asserted that service connection is warranted for his nervous condition, "tremors of hands and neck," and depression secondary to his tremors condition.  See August 2018 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, and VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim; see also November 2019 VA Form 21-0958, Notice of Disagreement.  The Veteran later clarified that his claim for "nervous condition" includes his shaking and trembling.  See July 2024 Board Hearing Transcript.

Service treatment records reflect diagnosis/treatment for anxiety/nervousness.  Treatment included hospitalization, as well as prescribed Valium "for nerves" and Thorazine.  On his separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran indicated "yes" to frequent trouble sleeping, depression or excessive worry, and nervous trouble of any sort.  On separation medical examination, the examiner notated "[n]ervousness throughout life" and "[d]epression and trouble sleeping refers to anxiety problem."  The examiner also noted the Veteran was "[p]resently on medication," denied family history of psychosis, and had a healed broken left thumb but no other significant medical or surgical history. 

Post-service VA treatment records reflect diagnosis/treatment for essential tremors.  A February 2016 primary care note indicated that the Veteran presented to establish care with the VA, noting he had been "under the care of no one for many yrs."  The Veteran denied having any psychiatric issues, including depression, anxiety, and/or thoughts of suicide/harming others. On exam, the physician noted the Veteran had "essential tremor hands and head," and started him on medication for same.  At a Neurology consult in June 2016, the Veteran complained of tremors, noting tremors to the head "may be 10-12 yrs" and, per his spouse, tremors in the hands for "the last few years."  The Veteran denied any vision loss, stiff neck, headaches, trouble swallowing, or neck pain.  He also indicated medications prescribed for his tremors had "no benefit."  The physician noted head tremors and mild postural hand tremors (left hand more) and no bradykinesia on exam, indicated impressions of head tremors and hand tremors as "probable essential tremors" with no clinical evidence for Parkinson's disease, and discussed/recommended medication changes.  April 2017 annual primary care visit indicated the Veteran "still has some essential tremor" and that he endorsed "better since going on" prescribed medication.  June 2017 primary care nursing noted the Veteran tremors were getting worse as he was unable to poor coffee or cereal without spilling same.  On January 2018 telephone encounter, the Veteran reported concerns that his tremors were so bad it affected his job, as people were asking him about shaking.  April 2018 Neurology consult noted the Veteran had "essential tremors" of hands and head, and recommended his primary care switch his medications.  On primary care visit in April 2019, the Veteran endorsed seeing a non-VA provider at Neurosurgery Tulsa but could not remember the provider's name.  Active problems list included "tremor."  The Veteran denied any feelings of sadness or any signs of depression and, since last visit, denied experiencing any personal problems or family concerns causing worry or stress in April 2019 and September 2020.  In November 2020, the Veteran reported his neurology consult with a Dr. J.G. was cancelled but he was not sure why and that his tremors were "getting worse" and he was unsure what medications he needed.  The VA clinical notes did not address etiology of the Veteran's essential tremor diagnosis.

Post-service private treatment records reflect diagnosis/treatment for tremors of head/voice and hands.  See Medical Treatment Record-Non-Governmental Facility, associated 7/11/2024 and 9/19/2024. The clinical notes indicated tremors "for at least 50 years," but did not address etiology of his essential tremor diagnosis. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2018.  The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with any mental disorder.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported high hopes of finding his biological mother when deployed to Germany, became anxious when he first arrived, and quickly gave up his goal of finding her.  The Veteran reported he did not recall ever being treated by a mental health professional, and that his mental symptoms (noted as "mild and episodic") began in 1972 as a result of being assigned to Germany where he was placed for adoption.  The examiner noted the Veteran had never been diagnosed with a mental disorder, had no previous psychiatric hospitalizations, and reported having an essential tremor since 1983 and is on medication.  The examiner also noted "he is periodically tremulous during the evaluation."  The examiner opined that, for the claimed "Nervous Condition" and "Depression" conditions, there was no diagnosis for either because there was "no pathology to render a diagnosis."  The examiner also remarked that the Veteran was admitted to psychiatric services in Germany on July 13, 1972 for further evaluation and disposition, noted the information on the Veteran's 1974 separation history/examination with regard to nervousness, depression, and anxiety, and indicated there were no current mental health notes.  Because the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had never been diagnosed with a mental disorder and had no previous psychiatric hospitalizations in one section, but noted he was admitted for psychiatric services in Germany and received in-service treatment for anxiety/nervousness in another section, the Board finds the exam internally inconsistent and affords it no probative weight.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a letter, dated June 21, 2019, from Dr. J.G., of Tulsa Neurospecialists, who opined it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's essential tremors are related to military service.  In so finding, Dr. J.G. noted that the Veteran had developed severe anxiety and depression while on active duty in 1972 and "this mental condition severely aggravates his essential tremors" and makes activities of daily life difficult.  No other rationale was given.  Such a conclusory statement without adequate supporting rationale is not sufficient for adjudication purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (the probative value of a medical opinion comes from when it is factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning for the conclusion).  Therefore, Dr. J.G.'s opinion is afforded no probative weight. 

On VA examination in December 2020 for central nervous system/neuromuscular diseases, the VA examiner diagnosed essential tremors.  On medical history, the Veteran reported his condition began in service in Germany where he developed "nervous condition," and symptoms began as nervousness, anxiety, and depression.  He endorsed treatment with medications "not working well," and current symptoms of anxiety, depression, lack of confidence, difficulties carrying plates and bowls of food, and people mistaking his head shaking for answering.  The examiner concluded that, because medical evidence was not sufficient to support if the Veteran's claimed hand tremors were aggravated beyond its natural progression by his in-service anxiety and depression, "the claimed condition was less likely than not..."  No other rationale was given. Other than merely listing excerpts from the Veteran's medical records, the examiner's conclusory statement lacks adequate supporting rationale and is therefore inadequate for adjudication purposes.

On VA examination in January 2021 for mental disorders, the examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate, and offered a positive nexus opinion, opining that the MDD was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the complaints/diagnosis of anxiety and depression during service.  In so finding, the examiner noted the Veteran's in-service referral for mental health evaluation and treatment and his endorsed persistence of symptoms since service (i.e., anxiety, depression, sleep disturbance, irritability, frustration, low self-esteem) and concluded such psychological/behavioral symptoms met diagnostic criteria for the diagnosed mental disorder, MDD with anxious distress.  The examiner also noted he observed tremors in the Veteran's hands and head throughout the in-person evaluation.  The examiner determined that the MDD with anxious distress diagnosis "is" the mental disorder and no additional "mental disorders" diagnosis is warranted.  The examiner also opined there was no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a separate "mood disorder" and/or "nervous condition" diagnosis and, as the claimed "depression" was a symptom of the MDD with anxious distress diagnosis, it was subsumed by that diagnosis.  The Board finds the examiner well-reasoned opinion supported by the record and affords it significant probative weight with regard to mental disorders, to include no record support for separate mental, mood, and/or depression diagnosis.  However, the Board finds the opinion regarding "nervous condition" inconsistent since the examiner indicated there were no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a separate diagnosis for "nervous condition" while also indicating that tremors in the Veteran's hands and head were observed throughout the evaluation.

In the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress.

In the February 2021 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran argued that a nervous condition should be service-connected due to his major depressive disorder.  At the July 2024 hearing, the Veteran confirmed that when he initially filed for "nervous condition," he intended for that nervous condition to include "the shaking and trembling" that he does.  His representative also argued that the Veteran's in-service anxiety/nervousness was treated with psychiatric hospitalization and prescribed Thorazine, the side-effect of which is shaking and trembling, which in the Veteran's case became permanent.

In support of the claim, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion dated October 4, 2024, from L. A., D.O., who opined the Veteran's neurologic damage, which is manifested as movement disorder affecting his head, neck, upper torso, and arms/hands and diagnosed as tardive dyskinesia, was caused by the military treating his anxiety and depression with the wrong medication - an antipsychotic (i.e., Thorazine) was prescribed rather than an antidepressant or anxiolytic.  As to rationale, Dr. L.A. first notes that the Veteran entered the military with no mental or physical disabilities, developed severe anxiety during active service and was placed in psychiatric care (hospitalized in Germany, U.S.) for 55 days, continued to seek treatment after the hospitalization and was prescribed Thorazine, and then discharged without further benefits/care.  Next, Dr. L.A. cites to scientific literature/research to show that first generation antipsychotics (i.e., Thorazine), which are prescribed primarily for disorders that the Veteran did not have (i.e., schizophrenia, bipolar), can, even in low doses, induce parkinsonism or Parkinson-like movement disorders in as many as 25-40 percent of patients receiving them and here, the record reflects the Veteran was placed on Thorazine for many months without appropriate follow-up or re-evaluation.  Dr. L.A., opined that the Veteran developed a movement disorder, noting it is common for tardive dyskinesia to develop years after antipsychotic medication use, and that his numerous tried/failed attempts at various medications used for Parkinson disorders further demonstrates likelihood the tremors are due to the antipsychotic medication administered in service.  Dr. L.A. opined the symptoms of his movement disorder are severe and cause him total occupational/social impairment, and the need for assistance from devices/others for his activities of daily living (ADLs).  For instance, the Veteran endorsed taking long showers multiple times a day because he cannot maintain minimal personal hygiene due to the movement disorder, or microwave a bowl of soup without spilling it, and that the movement disorder causes him to spastically fling food throughout the kitchen.  The Veteran endorsed skipping meals because he cannot prepare food without spilling it and stopped eating in public because the movement disorder causes him to spastically fling utensils and food at the people around him.  Dr. L.A. noted the Veteran was markedly underweight for his height (6'5", 140lbs).  Because his tremors are at times debilitating, Dr. L.A. opined assistance with ADLs (i.e., dressing, meal prep/clean-up, housekeeping) was needed.  The Board finds Dr. L.A.'s well-reasoned opinion supported by the record and her cited scientific resources, and affords it significant probative weight.

In sum, the evidence of record reflects current diagnosis of a shaking/trembling movement disorder diagnosed as tardive dyskinesia.  As for an in-service event, the Veteran's service treatment records do document hospitalization and treatment for anxiety/nervousness, with treatment that included prescribed Thorazine.  Thus, the remaining question remains is whether the Veteran's claimed "nervous condition" (tardive dyskinesia) causally relates to his military service, to include as due to his mental health treatment therein.

In that regard, the Board notes that there are competing opinions of record as to likely etiology of the Veteran's claimed "nervous condition."

It is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility and weight to be given the evidence.  See Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993) (citing Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 192-93 (1992)).  The probative value of medical evidence is based on the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the physician reaches; as is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  See Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993).

When reviewing such medical opinions, the Board may appropriately favor the opinion of one competent medical authority over another.  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995).  However, the Board may not reject medical opinions based on its own medical judgment.  Obert v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 30 (1993); see also Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991).  In assessing medical opinions, the failure of the physician to provide a basis for his opinion goes to the weight or credibility of the evidence in the adjudication of the merits.  See Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998).  Other factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the physician's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000).  A medical opinion may not be discounted solely because the examiner did not review the claims file.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

The January 2021 VA examiner physically examined the Veteran and reviewed the records.  The opinion was based largely on the fact the examiner determined there were "no findings, signs, and/or symptoms" to support a diagnosis of "nervous condition."  Yet, the examiner also indicated that tremors in the Veteran's hands and head were observed throughout the evaluation.

Although private physician Dr. L. A. did not physically examine the Veteran, Dr. L.A. did review the record and cited to relevant treatment records.  She also cited to pertinent medical literature and provided rationale for the conclusions reached. Accordingly, the Board assigns Dr. L.A.'s opinion of greater probative weight.

Accordingly, and resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board concludes that the Veteran's claimed "nervous condition," noted by Dr. L.A. as the movement disorder-diagnosed tardive dyskinesia, onset in service or is otherwise related to service.  Service connection for tardive dyskinesia is therefore warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran representative's request for "rating of 100 [percent] severe Tardive Dyskinesia, secondary to the military's prescribed treatment of Thorazine."  See Third Party Correspondence, associated 02/21/2025.  However, the Board does not set effective dates and disability ratings in service connection cases in the first instance.  The assignment of the initial rating and effective date are downstream issues and should be assigned by the AOJ in the first instance when the Board's decision awarding service connection is implemented.  Harrison v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 345, 348 (2005). Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156, 1158-59 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  If the Board assigns an initial rating and effective date for a service-connected disability in the first instance, it will deprive the Veteran of the right to appellate review by the Secretary.  38 U.S.C. § 7104(a).

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include a mental disorder and/or mood disorders, separate from already service connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress, is denied. 

Procedurally, the Veteran initially asserted that service connection is warranted for his nervous condition, "tremors of hands and neck," and major depressive disorder (MDD) secondary to his tremors condition.  See August 2018 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, and VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

In the November 2018 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for "mental disorders, mood disorders, major depressive disorder, nervous condition, depression." 

In the November 2019 VA Form 21-0958 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran requested service connection for "Mental disorder, Mood disorder, MDD, Nervous Condition."

On the November 2020 VA Form 20-0995 supplemental claim application, the Veteran requested service connection for "Mental disorders including mood disorders, major depressive disorder, nervous condition and depression."

In the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress "(also claimed as mental disorders, mood disorders, major depressive disorder, nervous condition, depression)."

The February 2021 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement indicated, twice, that "Mental disorder should be rated with major depressive disorder," and at the July 2024 hearing, the Veteran's representative stated the appeal includes three separate service connection claims - one for mental disorder, one for nervous condition, and one for mood disorders.  However, also at the hearing, the Veteran clarified that his "nervous condition" claim includes his tremors condition (adjudicated above), and his representative acknowledged that mood disorders, mental disorders, and depressive disorders "are all encapsulated under the mental rating schedule" and suggested that the Veteran's disorders lend to increasing his already service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress (increased ratings will be discussed below).

Needless to say, the characterization of the claim for mental health disorder(s) throughout this appeal has been confusing, and ever-evolving.  To add further confusion, in February 2025 correspondence, the Veteran's representative indicated that the Veteran specifically requests only two issues on appeal: (1) grant of an earlier effective date for the 30 percent rating for mental health disabilities (adjudicated below), and (2) a 100 percent rating for severe tardive dyskinesia, secondary to the military's prescribed treatment of Thorazine (discussed above).  See Third Party Correspondence, associated 02/21/2025.

The Board first notes that a claim of service connection encompasses all pertinent symptomatology, regardless of how that symptomatology is diagnosed.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5, 9 (2009).  This is because a claimant is not expected to have medical expertise and generally "is only competent to identify and explain the symptoms that he observes and experiences."  See id.  Therefore, the Board has recharacterized this particular issue still on appeal as entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include the "mental disorder" noted on the February 2021 VA Form 10182 NOD and the "mood disorders" indicated at the July 2024 Board hearing, as separate from the already been service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress.

Turning to the record, service treatment records reflect diagnosis/treatment for anxiety/nervousness.  Treatment included hospitalization, as well as prescribed medications.  In 1972 clinical notes, the Veteran endorsed symptoms including anxiety, nervousness, depression, and sleep difficulties.  In August 1973, the Veteran complained of feeling "very nervous" and was prescribed medication.  In 1974 clinical notes, the Veteran endorsed symptoms including anxiety and nervousness.  On his separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran indicated "yes" to frequent trouble sleeping, depression or excessive worry, and nervous trouble of any sort.  On medical examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran had "nervousness throughout life" and that his depression and trouble sleeping referred to the anxiety problems.

Post-service VA treatment records indicate the Veteran presented to establish care at the VA in February 2016, noting he had been "under the care of no one for many yrs."  The Veteran denied having any psychiatric issues, including depression, anxiety, and/or thoughts of suicide/harming others. On exam, the physician noted the Veteran had essential tremor hands and head and started him on medication for same.  At that time, the Veteran denied having any depression, anxiety, or thoughts of suicide or harming others.  On depression screening, he answered "not at all" to having little interest or pleasure in doing things, or feeling down, depressed, or hopeless.  Past medical history included degenerative disc disease in the 1980s, and there were no current medications.  Occupation noted was plumber.  On exam, he was noted to have essential tremor hands and head.  He was assessed in "relatively good health" and started on medication for his essential tremor.  In June 2016, the Veteran indicated his tremors were first noticed ten years ago by others with involuntary head bobbing and gradually progressed to his hands.

In an April 2017 annual visit, the Veteran complained of allergies and essential tremor, noting betterment since going on medication.  He denied having any depression, anxiety, or thoughts of suicide or harming others, and scored negative on depression screening.  On assessment, he was noted to be in good health, and his tremor medication was increased.  In June 2017, he indicated his tremors were getting worse as he was unable to poor coffee or cereal without spilling.  On assessment, it was noted the Veteran's essential tremors were better on medication, and that he worked daily as a plumber.

On April 2018 primary care for check-up/lab results, the Veteran scored negative on depression screening and indicated, no, nothing in life recently caused him worry or stress.  On April 2018 annual visit, the Veteran was noted to have no change in mood or behaviors on review of systems.  A September 2018 neurology note indicated ongoing treatment for essential head and hand tremors.  An April 2019 primary care note listed the Veteran's active problems as essential hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and tremor.  The Veteran indicated he was doing "pretty good," seeing a non-VA provider at Neurosurgery Tulsa but couldn't remember his name.  He denied having any personal problems or family concerns causing worry or stress since his last visit.  He also denied feelings of sadness, emptiness, or depression.

In September 2020, he also denied having any personal problems or family concerns causing worry or stress since his last visit, and/or any feelings of sadness, emptiness, or depression.  A November 2020 nurse note indicated the Veteran called about the neurology consult he had with Dr. Gonzalez wherein he stated the consult was canceled and he was not sure why.  The nurse later informed the Veteran that the consult was not canceled, but the request for consult had expired.

Post-service private treatment records indicate the Veteran has medical history of hypertension, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and essential tremor.  On exam, he was noted to be fully alert and oriented, in no acute distress, and had tremors of hands, head, and voice.  Ongoing treatment regarding tremors was noted.  See Medical Treatment Record-Non-Governmental Facility, associated 7/11/2024, 9/19/2024.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for mental disorders in October 2018.  On interview, the Veteran stated he did not recall ever being treated by a mental health professional.  He endorsed that he slept well, his energy was fine, and his only symptom - appetite waxing/waning - is mild and episodic.  He reported there was no impact on his daily functioning as he denied trouble sleeping, history of violent behavior, suicide attempts, and/or other mental problems.  He did endorse having essential tremors since 1983 for which he was on medication.  He denied any changes in his daily activities or social functions indicating that, after service, he has been a plumber for 44 years and has a good relationship with his supervisor and co-workers and no problems at work and enjoys numerous activities (i.e., reading the Bible, watching television, taking care of 12 dogs).  The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with a mental disorder, and opined the claimed condition was less likely than not related to service.  While the Board previously found the 2018 VA examiner's opinion inadequate due to internal inconsistencies, "[t]his infirmity, however, does not mean that the exam provides no probative evidence."  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2012) (per curiam), overruled on other grounds by Euzebio v. McDonough, 989 F.3d 1305 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Here, the Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding his symptomatology competent and probative.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for mental disorders in January 2021.  The examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate, and offered a positive nexus opinion, opining that the MDD was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the complaints/diagnosis of anxiety and depression during service.  In so finding, the examiner noted the Veteran's in-service referral for mental health evaluation and treatment and his endorsed persistence of symptoms since service, concluding such psychological/ behavioral symptoms met diagnostic criteria for the diagnosed MDD with anxious distress.  The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (i.e., such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), from which the examiner determined the Veteran experienced occupational/social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  During the exam, the Veteran was noted as casually dressed and groomed, open and cooperative, and had effectively responded to all questions.  He was fully oriented, appeared to be a good historian with no gross memory deficits, and evidenced tremors in his hands and head throughout.  His thought content was appropriately varied, thought processes were logical and sequential, and affect was slightly anxious.  Regarding other claimed "mental disorders,", the examiner opined that there is no separate diagnosis because the diagnosed major depressive disorder with anxious distress "is" the mental disorder.  Regarding the claimed "depression," the VA examiner opined there is no separate diagnosis because depression is a symptom of his major depressive disorder with anxious distress and is therefore subsumed under that diagnosis.  Regarding other claimed "mood disorder," the examiner opined there is no diagnosis as there are no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a separate diagnosis.  The Board finds the examiner well-reasoned opinion supported by the record and affords it significant probative weight with regard to mental disorders, to include no record support for separate mental, mood, and/or depression diagnosis.

In the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, and assigned a rating based on the Veteran's symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (i.e., forgetting names, recent events, directions), and occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal).

In the October 2024 private medical opinion by Dr. L.A., she opined the Veteran's neurologic damage, manifested as a movement disorder affecting his head, neck, upper torso, and arms/hands, diagnosed as tardive dyskinesia, was caused by the military treating his anxiety and depression with the wrong medication.  As to rationale, Dr. L.A. noted that the Veteran entered the military with no mental or physical disabilities, developed severe anxiety during active service and was placed in psychiatric care for 55 days, continued to seek treatment after the hospitalization and prescribed an antipsychotic, and then discharged without further benefits/care.  Dr. L.A. cited to scientific literature/research to show that first generation antipsychotics can, even in low doses, induce parkinsonism or Parkinson-like movement disorders and here, the Veteran was placed on such for many months without appropriate follow-up or re-evaluation.  Dr. L.A. found the Veteran's tardive dyskinesia developed years after antipsychotic medication use, which was further evidenced by his tried/failed attempts at various medications used for Parkinson disorders.  The Board finds Dr. L.A.'s well-reasoned opinion supported by the record and affords it significant probative weight. 

After careful review, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against finding an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include a "mental disorder" and/or "mood disorders" separate from the Veteran's already service-connected mental health disorder, onset in service, or is otherwise related to any in-service injury or disease.

To the extent that the Veteran believes that he has a separately acquired psychiatric disorder other than his current service-connected mental health disorder, as a lay person, he is not competent to provide an opinion as to a diagnosis or the likely etiology of a separate psychiatric diagnosis.  While lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues involving observable symptoms, as to the specific issue in this case, the diagnosis of a specific acquired psychiatric disorder, falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011).  Moreover, the Board notes that, while the Veteran seeks service connection for a separate "mental disorder" and/or "mood disorders," neither the Veteran nor his representative have indicated what symptomatology not already contemplated by his service-connected mental health disorder presents in which to support a separate psychiatric disorder.

The Board does not dispute that the Veteran has a diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder; however, his psychiatric symptoms are confirmed to be a manifestation of his current service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The most competent and probative evidence of record, which includes the Veteran's lay statements, the January 2021 VA opinion, and Dr. L.A.'s 2024 private medical opinion, reflects that the Veteran's service-connected mental health disorder encompasses all the Veteran's symptoms.  Accordingly, the Veteran does not have a separately acquired psychiatric disorder, as his mental disorder symptoms (i.e., anxiety, depression, sleep impairment, memory issues) are contemplated by his service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress.

The Board notes that the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  It is possible for a Veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury; however, the critical element in permitting service-connection for separate psychological disorders is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other disorder.  See id.  While the Veteran can have separately service-connected disabilities, any overlapping psychiatric symptoms for each disability cannot be rated more than once.  In the Veteran's case, these symptoms have already been considered in rating his service-connected mental health disorder.

Accordingly, the competent and probative evidence weighs against finding in favor of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include a "mental disorder" and/or "mood disorders," separate from the already service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49.

Increased Rating

4. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, is denied.

The Veteran seeks an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for his service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's major depressive disorder with anxiety distress, recurrent, moderate, is rated 30 percent, under Diagnostic Code 9434, which assigns ratings based upon the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under the General Formula, a 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated mental health disorder symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 50 percent or higher. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned only if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Turning to the record, service treatment records reflect diagnosis/treatment for anxiety/nervousness.  Treatment included hospitalization, as well as prescribed medications.  On his separation, the Veteran indicated "yes" to frequent trouble sleeping, depression or excessive worry, and nervous trouble of any sort.  On medical examination, the examiner notated "[n]ervousness throughout life" and "[d]epression and trouble sleeping refers to anxiety problem."

Post-service VA treatment records indicate the Veteran presented to establish care at the VA in February 2016, noting he had been "under the care of no one for many yrs."  The Veteran denied having any psychiatric issues, including depression, anxiety, and/or thoughts of suicide/harming others.  On exam, the physician noted the Veteran had essential tremor hands and head and started him on medication for same.  At that time, the Veteran denied having any depression, anxiety, or thoughts of suicide or harming others.  On depression screening, he answered "not at all" to having little interest or pleasure in doing things, or feeling down, depressed, or hopeless.  Past medical history included degenerative disc disease in the 1980s, and there were no current medications.  Occupation noted was plumber.  On exam, he was noted to have essential tremor hands and head.  He was assessed in "relatively good health" and started on medication for his essential tremor.  In June 2016, the Veteran indicated his tremors were first noticed ten years ago by others with involuntary head bobbing and gradually progressed to his hands.

In an April 2017 annual visit, the Veteran complained of allergies and essential tremor, noting betterment since going on medication.  He denied having any depression, anxiety, or thoughts of suicide or harming others, and scored negative on depression screening.  On assessment, he was noted to be in good health, and his tremor medication was increased.  In June 2017, he indicated his tremors were getting worse as he was unable to poor coffee or cereal without spilling.  On assessment, it was noted the Veteran's essential tremors were better on medication, and that he worked daily as a plumber.

On April 2018 primary care for check-up/lab results, the Veteran scored negative on depression screening and indicated, no, nothing in life recently caused him worry or stress.  On April 2018 annual visit, the Veteran was noted to have no change in mood or behaviors on review of systems.  A September 2018 neurology note indicated ongoing treatment for essential head and hand tremors.  An April 2019 primary care note listed the Veteran's active problems as essential hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and tremor.  The Veteran indicated he was doing "pretty good," seeing a non-VA provider at Neurosurgery Tulsa but couldn't remember his name.  He denied having any personal problems or family concerns causing worry or stress since his last visit.  He also denied feelings of sadness, emptiness, or depression.  In September 2020, he also denied having any personal problems or family concerns causing worry or stress since his last visit, and/or any feelings of sadness, emptiness, or depression.

Post-service private treatment records indicate the Veteran has medical history of hypertension, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and essential tremor.  On exam, he was noted to be fully alert and oriented, in no acute distress, and had tremors of hands, head, and voice.  Ongoing treatment regarding tremors was noted.  See Medical Treatment Record-Non-Governmental Facility, associated 7/11/2024, 9/19/2024.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for mental disorders in October 2018.  On interview, the Veteran stated he did not recall ever being treated by a mental health professional.  He endorsed that he slept well, his energy was fine, and his only symptom - appetite waxing/waning - is mild and episodic.  He reported there was no impact on his daily functioning as he denied trouble sleeping, history of violent behavior, suicide attempts, and/or other mental problems.  He did endorse having essential tremors since 1983 for which he was on medication.  He denied any changes in his daily activities or social functions indicating that, after service, he has been a plumber for 44 years and has a good relationship with his supervisor and co-workers and no problems at work and enjoys numerous activities (i.e., reading Bible, watching television, taking care of 12 dogs).  On behavioral observation, the examiner noted the Veteran was open, honest, and forthright.  The examiner did not diagnosis the Veteran with a mental disorder.  While the Board previously found the 2018 VA examiner's opinion inadequate due to internal inconsistencies, "[t]his infirmity, however, does not mean that the exam provides no probative evidence."  See Monzingo, supra.  Here, the Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding his symptomatology competent and probative.

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination in January 2021.  The Veteran reported being currently married for 1.5 years and living with a son in Oklahoma while his wife lived in Louisiana.  He reported continuing to work as a plumber and that he has worked as a plumber his entire working life.  He reportedly quit drinking in 1999, with no behavioral and/or substance abuse problems since.

On mental status examination, he appeared casually dressed and groomed, open and cooperative, and responded to all questions effectively.  He was fully oriented, appeared to be a good historian with no gross memory deficits, but did evidence tremors in his hands and head throughout.  His thought content was appropriately varied, thought processes were logical and sequential, and affect was slightly anxious.  He endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (i.e., such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events).  The examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate, and summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  The examiner also noted the Veteran could handle his own financial affairs.

In an October 2024 private medical opinion, Dr. L.A., diagnosed the Veteran with a movement disorder (tardive dyskinesia) affecting his head, neck, upper torso, and arms/hands, opining the disorder was caused by the military treating the Veteran's in-service anxiety and depression with the wrong medication.  Dr. L.A. described numerous symptoms resulting from the Veteran's movement disorder, opining that such symptoms caused him total occupational/social impairment and the need for assistance from devices/others for his ADLs. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements, the relevant treatment records and VA examinations, as well as a private evaluation conducted in 2024.  After engaging in a holistic analysis assessing the severity, frequency and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's mental health disorder throughout the appeal period, recognizing that the mental disorder symptoms listed in the rating criteria are non-exhaustive examples and when looking at the effects determining the impairment level, the Board finds that the Veteran's mental health disorder, during the period on appeal, more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 30 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 50 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

The Board finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's mental disorder symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a 30 percent rating.  The Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, but was generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation.  In VA examination in 2021, the Veteran reported depressed mood, anxiety, sleep disturbances, and some memory loss.  The examiner noted the Veteran was "slightly anxious" on behavioral observation, and noted his mental disorder symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events.  During the October 2018 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he worked as a plumber for 44 years, had a good relationship with his supervisor and co-workers and no problems at work, and enjoyed work and several activities (i.e., reading Bible, watching television, taking care of 12 dogs).  VA treatment records note the Veteran continued to work daily as a plumber.  During the 2021 VA examination, he reported being recently married, for 1.5 years, and that he lived with a son.

The 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's disability resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  As the examiner's assessment was based both on the Veteran's reports of his symptoms, as well as the examiner's own measurements and observations, the Board affords the VA examiner's medical opinion significant probative weight as to the severity of the Veteran's psychiatric disability.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. as 301.

In the absence of evidence of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such mental disorder symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, a rating in excess of 30 percent disabled for an acquired psychiatric disorder is not warranted.  The Board acknowledges that Dr. L.A. indicated in her October 2024 private medical opinion that the Veteran's movement disorder causes total occupational and social impairment.  However, as Dr. L.A. attributed the impairment to symptoms caused by his movement disorder (tardive dyskinesia), her report does not evidence any occupational and/or social impairment as due to the Veteran's mental disorders symptoms.

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's mental disorder symptoms are not of such severity to approximate, or more nearly approximate, the criteria for a 50 percent, or higher, evaluation and that the findings do not support a conclusion that his symptoms are productive of a "similar severity, frequency, and duration" as those required for a 50 percent, or higher, evaluation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7; Vazquez-Claudio, supra. (38 C.F.R. § 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas).

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's mental disorder symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a higher-than-30 percent rating.  The criteria for a 50 percent or higher rating are not met and the appeal must be denied.

The Board has also considered whether a claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability as due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) has been raised by the Veteran during the pendency of this appeal.  In Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the Court held that VA must address the issue of entitlement to TDIU in increased rating claims when the issue of unemployability either is raised expressly or by the record.  Here, there is no indication that the Veteran contends that his service-connected major depressive disorder with anxiety distress, wholly precludes him from securing or following substantially gainful employment.  Moreover, while not dispositive, the most contemporary available records show that the Veteran still works as a plumber.  As such, the Board does not find that a claim of TDIU is raised by the record, and it will not be addressed further.

5. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, is denied.

The Veteran seeks an effective date earlier than November 30, 2020, for the grant of service connection for his major depressive disorder with anxious distress.

The law and regulations governing effective dates establish that, unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final adjudication, or a claim for increase, of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).  The effective date of an award of disability compensation to a veteran shall be the day following the date of discharge or release if application therefore is received within one year from such date of discharge or release.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1).  This statutory provision is implemented by a regulation which provides that the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

A specific claim in the form prescribed by the Secretary of VA must be filed in order for benefits to be paid to any individual under the laws administered by VA.  38 U.S.C. § 5101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.151(a).  A claim is a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a benefit.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p).

Effective March 24, 2015, VA amended its adjudication regulations to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 57,660 (Sept. 25, 2014).  This rulemaking also eliminated the constructive receipt of VA reports of hospitalization or examination and other medical records as informal claims for increase and revised 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).  These amendments are applicable with respect to claims and appeals filed on or after March 24, 2015.

Any communication or action, indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA may be considered an informal claim.  Such an informal claim must identify the benefit sought.  Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim has not been filed, an application form will be forwarded to the claimant for execution.  If received within one year from the date it was sent to the claimant, it will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(a).

The mere presence of medical evidence does not establish intent on the part of the Veteran to seek service connection for a disability.  Brannon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 32, 35 (1998).  The effective date of service connection is not based on the date of the earliest medical evidence demonstrating a causal connection, but rather, on the date the application was filed with VA.  Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1999).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

A review of the record shows that VA received the Veteran's VA Form 21-0996 Intent to File a Claim in October 2017.  Thereafter, in August 2018, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, seeking compensation for, in relevant part, a nervous condition, tremors of hand and neck, and major depressive disorder secondary to the tremors.  The RO denied service connection for "mental disorders, mood disorders, major depressive disorder, nervous condition, depression" and "tremors of hands and neck" in a November 2018 rating decision.  VA sent notification of that decision to the Veteran and his representative on November 8, 2018.  See November 2018 Notification Letter.  The record does not reflect, nor does the Veteran contend that he did not receive the November 2018 Notification Letter.

The Veteran appealed the November 2018 decision by filing a notice of disagreement (NOD) in November 2019.  See November 2019 NOD.  The AOJ issued a Statement of the Case (SOC) in December 2019 denying the Veteran's claims.  A copy of the SOC was provided to the Veteran and his representative, instructing the Veteran that an appeal must be filed within 60 days from the date of the December 7, 2019 SOC, or within the remainder of the one-year period from the date of the November 8, 2018 Notification Letter notifying the Veteran of the action appealed.  The record does not reflect, nor does the Veteran contend that he did not receive the December 7. 2019 SOC.  However, the Veteran nor his representative perfected an appeal to the Board of his claim within the required timeframe.  Therefore, the November 2018 rating decision became final.

On November 30, 2020, which is the currently assigned effective date, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking to reopen the previously denied claims, and attached new evidence.  VA examination in January 2021 diagnosed the Veteran with major depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The RO granted service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate (also claimed as mental disorders, mood disorders, major depressive disorder, nervous condition, depression) in its January 2021 rating decision and assigned the November 30, 2020 effective date, as the day VA received the Veteran's claim.  This appeal followed.

A review of the record shows that there are no unadjudicated claims that were received prior to November 30, 2020.

As noted above, the effective date of an award based on an original claim or a claim reopened after final adjudication shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  For reopened claims, the effective date will be the date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(r).  Here, the claim to reopen was received on November 30, 2020, and arose after the date of entitlement, therefore it is the properly assigned effective date.

The Board also considered the Veteran's representative's July 2024 Board hearing contention that the Veteran's psychiatric disability manifested during service and, according to 38 C.F.R. § 4.129, such mental conditions are to be rated at 50 percent from the date of discharge.  With regard to 38 C.F.R. § 4.129, it states:

When a mental disorder that develops in service as a result of a highly stressful event is severe enough to bring about the veteran's release from active military service, the rating agency shall assign an evaluation of not less than 50 percent and schedule an examination within the six-month period following the veteran's discharge to determine whether a change in evaluation is warranted.

The above version of 38 C.F.R. § 4.129 was incorporated in 2008, as part of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) of 2008, and does not apply to members of the military who were released from service prior to the revision.  Russell v. United States, 106 Fed. Cl. 696, 699-700. 

Even if the current version of the regulation could have been applied to the Veteran's claim, it would not support granting an earlier effective date of service connection.  The statutory authority for 38 C.F.R. § 4.129 is 38 U.S.C. 1155, which relates to the evaluation of service-connected disabilities, not the granting of service connection.  The current version of 38 C.F.R. § 4.129 sets a minimum initial evaluation for a mental disorder, caused by a highly stressful event, that results in the Veteran's release from active military service - with an implicit assumption that the mental disorder is service connected upon discharge, as this is a prerequisite for assigning an evaluation.  The regulation does not negate the requirement to seek service connection for a mental disorder, and does not require or permit assignment of an earlier effective date of service connection in cases where the Veteran did not seek service connection for a mental disorder until more than one year after separation.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5110.

In sum, the Board finds the weight of the evidence is against entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 30, 2020, for the grant of service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The Board concludes the evidence does not support such entitlement and there is no doubt to be otherwise resolved.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, supra.  Consequently, entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 30, 2020, is denied.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Picard

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.