Citation Nr: A25033514
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231024-386672
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to August 26, 2022, for the grant of service connection for major depressive disorder (depressive disorder) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for bone spur of the right foot is remanded.

Service connection for bone spur of the left foot is remanded.

Service connection for bone spur of the left ankle is remanded.

Service connection for bone spur of the right ankle is remanded.

Service connection for sciatica of the left lower extremity is remanded.

Service connection for sciatica of the right lower extremity is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's Intent to File a Claim was received on August 26, 2022, and his VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim was received on May 6, 2023. The Veteran did not file a claim or submit any communication that can be reasonably interpreted as a claim for service connection of major depressive disorder earlier than August 26, 2022.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to August 26, 2022, for service connection for major depressive disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1986 to February 1990. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from June 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, for the claim of entitlement to an effective date prior to August 26, 2022, for the grant of service connection for major depressive disorder (depressive disorder), the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the claims of entitlement to service connection for bone spur of the right foot, bone spur of the left foot, bone spur of the left ankle, bone spur of the right ankle, sciatica of the left lower extremity, and sciatica of the right lower extremity, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for bone spur of the right foot, bone spur of the left foot, bone spur of the left ankle, bone spur of the right ankle, sciatica of the left lower extremity, and sciatica of the right lower extremity, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an effective date prior to August 26, 2022, for the grant of service connection for major depressive disorder is denied. 

The Veteran generally asserts that an effective date prior to August 26, 2022, is warranted. See October 24, 2023 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.

The effective date for a grant of service connection is the day following the date of separation from active service or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year after separation from service. Otherwise, it is the date of receipt of claim, or the day entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a), (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2)(i). The date of receipt of a claim is the date on which a claim, information, or evidence is received by VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1 (r). The provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5101 (a) mandate that a claim must be filed in order for any type of benefit to be paid. Jones v. West, 136 F.3d 1296, 1299 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

Prior to March 24, 2015, a "claim" included a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a benefit. 38C.F.R. §3.1 (p). Any communication or action indicating the intent to apply for a benefit under the laws administered by the VA may be considered an informal claim, if it identifies generally, although not necessarily with specificity, the benefit sought. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (p), 3.155 (2014).

Effective March 24, 2015, VA adopted a standardized claims system requiring a formal claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155. A formal claim is a specific claim in the form prescribed by the Secretary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.151.

In this case, the Veteran's intent to file a claim was received on August 26, 2022, and his claim for major depressive disorder was received by VA on May 6, 2023. Effective March 24, 2015, VA adopted a standardized claims system. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155. Review of the claims file shows that the Veteran has not filed a claim or submitted any communication that can be reasonably interpreted as a claim for benefits earlier than that date. Nor has the Veteran or his representative presented any theory that warrants assignment of an earlier effective date. Even if entitlement arose prior to this date, the date of claim would still be the later of the two dates. Therefore, the Veteran's major depressive disorder is assigned the earliest possible effective date. A conclusory generalized lay statement that an earlier effective date is warranted is insufficient to warrant an assignment of an effective date earlier than August 26, 2022.

The weight of the persuasive evidence is against the claim and the doctrine-of-reasonable doubt is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). The claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for bone spur of the right foot is remanded.

2. Service connection for bone spur of the left foot is remanded.

3. Service connection for bone spur of the left ankle is remanded.

4. Service connection for bone spur of the right ankle is remanded.

5. Service connection for sciatica of the left lower extremity is remanded.

6. Service connection for sciatica of the right lower extremity is remanded.

The Veteran's Military Personnel Records were associated with the claims file on February 6, 2024.

These additions to the record raise the question of whether 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (c) applies to these records. This regulation provides that "at any time after VA issues a decision on a claim if VA receives or associates with the claims file relevant official service department records that existed and had not been associated with the claims file when VA first decided the claim, VA will reconsider the claim." The regulation explicitly includes "Service records that are related to a claimed in-service event, injury, or disease."

However, the mere fact that additional service personnel records were added to the claims file after the rating decisions on appeal is not grounds for reconsideration. Rather, 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (c) requires reconsideration in cases where the records are relevant. The Board has reviewed the newly associated personnel records carefully and finds that they contain relevant information regarding the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for bone spur of the right foot, bone spur of the left foot, bone spur of the left ankle, bone spur of the right ankle, sciatica of the left lower extremity, and sciatica of the right lower extremity, as they include, in part, disciplinary record indicating that the Veteran was absent for 24 days without leave. 

Therefore, these records are relevant records to warrant reconsideration of these claims under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (c). The AOJ's failure to fulfill the regulatory duty of reconsidering the original claim for service connection for bone spur of the right foot, bone spur of the left foot, bone spur of the left ankle, bone spur of the right ankle, sciatica of the left lower extremity, and sciatica of the right lower extremity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (c) requires remand to correct.

Other reasons for remand

The Veteran seeks service connection for bone spur of the right foot, bone spur of the left foot, bone spur of the left ankle, bone spur of the right ankle, sciatica of the left lower extremity, and sciatica of the right lower extremity. 

For the claims of entitlement to service connection for sciatica of the lower extremities, he contends the condition is secondary to service-connected Osgood-Schlatter's Disease.  In June 2023, he reported that because of chronic pain in his lower extremities, he began walking a certain way, which has affected his sciatic nerve. When the pain is in his lower back, it is tolerable, but it moves down to his right buttocks and back to his right leg, where it becomes almost unbearable, and pain medications do nothing.  On his best days, it stays in his back and travels down regularly. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The October 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran is diagnosed with sciatica of the right lower extremity, and the claimed primary disability, Osgood-Schlatter's Disease, is service-connected. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

With the claim of entitlement to service connection for bone spurs, he contends that he never had them before entering service but started having foot pain while enlisted. He reports ongoing pain, which makes walking exercises unpleasant and difficult. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The October 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran is diagnosed with bilateral ankle bone spur and bilateral foot bone spur. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

A November 1988 service treatment records note a bone scan revealed "stress-induced changes to the hip, ankle and feet".  The bone scan report notes, "Bone scan compatible with Osgood-Schlatter disease bilaterally. Stress-induced changes to both lower extremities". 

In November 1989, he was given a profile to exercise at his own pace.

A May 1989 treatment record notes a report of bilateral ankle pain for eight months. He also reported pain in both lower extremities.

A May 1989 treatment record notes recurring tendon problems in both legs. 

On his Separation examination in January 1990, he reported "cramps in the legs". The separation examination report notes, "Osgood-Schlatter Disease with onset probably in 1987, specifically diagnosed November 1988 by bone scan, aggravated by exercises or hitting the area against something, treated with Indocin twice a week, controlled. Occasional cramps in legs while exercising, resolved after switching, NCNS"

Post-service, he reported ankle pain in November 1999. The examiner notes severe pain in the lateral side of the left leg.  He was prescribed Robaxin and Tylenol in November 1999 for cramping and pain.

In May 2014, he reported bilateral leg pain for 15-20 years. The examiner notes that extremities show tenderness of the peroneus muscles bilaterally and pulses present bilaterally.

In January 2017, he reported heel spur pain. 

In February 2020, he was treated for bilateral foot pain due to a bone spur. The examiner notes positive bone spur in the feet and pain in the ankle.

The Veteran was afforded a VA Peripheral Nerves Examination in July 2023. The examiner diagnosed a right lower extremity sciatica nerve.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not due to the result of the Veteran's service-connected sciatica condition.  The examiner provided the rationale that this condition appeared 23-35 years after the Veteran's time in service.  The enlistment and separation examinations were negative for sciatica. After an extensive medical literature review, no studies were located showing a connection between Osgood-Schlatter's Disease and sciatica in the acute or chronic phase.

The Board finds the July 2023 VA examination and opinion inadequate.  As an initial matter, the Board notes that while the examiner failed to diagnose a left lower extremity, no diagnostic testing was performed. With regard to the opinion and provided rationale, the Board notes that while the examiner addressed causation, the examiner does not attempt to address aggravation. Lastly, while the Veteran reports bilateral leg cramps at his separation examination, no opinion was provided addressing whether the condition is directly related to service. Failure to obtain an adequate examination and opinion prior to the October 2023 decision on appeal is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring remand.

With regard to the claim for service connection for bilateral foot and ankle, the Veteran has not been offered a VA examination to determine whether any of his current bilateral foot and ankle disabilities are related to service.

VA must provide a medical examination when there is evidence of (1) a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) an in-service event, injury, or disease; (3) some indication that the claimed disability may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease; and (4) insufficient competent evidence of record for VA to make a decision. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App.79 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2); 38C.F.R. §3.159 (c)(4)(i). The third prong, which requires evidence that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

As outlined above, a November 1988 service treatment records note a bone scan revealed "stress-induced changes to the hip, ankle and feet".  The bone scan report notes, "Bone scan compatible with Osgood-Schlatter disease bilaterally. Stress-induced changes to both lower extremities. Post-service, he reported ankle pain in November 1999. The examiner notes severe pain in the lateral side of the left leg. He was prescribed Robaxin and Tylenol in November 1999 for cramping and pain. In January 2017, he reported heel spur pain.  In February 2020, he was treated for bilateral foot pain due to a bone spur. The examiner notes positive bone spur in the feet and pain in the ankle.

On review, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran is diagnosed with bilateral ankle and bilateral foot disabilities.  The November 1988 bone scan revealed stress-induced changes to the hip, ankle, and feet, and the notation that this is compatible with his Osgood-Schlatter disease bilaterally meets the first three elements of the McLendon test. The Board finds that the low threshold is met here, and the VA's duty to provide a VA examination and opinion was triggered to obtain an opinion on the theory of direct service connection. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.   Failure to obtain an opinion addressing whether the Veteran has a bilateral foot and ankle disability caused by his active-duty service is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring a remand.

On the theory of secondary service connection, the Board notes that the Veteran is service-connected for Osgood-Schlatter disease. As noted above, the November 1988 bone scan indicates that a bilateral foot and ankle could be related to the Veteran's service-connected Osgood-Schlatter disease.  

The third McLendon element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the service-connected Osgood-Schlatter disease, including equivocal or non-specific medical evidence or credible lay evidence. The Board finds that the low threshold is met here and VA's duty to provide a VA examination was triggered prior to the October 2023 rating decision on appeal. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 85-86.  Failure to obtain an opinion addressing whether the Veteran has a bilateral ankle and foot disability, which is caused or aggravated by his service-connected Osgood-Schlatter disease, is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring a remand.

Relevant to all claims

The Board notes that in June 2000, the Veteran reported treatment at Harry S Truman Memorial Hospital in Columbia, Missouri. However, upon review, these records have not been associated with the claims file. Failure to obtain outstanding treatment records is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring a remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact Harry S Truman Memorial Hospital in Columbia, Missouri, to obtain and associate with the claims file all outstanding records of treatment. If any requested records are not available, or the search for any such records otherwise yields negative results, that fact must clearly be documented in the claims file. Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile. The non-existence or unavailability of such records must be verified and this should be documented for the record. Required notice must be provided to the Veteran and his representative.

2. Reconsider the claims for entitlement to service connection for bone spur of the right foot, bone spur of the left foot, bone spur of the left ankle, bone spur of the right ankle, sciatica of the left lower extremity, and sciatica of the right lower extremity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (c). 

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA Peripheral Nerves Examination. EMG testing must be performed. 

The examiner is asked to provide the response to the following:

(a.) Does the Veteran have a left lower extremity peripheral nerve disability?

(b.) If and only if, a left lower extremity disability is diagnosed, did the left lower extremity peripheral nerve disability begin in service? Why or why not?

(c.) Is any left lower extremity peripheral nerve disability related to the Veteran's active duty service? Why or why not?

(d.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any left or right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was caused by his Osgood-Schlatter disease? Why or why not?

(e.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any left or right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was aggravated by his Osgood-Schlatter disease? Why or why not?

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his claimed bilateral foot and ankle disabilities. The electronic claims folder must be made accessible to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Did any bilateral ankle or foot disability begin in service? Why or why not? 

(b.) Is any bilateral ankle or foot disability related to the Veteran's active duty service? Why or why not?

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any bilateral foot or ankle disability was caused by his Osgood-Schlatter disease disability? 

(d.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any Veteran's bilateral foot or ankle disability was aggravated by his Osgood-Schlatter disease disability?

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale should be provided for each opinion offered.

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asare, Ama K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.