Citation Nr: A25033795
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 220308-226262
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

An initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with anxiety, depression, mood disorder not otherwise specified (NOS), and alcohol dependency in remission, is granted.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted effective July 26, 2012.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission symptoms more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

2. From July 26, 2012, forward the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission has precluded him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for TDIU as of July 26, 2012, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.15, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1973 to June 1977.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2021 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Hearing docket.  See March 2022 VA Form 10182.  This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the April 2021 rating decision and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  The Veteran appeared for the hearing before a Veterans Law Judge in March 2023.

During the pendency of this appeal, and outside the evidentiary window, the Veteran's representative objected "generally" to a VA examination report and requested the curriculum vitae (CV) and VA personnel file of the VA examiner.  

Under Francway, the Court held that a Veteran is required to raise some challenge to the qualifications of a VA examiner before the Board in order to require VA to produce some information regarding the competency of the examiner.  Francway v. Wilkie, 930 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2019).  The Federal Circuit has held that any challenge to the expertise of a VA expert must set forth the specific reasons why the litigant concludes that the expert is not qualified to give an opinion. Id. at 1380.  Typically, a claimant must have the ability to secure from the VA the information necessary to raise the competency challenge. Id.  Once the request is made for information as to the competency of the examiner, a claimant normally has the right, absent unusual circumstances, to the curriculum vitae and other information about the qualifications of a medical examiner. Id.  This is mandated by the VA's duty to assist. Id.

Pursuant to the provisions of the AMA, however, the Board reviews the record only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  In this case, the examinations were conducted in October 2012 and August 2019 with the AMA rating decision on appeal issued in April 2021.  The challenge to the VA examiner's competency was received in February 2023.  Because the challenge was received after the rating decision on appeal, the failure to provide the VA examiner's qualifications to the Veteran does not represent a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The duty to assist does not attach at the Board level in an AMA appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  Therefore, remand is not appropriate, and no further action is warranted.

In a January 2024 decision, the Board denied a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD.  The Veteran appealed the Board's January 2024 decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), which in a November 2024 Order, granted the parties' joint motion for remand (JMR), vacating the Board's January 2024 decision and remanding the claim for compliance with the terms of the JMR.

Increased Ratings

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission.

By way of procedural history, prior to the rating decision currently on appeal, a December 2012 rating decision awarded service connection for PTSD with anxiety and depression and assigned a 50 percent rating, effective July 26, 2012.  In a March 2021 decision, the Board granted service connection for mood disorder, not otherwise specified (NOS), and alcohol dependency in remission.  In the April 2021 rating decision implementing the Board's decision, the AOJ granted an effective date of July 26, 2012, for service connection for mood disorder NOS and alcohol dependency in remission, combined these with his service-connected PTSD with anxiety and depression, and continued a 50 percent rating.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating, but no higher.

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in October 2012.  Diagnoses of mood disorder, not otherwise specified, alcohol dependency in remission, and cannabis dependency in remission were noted.  The examiner noted that differentiation of symptoms between diagnoses was possible, later noting that the alcohol and cannabis dependence disorders had no current symptoms.  Occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress was noted.  The Veteran reported being a truck driver from 1976 until August 2011, when he sustained cervical trauma in an accident.  Symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, and mild memory loss were noted.

In a November 2012 private psychological evaluation, Dr. S.W., a clinical psychologist, noted the Veteran was neatly groomed and appropriately addressed and that his thoughts were clear and goal-directed, with disturbance of logic or bizarreness.  The Veteran reported being happy when he is at home but added that he was "pretty angry" when he worked.  Anxiety, depression, sadness, indecision, and anergia were endorsed.  The Veteran denied suicidal ideation, and no psychotic distortion, to include hallucinations, faulty perception, or misinterpretation of consensual reality were noted.  "[S]light interference with concentration and memory" were noted.  He reported being married for 33 years and having 3 adult children.  He denied having any friends or involvement with his community.  He reported hobbies of working on his car and restoring a tractor.  Diagnoses of PTSD, generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, pain disorder, and alcohol dependence in sustained full remission, were noted.

The Board notes that VA treatment records throughout the period on appeal reflect that the Veteran routinely denied suicidal or homicidal ideation and that he did not suffer from delusions or hallucinations.  Further, these records reflect that he routinely reported minimized irritability, denied anger outbursts, and being hostile, threatening, or profane.  Appropriate grooming and dress were consistently noted.

The evidence includes Social Security Administration (SSA) records from 2012.  While SSA records are not controlling for VA determinations, they may be pertinent to VA claims.  Collier v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 412 (1991); Murincsak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 363 (1992).  The Veteran's SSA psychiatric review found no restrictions or difficulties with activities of daily, social functioning, or maintaining concentration, persistence, or pace.  The clinician concluded the Veteran had a cognitive impairment that was not severe.  At another psychiatric evaluation in May 2012, he was described as having excellent grooming and hygiene.  He reported memory lapses and had a mild deficiency in his remote memory and a mild deficiency in judgment.  The mental status examination reported that the Veteran had a normal mood and calm affect and was cooperative with normal speech with relevant, logical, and organized thought processes.  His concentration was within normal limits and there was no evidence perceptual disturbance or hallucinations.  The clinician reported that his social functioning was within normal limits and has good relationships with his wife and family with no interpersonal difficulties.

A June 2012 VA treatment record notes the Veteran was able to operate an automobile and maintain his interests and motivation independently and effectively.  Occasional dysphoric mood and snappiness were noted.  

A January 2013 VA treatment record notes the Veteran reported irritability that was mainly verbal and being impatient, but having a supportive family.

A May 2014 VA treatment record notes the Veteran reported "getting more snappy than usual" 4 weeks prior, stating that his irritability is mainly verbal and that it can interfere with his relationships.

The Veteran testified at the July 2014 Decision Review Officer (DRO) hearing that he still has nightmares and does not have a social life as he "can't go out around people very much."  He stated that he tries to avoid crowds and loud noises and that when he does go out his wife always accompanies him.

The Veteran testified at the April 2017 Board hearing that he used to have nightmares and still has a fight or flight reaction.  He stated that he "does not like people on the whole" and avoids malls and large stores.  He reported anxiety and depression.  He stated that he has "a couple of friends" and that they are people he has known all of his life.  He then stated that he talks to them when he sees them but doesn't hang out with them, further stating that he has no motivation to see his family.

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in August 2019.  Diagnoses of PTSD, major depressive disorder in partial remission, and alcohol use in sustained remission were noted.  Differentiation of symptoms was noted as possible, with no symptoms currently attributable to substance abuse.  Continuing symptoms of anxiety were noted as overlapping significantly with PTSD symptoms of hypervigilance and intrusive memories.  It was then noted that low mood, hopelessness, irritability, guilt, and regret are attributable to his depression, but significantly overlap with his PTSD symptoms of survivor guilt, sleep disturbance, memory impairment, and concentration difficulty.  Interplay between the diagnoses and symptoms was noted.  Occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation, was noted.  The examiner then stated that it is not possible to differentiate what impairment results from which condition without resorting to speculation.  It was noted that the Veteran has been married for 40 years and is now his wife's caregiver due to multiple strokes, his elderly mother-in-law, and his wife's 2 disabled half-brothers.  He denied drinking or using drugs.  Symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood were noted.  He was described as kempt and dressed appropriately, and he denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.

The Veteran testified at the March 2023 Board hearing that he has noticed that he is starting to get angry.  He stated that he used to wake up from nightmares in the middle of the night and slap his wife and does not want that to happen again.  He testified that starting 3 or 4 years prior, he has not been as calm as he used to be and does not enjoy his hobby of working with old tractors like he used to.  He further reported a worsening in his relationship with his family, stating that his brothers-in-law hardly come to see him and his wife whereas they "used to come around all the time."  He further stated that his sister lives next door to him and he only sees her when he goes over there.  He also stated that he would not be able to manage his symptoms in a job setting.  He stated that his anger used to result in periods of violence, with the instance being 2011 or 2012, before he started taking Venlafaxine.  He further reported having road rage a week prior but stated that his wife calmed him down.  He further acknowledged that he "[p]robably" could have calmed himself down in the absence of his wife, though it would have been hard.  He stated that he liked driving a truck because he could be alone and had left several good jobs due to his anger.

In an April 2023 private psychological evaluation Dr. Q.S., a psychologist, noted that the Veteran reported working as many as 70 jobs in 50 years after his service, and stated that many times when he experienced conflict or felt stressed, he simply walked away from the job.  The Veteran further reported that even when working alone as a truck driver he had difficulty with supervisors and dispatchers, and eventually retired in 2012.  Dr. Q.S. stated that the Veteran "minimized his difficulties with anger and irritability" in VA treatment records, though without offering a rationale for this conclusion.  It was noted that the Veteran was well-groomed, clean, alert, and oriented in all three spheres.  He reported being in a grumpy mood and stated that he often feels like crying.  It was noted that he is highly self-critical and has guilt about his angry outbursts.  He reported a fair, but worsening, appetite.  Passive suicidal ideation was noted, although frank suicidal ideation was denied.  A history of homicidal ideation was noted.  High levels of avoidance were noted.  Mild difficulty with memory was noted.  It was further noted that the Veteran reported chronic levels of irritability with angry outbursts, moderate levels of hypervigilance and startle reaction, and poor interpersonal functioning.  The Veteran described himself as angry and increasingly withdrawn and reported "considerable incidence of road rage."  The Veteran's wife reported that due to his irritability, they have become increasingly isolated as a couple and have a strained marriage.  Symptoms of low appetite, significant guilt, anhedonia, low mood, and feelings of numbness were noted.

The Board recognizes that the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning and the Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the Board notes that the private doctor did not provide any evidence or rationale to support the conclusion that the Veteran has been minimizing his reported symptoms.  Further, aside from a single reported incidence, the Board notes that there is no evidence in the record of a "considerable incidence of road rage."  As such, the Board finds this opinion to be of limited probative value in this respect.  Based on the above, the Board finds that this opinion's probative value is outweighed by the contemporaneous VA examinations and treatment records.

The evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating (depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks, mild memory loss), a 50 percent rating (flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships), and a 70 percent rating (impaired impulse control and suicidal ideation).

Further, the Veteran had symptoms that are not listed with a specific rating.  Specifically, the record reflects the Veteran's disability has also been manifested by low appetite, guilt, feeling numb, anhedonia and social isolation.  The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 50 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 70 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  

As noted above, the Veteran reported occasional dysphoric mood and snappiness in a June 2012 VA treatment record.  He further reported irritability that was mainly verbal and being impatient in a January 2013 VA treatment record.  A May 2014 VA treatment record notes the Veteran reported "getting more snappy than usual" 4 weeks prior, stating that his irritability is mainly verbal and that it can interfere with his relationships.  Irritability was noted in an August 2019 VA PTSD examination report.  He testified at the March 2023 Board hearing that he has noticed that he is starting to get angry and that starting 3 or 4 years prior, he has not been as calm as he used to be and that his brothers-in-law hardly come to see him and his wife whereas they "used to come around all the time."  The Board finds that this evidence indicates the Veteran's irritability, while varying at times, has overall worsened throughout the period on appeal.

The Board notes that the Veteran expressed passive suicidal ideation in the April 2023 private opinion, which is similar to persistent danger of self-harm, which is contemplated by the 100 percent criteria. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19.  However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not risen to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating.  The Veteran regularly denied thoughts, intent, or a plan involving self-harm in existing treatment records.

As highlighted by the Court in Bankhead, suicidal ideation operates on a continuum, with passive suicidal ideation (i.e., wishing to go to sleep and not wake up) at one end of the continuum, and active suicidal ideation (i.e., thinking of killing oneself) at the other end of the continuum. Id. at 19-20.  The criteria for a 70 percent rating under the General Formula does not require suicidal intent, plan, or preparatory behavior. Id. at 20.  The presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment in most areas.  

Based on his symptomatology, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD is consistent with and reflective of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas throughout the appeal period.

For the above reasons, the Board finds an initial 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission.  Further, the Board finds the evidence is neither evenly balanced, nor approximately so, with regard to whether an initial 100 percent rating is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against a 100 percent rating.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

2. Entitlement to TDIU.

The Board notes that entitlement to a TDIU has been raised by the record as "part and parcel" of the underlying increased rating claim.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).

It is the established policy of the VA that all veterans who are unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled.  A total disability will be considered to exist when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation.  

Entitlement to a TDIU is based on an individual's particular circumstances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16; Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2014).  Thus, in adjudicating a TDIU claim, VA must take into account the individual veteran's education, training, and work history, but not his or her age or the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Todd, 27 Vet. App. at 85-86.  The ultimate question of whether a Veteran is capable of substantial gainful employment is an adjudicatory determination, not a medical one.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total, when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or as a result of two or more service-connected disabilities, provided that one of those disabilities is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

In determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, attention must be given to: 

o	The veteran's history, education, skill, and training;

o	Whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy, or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue.  Factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, and reaching, as well as auditory and visual limitations; and

o	Whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.  Factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity.

Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).

As of July 26, 2012, the Veteran was service connected for the following: PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder not otherwise specified NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission at 70 percent; residuals of injuries to the right middle and ring fingers at 20 percent; and right hand scar at 0 percent.  A combined rating as of that date of 80 percent is noted.  As such, he meets the schedular requirement for TDIU as of July 26, 2012.

In a July 2012 letter, the Veteran asserted that he was unable to work due to his "military disabilities."

An October 2012 Social Security Administration (SSA) Residual Functional Capacity report notes the Veteran worked from May 1996 to March 2005 as a truck driver, and then from March 2005 to August 2011 as a truck driver.

In a November 2012 private psychological evaluation, the Veteran reported being happy when he is at home but added that he was "pretty angry" when he worked.

A June 2012 VA treatment record notes the Veteran reported occasional dysphoric mood and snappiness.

A January 2013 VA treatment record notes the Veteran reported irritability that was mainly verbal and being impatient, but having a supportive family.

The Veteran testified at the July 2014 DRO hearing that he does not have a social life as he "can't go out around people very much," that he tries to avoid crowds and loud noises, and that when he does go out his wife always accompanies him.

The Veteran testified at the April 2017 Board hearing that he still has a fight or flight reaction, "does not like people on the whole," and avoids malls and large stores.

In a January 2019 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran asserted that he was unable to secure or follow any substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected PTSD and hand injuries as of August 2011.  He reported working as a truck driver from March 2004 to August 2011, having 1 year of college, and no further training or education.

An August 2019 VA PTSD examination report notes the Veteran endorsed irritability and hypervigilance.

The Veteran testified at the March 2023 Board hearing that he has noticed that he is starting to get angry and that starting 3 or 4 years prior, he has not been as calm as he used to be.  He further reported a worsening in his relationship with his family, stating that his brothers-in-law hardly come to see him and his wife whereas they "used to come around all the time."  He stated that he would not be able to manage his symptoms in a job setting and that his anger used to result in periods of violence before he started taking Venlafaxine.  He further reported having road rage a week prior but stated that his wife calmed him down.  He further acknowledged that he "[p]robably" could have calmed himself down in the absence of his wife, though it would have been hard.  He stated that he liked driving a truck because he could be alone and had left several good jobs due to his anger.

In an April 2023 private psychological evaluation, the Veteran reported working as many as 70 jobs in 50 years after his service, and he stated that many times when he experienced conflict or felt stressed, he simply walked away from jobs.  He further reported that even when working alone as a truck driver he had difficulty with supervisors and dispatchers.  It was noted that he is highly self-critical and has guilt about his angry outbursts.  The Veteran's wife reported that due to his irritability, they have become increasingly isolated as a couple and have a strained marriage.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's work history, to include the nature and conditions of his employment, are entirely subjective, being based on his reports.  However, the Veteran is competent to report what he observes, and the Board finds his reports are credible.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).

In analyzing the meaning of "substantially gainful employment," Courts have concluded that "the test is whether a particular job is realistically within the physical and mental capabilities of the claimant."  Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356, 359 (1991), citing Timmerman v. Weinberger, 510 F.2d 439, 442 (8th Cir. 1975).  It is not necessary to find the Veteran is a total basket case before concluding he is unemployable.  Accordingly, he need not establish "100 percent unemployability" to prove an inability to maintain a "substantially gainful occupation"; the use of the word "substantially" suggests an intent to impart flexibility into a determination of his overall employability.  See Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  This critical distinction differentiates a 100 percent schedular rating (i.e., total occupational impairment) for, say, a mental disorder, versus what is required for a TDIU.

Here, the evidence of record shows the Veteran's service-connected PTSD symptoms manifest in, among others, irritability, verbal outbursts, interpersonal conflict, and isolating behaviors that have affected his relationships with others.  The Board finds that these symptoms would make working with supervisors, co-workers, or customers highly problematic, if not entirely infeasible.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Based on the above, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence of record reasonably shows that the Veteran was unemployable due to his service-connected PTSD with anxiety, depression, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol dependency in remission and that a TDIU is warranted effective July 26, 2012, the date the Veteran met the schedular requirement for TDIU.

 

 

T. V. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Keeley, Brian

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.