Citation Nr: A25033462
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-453618
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from September 1963 to July 1983.  

S.C., is the Veteran's niece.  She submitted the underlying joint application with the Veteran and is interested in serving as the Primary Family Caregiver.  38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a); 38 C.F.R. § 71.25.

In April 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied entitlement to benefits under PCAFC.  In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, as the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was notified of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal in April 2024.  In September 2024, the Board informed the Veteran that he had the opportunity to request a different review option by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, within 60 days of the September 2024 Board correspondence.  The Veteran has not responded, and a year has now passed since the April 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1102; Williams vs. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).

Eligibility for benefits under the PCAFC is remanded.   

Generally, the Veteran and S.C., his niece, contend that the Veteran was eligible for a Family Caregiver and his niece met the applicant requirements to serve as Primary Family Caregiver.  The April 2024 determination explained that the Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) review found the Veteran did not meet the eligibility criteria for PCAFC because the evidence did not support a finding that the Veteran needed continuous personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months for activities of daily living or a need for regular or extensive supervision, protection, or instruction.  The April 2024 CEAT review is not adequate to inform a decision on the merits.  

A February 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument states the Veteran is in need of set-up or clean-up assistance with eating; set-up or clean-up assistance with dressing and undressing; supervision or touching assistance with mobility to include walking and going up and down stairs.  The Veteran Functional Assessment states the Veteran "needs medication set-up" and the caregiver regularly fills the pillbox.  The Veteran Functional Assessment states the Veteran is a "fall risk" and "someone always needs to be with the person to help with remembering, decision making or judgment when away from home."  The April 2024 CEAT review failed to address the February 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument reflecting the Veteran requires some assistance completing activities of daily living including eating, dressing and undressing, mobility and a need for supervision.  That is a pre decisional error.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from CEAT as to whether the Veteran is in need of personal care services due to:

(a) An inability to perform an activity of daily living including: 1. Dressing or undressing oneself; 2. Bathing; 3. Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable;    4. Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.);           5. Toileting or attending to toileting; 6. Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 7. Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.) 

(b) A need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or

(c) A need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.

The clinician should consider the February 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument evaluation reflecting that the Veteran requires at least some assistance in eating, dressing and undressing, mobility, and a need for supervision.  In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion, as well as an explanation of any such terms as partial or moderate assistance, or supervision or touching assistance from a caregiver for the completion of an activity of daily living, must be articulated.  CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.R. Kardian, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.