Citation Nr: A25033897
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473188
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2002 to May 2013.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in September 2022 and October 2023, and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

By way of procedural background, in June 2023, the Veteran filed a request for higher level review seeking review of the September 2022 rating decision.  Following the high-level review decision in October 2023, in a September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

Direct review is the appeal option to the Board in which a Board decision is issued based on evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  The Board cannot hold a Board hearing or accept into the record additional evidence in its direct review.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his chronic sinusitis disorder is related to his military service.

Under the AMA a remand is proper only when there is a duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of an AOJ decision on appeal, or if another error fails to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a). 

The claims file contains a VA medical records reflecting diagnoses of sinusitis in November 2023 and January 2024, which had not been previously diagnosed and was therefore at least in part the basis of the denials in this matter.  However, under the AMA the Board is precluded from reviewing and/or assessing the adequacy of the examination because this evidence falls outside the evidentiary window.  

However, while this evidence cannot be considered as a basis for remand itself, the Board finds that the existence of such evidence can be considered to determine whether such evidence requires that VA complete a statutory obligation in light of such evidence that could lead to the grant of the subject claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).  Accordingly, the Board finds a remand is needed for the readjudication of the claim, to include obtaining an additional examination and opinion to determine the likely etiology of the Veteran's sinus disability.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed sinus disability.  The electronic claims file must be reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated studies and testing must be conducted, and all pertinent symptomatology must be reported in detail.  After a review of the claims file, the examiner should provide answers to the following questions.

(a.) Following a VA examination, the examiner should state whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis. 

(b.) Then, opine as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's chronic sinusitis disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.

(c.) A complete rationale for all opinions rendered must be provided.

(d.) In providing all of the requested opinions, the examiner should fully consider the Veteran's competent lay statements regarding the observable symptoms he has experienced.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Taylor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.