Citation Nr: A25033841
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240118-408905
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder (claimed as sleep disturbances and stress) is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left shoulder strain is denied.

The reduction of the rating for right shoulder strain, from 30 percent to 20 percent effective October 1, 2023, was proper and restoration is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's insomnia disorder (claimed as sleep disturbances and stress) has been manifested by occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress.

2. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's cervical strain has been manifested by forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees.

3. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's left shoulder strain has been manifested by pain causing a functional loss and less movement than normal. 

4. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's right shoulder strain has been manifested by pain causing a functional loss and less movement than normal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9400.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

3. The criteria for establishing entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left shoulder strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.25, 4.27, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5201.

4. The reduction of the disability rating for right shoulder strain, from 30 percent to 20 percent effective October 1, 2023, is deemed proper.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105 (e), 4.1-4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Marine Corps from October 2018 to October 2022.  Among his awards, the Veteran received the National Defense Service Medal and the Global War on Terrorism Medal.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2022, April 2023, May 2023, and July 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).

Procedurally, the December 2022 rating decision granted service connection for right shoulder strain with a 30 percent disability rating, left shoulder strain with a 20 percent disability rating, cervical strain with a 10 percent disability rating, and degenerative disc disease other than IVDS with a 10 percent disability rating. The Veteran filed a request for a higher-level review requesting increased disability ratings for left shoulder strain, right shoulder strain, cervical strain, and degenerative disc disease other than IVDS.  

The VA issued an April 2023 rating decision in which the Veteran's request for increased disability ratings for left shoulder strain, cervical strain, and degenerative disc disease other than IVDS were denied.  However, the rating decision proposed that the disability rating for right shoulder strain be reduced from 30 percent to 20 percent.

The VA issued a May 2023 rating decision in which service connection for insomnia disorder, claimed as sleep disturbances and stress, was granted with a 10 percent disability rating.  

The VA issued a July 2023 rating decision in which the disability rating for right shoulder strain was reduced from 30 percent to 20 percent.  In January 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 which is currently before the Board.  The Veteran appealed the December 2022, April 2023, May 2023, and July 2023 rating decisions.

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, when deciding the issues of increased disability ratings for left shoulder strain, cervical strain, and degenerative disc disease other than IVDS the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  When deciding the issue of increased disability rating for insomnia disorder, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Disability ratings.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disabilities resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in the General Rating Formula demonstrates that the symptoms after the phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Neither the number of symptoms nor the type of symptoms controls in determining whether the criteria for the next higher rating have been met. It is the effect of the symptoms, rather than the presence of symptoms, pertaining to the criteria for the next higher rating, that is determinative, and the Board must draw fact-based conclusions as to whether those symptoms, and their severity, frequency, and duration, have caused the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a given rating. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017).  Further, the Veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).

The Court has held that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the Veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).  

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder (claimed as sleep disturbances and stress).

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder.  Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is not warranted.

By way of history, the Veteran's insomnia disorder has been rated at 10 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9400, which is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  Under the code, a 10 percent disability rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

The criteria for a 70 percent rating are occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The criteria for a 100 percent rating are total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9400.

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

In the case at hand, the Board finds that the competent evidence shows that the Veteran's overall disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for a 10 percent rating.  The Veteran attended a VA examination in April 2023.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with insomnia disorder and found that the Veteran's insomnia disorder was caused by the Veteran's active duty military service.  The examiner found that the Veteran reported that he has never been in psychotherapy, and he has never been prescribed psychoactive medication.  The Veteran indicated that he was not depressed, does not suffer from significant anxiety or worry, and he has never had a panic attack.  The Veteran denied compulsions, mania, psychosis, or cognitive impairment.  The examiner found that the Veteran did suffer from chronic sleep impairment.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran sleeps for not more than 4 to 5 hours per night, his sleep is interrupted approximately 3 times a night, and the Veteran has trouble getting comfortable and falling asleep.  The Veteran further stated that he is a light sleeper and is easily awakened.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.

Although the Veteran has not submitted a medical report in support of his position, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder.  While the Board recognizes the Veteran's competence to describe the current severity of his symptoms, lay persons are not competent to consider complex medical questions to include assessments of the nature and severity of the symptoms for purposes of establishing an increased rating claim or render a complex medical opinion in the absence of proof of relevant training and expertise. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (2007).

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder is not warranted.  The medical evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. 

The Board further finds that the Veteran has not requested an extraschedular rating and the competent evidence of record does not support an extraschedular rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture is adequately contemplated by the rating schedule when the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's disability is compared with the established rating criteria.   

The Board has considered the requirement of 38 C.F.R. § 4.3 to resolve any reasonable doubt regarding the level of the Veteran's disability in his favor. The Board finds that the competent evidence persuasively indicates that the Veteran's overall disability picture more nearly approximates that of a 10 percent disability rating and his symptoms do not more nearly reflect the frequency, severity, and duration of symptoms associated with the 30 percent rating. A rating in excess of 10 percent is therefore not warranted. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.130, DC 9400.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for his cervical strain.  After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is not warranted. 

By way of history, the Veteran's cervical strain has been rated at 10 percent disabling pursuant under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237, which is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  Under the DC, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted with forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.

A 20 percent rating is warranted with forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when the evidence demonstrates forward flexion of the cervical spine 15 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

The criteria for a 40 percent disability rating are unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine; or, forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

A 50 percent rating is warranted with unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

The criteria for a 100 percent disability rating are unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  

In the case at hand, the Board finds that the competent evidence shows that the Veteran's overall disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for a 10 percent rating from October 22, 2022.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, DC 5237.

The Veteran attended a VA examination in May 2022.  The examiner found that the Veteran reported neck pain with active motion, passive motion, and weight bearing, but denied flare-ups.  Upon testing, the examiner measured the Veteran's ative range of motion with forward flexion at 40 degrees, extension at 40 degrees, right lateral flexion at 40 degrees, left lateral flexion at 40 degrees, right lateral rotation at 75 degrees, and left lateral rotation at 75 degrees.  The Veteran's measurements for passive range of motion and repetitive use range of motion were the same as the measurements for active range of motion.   The examiner found the Veteran's repeated use over time measurements to be forward flexion at 35 degrees, extension at 35 degrees, right lateral flexion at 35 degrees, left lateral flexion at 35 degrees, right lateral rotation at 70 degrees, and left lateral rotation at 70 degrees.  The examiner further found no loss of muscle strength, no sensory deficit, normal reflexes, no radiculopathy, and no ankylosis.  Significantly, the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not actively treat or take medication for his cervical strain.

Based on the examination findings, the Board finds that the medical evidence of record more nearly approximates the criteria for a 10 percent disability rating.  Specifically, the examination documented forward flexion at 35 degrees which is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees.

That being said, the Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 20 percent.  Specifically, the Board finds that the medical evidence does not show forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees, or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

Similarly, the Board finds that that the evidence of record does not support a disability rating of 30, 40, 50, or 100 percent.  Specifically, the Board has reviewed the objective medical evidence of record and does not find that the Veteran's symptoms have resulted in the functional equivalence of unfavorable ankylosis at any time, including during flareups.  Chavez v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).  Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as a condition in which the entire cervical spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve stretching.  The evidence demonstrates that the Veteran has maintained some degree of motion in his neck - he does not suffer from "fixation."  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain.  While the Board recognizes the Veteran's competence to describe the current severity of his symptoms, lay persons are not competent to consider complex medical questions to include assessments of the nature and severity of the symptoms for purposes of establishing an increased rating claim or render a complex medical opinion or diagnosis in the absence of proof of relevant training and expertise. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (2007).

The Board further finds that the Veteran has not requested an extraschedular rating and the competent evidence of record does not support an extraschedular rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture is adequately contemplated by the rating schedule when the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's disability is compared with the established rating criteria.   

The Board has considered the requirement of 38 C.F.R. § 4.3 to resolve any reasonable doubt regarding the level of the Veteran's disability in his favor. The Board finds that the competent evidence persuasively indicates that the Veteran's overall disability picture for the period from October 22, 2022, more nearly approximates that of a 10 percent disability rating and his symptoms do not more nearly reflect the frequency, severity, and duration of symptoms associated with the 20 percent rating. A rating in excess of 10 percent is therefore not warranted. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, DC 5237.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left shoulder strain is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for his left shoulder strain.  After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is not warranted.

The rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021. 85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov 30, 2020). However, in this case, the appeal period at issue commenced October 22, 2022, after the effective date of the amendments.  Because the entire period on appeal occurs after the effective date of the amendments, the new rating criteria are applicable for the entire period.

Diagnostic Codes 5200 through 5203 address disability ratings for the shoulder and arm.  DC 5200 deals with ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, DC 5201 addresses limitation of motion of the arm, DC 5202 addresses impairment of the humerus, and DC 5203 addresses impairment of the clavicle or scapula.  In the case at hand, it has not been shown, nor alleged, that the Veteran has incurred an impairment of the scapulohumeral articulation, the humerus, or the clavicle or scapula. The remaining issue is whether the Veteran's left shoulder strain warrants a disability rating in excess of 20 percent under DC 5201.

Ratings under Diagnostic Code 5201 differ depending on whether the dominant (major) or non-dominant (minor) extremity is being rated. In this case, the Veteran is left-hand dominant, so his left shoulder is his major shoulder.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.69.

Historically, the Veteran has received a 20 percent disability rating for the left shoulder pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, DC 5201.  Under the DC, a 40 percent disability rating is warranted for a minor arm with flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from side. 

A 30 percent rating is warranted with motion midway between side and shoulder level flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees.

A 20 percent rating is warranted with motion at shoulder level flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and therefore not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  

The Veteran attended a VA examination in December 2022.  The examiner found that the Veteran had recurring pain and shoulder stiffness.  The examiner measured the Veteran's active range of motion at 160 degrees for flexion, abduction to 160 degrees, internal rotation to 80 degrees, and external rotation to 80 degrees.  The Veteran's measurements for passive range of motion were the same as those for active range of motion.  The Veteran's repetitive use measurements were flexion to 140 degrees, abduction to 140 degrees, internal rotation to 70 degrees, and external rotation to 70 degrees.  The Veteran's repeated use over time measurements were flexion to 140 degrees, abduction to 140 degrees, internal rotation to 70 degrees, and external rotation to 70 degrees.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran suffered from daily flare-ups which are precipitated by daily activity, and which are alleviated by rest and applying ice.  The estimated measurements for flare-ups were flexion to 130 degrees, abduction to 130 degrees, internal rotation to 65 degrees, and external rotation to 65 degrees.  The examiner found that the Veteran suffered from less movement than normal and difficulty with overhead lifting.  The examiner did not find deformity, swelling, atrophy, loss of muscle strength, or ankylosis.  The examiner also did not find instability or dislocation.  Significantly, the examiner found that the Veteran was not currently undergoing active treatment for his shoulder, and he was not using prescription medication.  The examiner found that the only medication the Veteran was using was Tylenol on an as needed basis.

38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I, defines normal ranges of motion of the shoulder. Normal ranges of motion of the shoulder are flexion (forward elevation) from 0 degrees to 180 degrees, abduction from 0 degrees to 180 degrees, external rotation from 0 degrees to 90 degrees, and internal rotation from 0 degrees to 90 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I. In determining whether the Veteran has limitation of motion to shoulder level, it is necessary to consider forward flexion and abduction. See Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 314-16 (2003).

Based on a thorough review of all medical evidence of record, and considering the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not support a disability rating of 20 percent for left shoulder strain.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran has previously been awarded a 20 percent disability rating and the Board will not disturb a previous favorable finding.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements that he feels he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left shoulder strain.  While the Board recognizes the Veteran's competence to describe the current severity of his symptoms, lay persons are not competent to consider complex medical questions to include assessments of the nature and severity of the symptoms for purposes of establishing an increased rating claim or render a complex medical opinion or diagnosis in the absence of proof of relevant training and expertise. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (2007), Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).

The Board further finds that the Veteran has not requested an extraschedular rating and the competent evidence of record does not support an extraschedular rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture is adequately contemplated by the rating schedule when the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's disability is compared with the established rating criteria.   

Accordingly, the Veteran is not entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for his left shoulder strain.  As the weight of the evidence is against this claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The reduction in the disability rating for right shoulder strain, from 30 percent to 20 percent effective October 1, 2023, is deemed proper.

The Veteran contends that the reduction of the disability rating for his right shoulder strain from 30 percent to 20 percent effective October 1, 2023, was improper. Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is not warranted.

In the case at hand, the VA contends that the initial disability rating of 30 percent for the Veteran's right shoulder strain was made in error.  Specifically, in the December 2022 rating decision, a finding was made that a 30 percent disability rating was warranted because the examination findings of record demonstrated that the Veteran's arm motion from the side was limited to flexion/abduction of 25 degrees.  In actuality, the December 2022 VA examination does not show a limitation of arm motion from the side to 25 degrees.  Further, there is no medical evidence on file which shows any such limitation.  Accordingly, the issues to be decided are whether the rate reduction was proper and whether the evidence of record supports a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's right shoulder strain.  

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e) set forth procedural guidelines for reducing a disability rating. Procedurally, where reduction in the evaluation of a service-connected disability is considered warranted and the lower evaluation would result in a reduction of current compensation payments, a rating proposing the reduction or discontinuance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons supporting the proposed reduction. The Veteran must then be given 60 days to submit additional evidence and to request a predetermination hearing. Then, a rating action will be taken to effectuate the reduction, if warranted. The effective date of the reduction will be the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the Veteran of the final action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e).

In this case, an April 2023 letter proposing to reduce the rating for right shoulder strain provided the Veteran with notice of the proposed reduction and informed him that he could submit medical or other evidence to show why the reduction should not be made. The letter explained that this evidence could include a statement from a physician who treated or examined the Veteran. The letter also notified the Veteran that he could request a personal hearing to provide testimony on this matter. The letter further informed him that, if he did not request a hearing within 30 days or submit additional evidence within 60 days, the RO would issue a decision based on the evidence of record. In short, this letter provided adequate content notice for the proposed reduction. Furthermore, when the reduction was effectuated in July 2023, it was not effective until October 1, 2023. Thus, the procedural requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e) were met in this case.  Having determined that the procedural requirements have been satisfied, the remaining issue to be decided is whether the competent evidence of record supports a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's right shoulder strain.

The rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021. 85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov 30, 2020). However, in this case, the appeal period at issue commenced October 1, 2023, after the effective date of the amendments.  Because the entire period on appeal occurs after the effective date of the amendments, the new rating criteria are applicable for the entire period.

Diagnostic Codes 5200 through 5203 address disability ratings for the shoulder and arm.  DC 5200 deals with ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, DC 5201 addresses limitation of motion of the arm, DC 5202 addresses impairment of the humerus, and DC 5203 addresses impairment of the clavicle or scapula.  In the case at hand, it has not been shown, nor alleged, that the Veteran has incurred an impairment of the scapulohumeral articulation, the humerus, or the clavicle or scapula. The remaining issue is whether the Veteran's right shoulder strain warrants a disability rating in excess of 20 percent under DC 5201.

Ratings under Diagnostic Code 5201 differ depending on whether the dominant (major) or non-dominant (minor) extremity is being rated. In this case, the Veteran is left-hand dominant, so his right shoulder is his minor shoulder.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.69.

Historically, the Veteran has received a 30 percent disability rating for the right shoulder pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, DC 5201.  Under the DC, a 30 percent disability rating is warranted for a minor arm with flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from side. 

A 20 percent rating is warranted with motion midway between side and shoulder level flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees, or motion at shoulder level flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees.

The Veteran attended a VA examination in December 2022.  The examiner found that the Veteran suffers from pain and stiffness in his right shoulder and experiences mild flare-ups on a daily basis.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's flare-ups are alleviated by rest and applying ice or heat.  Upon examination, the examiner measured the Veteran's active range of motion at flexion to 160 degrees, abduction to 160 degrees, internal rotation to 80 degrees, and external rotation to 80 degrees.  The examiner found the same range of motion with passive motion testing.  The Veteran's range of motion on repetitive use was flexion to 150 degrees, abduction to 150 degrees, internal rotation to 75 degrees and external rotation to 75 degrees.  Repetitive use over time measurements were flexion to 140 degrees, abduction to 140 degrees, internal rotation to 70 degrees, and external rotation to 70 degrees.  The Veteran's range of motion during a flare-up was estimated at flexion to 130 degrees, abduction to 130 degrees, internal rotation to 65 degrees, and external rotation to 65 degrees.  The examiner found no muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, no evidence of instability or dislocation, and no impairment of the clavicle, scapula or humerus.  Significantly, the examiner found that the Veteran was not currently undergoing active treatment for his shoulder, and he was not using prescription medication.  The examiner found that the only medication the Veteran was using was Tylenol on an as needed basis.

38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I, defines normal ranges of motion of the shoulder. Normal ranges of motion of the shoulder are flexion (forward elevation) from 0 degrees to 180 degrees, abduction from 0 degrees to 180 degrees, external rotation from 0 degrees to 90 degrees, and internal rotation from 0 degrees to 90 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I. In determining whether the Veteran has limitation of motion to shoulder level, it is necessary to consider forward flexion and abduction. See Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 314-16 (2003).

Based on a thorough review of all medical evidence of record, and considering the provisions of  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not support a disability rating of 20 percent for right shoulder strain.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran has previously been awarded a 20 percent disability rating and the Board will not disturb a previous favorable finding.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements that he feels he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right shoulder strain.  While the Board recognizes the Veteran's competence to describe the current severity of his symptoms, lay persons are not competent to consider complex medical questions to include assessments of the nature and severity of the symptoms for purposes of establishing an increased rating claim or render a complex medical opinion or diagnosis in the absence of proof of relevant training and expertise. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (2007), Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).

The Board further finds that the Veteran has not requested an extraschedular rating and the competent evidence of record does not support an extraschedular rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture is adequately contemplated by the rating schedule when the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's disability is compared with the established rating criteria.   

Accordingly, the Veteran is not entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for his right shoulder strain.  As the weight of the evidence is against this claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative disc disease other than IVDS is remanded.

Although the Board regrets the delay imposed by a remand, the Board finds a remand necessary on the grounds that the Board finds the May 2022 VA examination evaluating the extent of the Veteran's disability arising from the Veteran's service-degenerative disc disease other than IVDS inadequate pursuant to Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (2025).  The Board further finds that the failure to obtain an adequate examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error which warrants a remand.

The Board specifically finds the May 2022 VA examination inadequate for the reason that, in evaluating the extent of the Veteran's disability resulting from his degenerative disc disease other than IVDS, the examiner did not consider the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication.  The Board finds that the examiner acknowledged that the Veteran actively treats for his low back and uses medication, including lidocaine, to alleviate his pain. However, the examiner did not address the ameliorative effect of the Veteran's medications.  

Once the VA has obtained an examination, it must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 3030 (2007).  In light of the fact that there is currently no adequate medical opinion as to the extent of the Veteran's disability arising from his degenerative disc disease other than IVDS, the Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue without a new medical opinion.  Therefore, a remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.	Obtain a medical opinion which addresses the current severity of the Veteran's degenerative disc disease other than IVDS.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. 

a)	In accordance with Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (2025), the examiner should identify all medications the Veteran takes for his degenerative disc disease other than IVDS and opine as to the ameliorative effects of the medications.

b)	In accordance with Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If pain is found during the examination, the examiner should identify the degree of limitation of motion at which the pain begins.

c)	In accordance with Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. In assessing functional loss, flare-ups and increased functional loss on repetitive use must be considered. The examiner must consider all procurable and ascertainable data and describe the extent of any pain, incoordination, weakened movement, and excess fatigability on use, and, to the extent possible, report functional impairment due to such factors in terms of additional degrees of limitation of motion.

d)	If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate of the additional impairment due to flare-ups in terms of additional degrees of limitation of motion based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.

e)	If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

A complete rationale is required for all opinions offered.	

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Litts, Norman W. Jr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.