Citation Nr: A25033586
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240217-418045
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right knee disability is dismissed.

REMANDED

Service connection for a bilateral hand condition is remanded.

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) (claimed as acid reflux and heartburn) is remanded.

Service connection for hemorrhoids is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for bilateral pes planus (claimed as bilateral foot pain) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The November 2023 rating decision that deferred a decision on the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability was not an adjudicative determination by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA); the February 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) appealing this rating action was premature. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The February 2024 appeal of the November 2023 rating decision that deferred a decision on the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is dismissed as a matter of law. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.204; Shipley v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 458, 461 (2011). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from July 1990 to May 1993, to include service in Southwest Asia.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a November 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's bilateral hand, GERD, hemorrhoids, left knee, and bilateral pes planus disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for a right knee disability is dismissed.

Here, a November 2023 rating action notes that "a decision on entitlement to compensation for right knee pain is deferred." In response to this November 2023 rating action that deferred service connection for right knee pain, the Veteran filed a February 2024 NOD, indicating that he wishes to appeal that decision. However, the November 2023 rating decision that deferred service connection for a right knee disability was not a final decision on the matter.

The Board has jurisdiction where there is a question of law or fact on appeal to the Secretary. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104. Under 38 U.S.C. § 7105, the Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.

In this case, as the November 2023 rating decision regarding the Veteran's right knee disability was not a final decision, the appeal of this decision was premature and therefore, there is no question of law or fact for the Board to decide as to the issue. As such, the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is dismissed.

The Board notes that in a subsequent rating decision, issued in August 2024, the Veteran was granted service connection for his right knee disability, effective November 16, 2022, the date he initially filed a claim for service connection for this issue. The Board also notes that the Veteran filed a separate NOD in August 2024, in which he indicated that he is seeking a higher rating for his now service-connected right knee disability. The Board notes that this issue will be addressed in a separate appeal.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for a bilateral hand condition is remanded.

Service connection for GERD (claimed as acid reflux and heartburn) is remanded.

Service connection for hemorrhoids is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends his bilateral hand, GERD, hemorrhoids, and left knee conditions are related to his active service, to include his confirmed service in Southwest Asia. The Board finds that remand of these disabilities is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors-to afford the Veteran adequate VA medical examinations and obtain adequate medical opinions.

Bilateral Hand Condition

At an October 2023 VA examination for skin conditions, it was noted that the Veteran notices bilateral hand itch and drying when it is cold outside. It was also noted that he has similar itching in his legs. The examiner noted that the Veteran was deployed to Iraq and Kuwait and was there for two years. The examiner stated that there was no discoloration of the nails in the Veteran's hands to diagnose a fungal infection. However, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a bilateral hand condition--dermatitis. The examiner did not provide a medical opinion for this bilateral hand condition.

Here, the Veteran has a bilateral hand condition, which he claims is related to his active service. He stated that he was seen and treated in service for his hands. See April 2023 Claim. His service treatment records (STRs), dated in January 1992, show that he was seen by Dermatology for treatment of a skin condition on his hands. Based on the above, the Board finds that a medical opinion is necessary to determine the nature and etiology of the condition on the Veteran's hands. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The Board notes that not providing a medical opinion for the diagnosed hand dermatitis constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

GERD and Hemorrhoids 

The Veteran stated that he reported his problems with GERD and hemorrhoids in service. See April 2023 Claims. His VA examinations, conducted in October 2023, confirm the Veteran's reports. Notably, the examiner indicated that the Veteran was diagnosed with GERD in 1990; it was also noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with internal and external hemorrhoids in 1992.

However, the examiner concluded that the current diagnoses of GERD and hemorrhoids are not related to the Veteran's active service, to include any toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs). The examiner stated that he considered the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. The examiner also stated that no literature or medical record evidence can be found to indicate that GERD and hemorrhoids are due to toxic exposures.

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a claim, that examination or medical opinion must be an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes probative value to a medical opinion. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Here, the examiner's opinion regarding the Veteran's GERD and hemorrhoids lacks adequate rationale. It also does not consider the Veteran's reports of the continuity of his symptoms since service to the present; nor does it address the related symptoms noted in the STRs. The Board notes that an inadequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which requires remand for correction.

Further, the following favorable findings are documented in the November 2023 rating decision: 1) Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded--that the Veteran has verified military service that constitutes presumptive toxic exposure pursuant to 38 U.S.C. §1119, that the evidence shows the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia and was exposed to particulate matter during military service, and that the Veteran meets the definition of a "Persian Gulf Veteran" as specified by 38 U.S.C §1117; and also 2) that the Veteran was diagnosed with GERD and hemorrhoids. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

Therefore, as the Veteran has verified service in Southwest Asia (service in the Persian Gulf War), under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (b), which pertains to Persian Gulf War veterans, signs or symptoms which may be manifestations of undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness include, but are not limited to, fatigue, signs or symptoms involving the skin, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, neurological signs or symptoms, neuropsychological signs or symptoms, signs or symptoms involving the respiratory system, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal signs or symptoms, cardiovascular signs or symptoms, and abnormal weight loss. Here, the Veteran maintains that his disabilities are reflective of some of these symptoms. However, a Gulf War VA examination was not conducted to specifically address these signs and symptoms. As such, the Board cannot make well-informed decisions on the Veteran's claims.

Left Knee

The Veteran asserts his left knee disability stems from working aboard a Navy ship, where he was required to do prolonged standing, bending, and lifting. See April 2023 Statement In Support Of Claim. He maintains that problems with his knee started in service and have continued to the present.

A favorable finding in the November 2023 rating decision is that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of left knee strain. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 

At the October 2023 VA examination, where the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral knee strain, it was noted that the Veteran started experiencing bilateral knee pain in service, as he had to stand for prolonged periods in Navy ships. The examiner noted that the Veteran also has flat feet, which caused him to have bilateral knee pain. It was further noted that the Veteran's military occupational specialty in the Navy required him to lift heavy objects. However, the examiner did not provide a medical opinion for the Veteran's left knee strain disability, although one was provided for the right knee (the Veteran is currently service-connected for right knee strain).

Here, the Board finds that a medical opinion is necessary for the Veteran's left knee strain as well, as he has reported similar complaints and symptoms (for both the right and left knees). Thus, remand is required to afford the Veteran another VA examination, and to obtain a medical opinion, to fully address his left knee condition. The Board also notes that not providing a medical opinion for the diagnosed left knee disability constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Additionally, the examiner raised the issue of secondary service connection for the Veteran's knee, when he stated that "the Veteran also has flat feet, which caused him to have bilateral knee pain." The Veteran is also seeking service connection for his flat feet (bilateral pes planus). Upon examination, the examiner should further opine whether the Veteran's left knee disability was either caused or aggravated by his bilateral pes planus. Concerning the Veteran's left knee pain, the Board notes that the Court of Veterans Claims (Court) has ruled that pain alone can constitute a disability; thus, another VA examination with an opinion is necessary to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left knee pain, and to ascertain whether any such disability is secondary to pes planus. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

Service connection for bilateral pes planus (claimed as bilateral foot pain) is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for his bilateral foot disability, claiming that he hurt his feet while working aboard a Navy ship, where he was required to do prolonged standing, bending, and lifting. See April 2023 Statement In Support Of Claim. He maintains that the pain has continued to the present. The Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error, to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion.

As an initial matter, the Board acknowledges that a favorable finding noted in the November 2023 rating decision is that the Veteran has bilateral pes planus that existed prior to his military service. It was noted that a review of the Veteran's entrance examination shows he entered the military with moderate pes planus. The Board confirms that a review of the Veteran's March 1990 enlistment examination report shows that his feet were noted as normal when he entered service. He was noted to have moderate bilateral pes planus, with no symptoms. The Veteran acknowledged this diagnosis. See April 2023 Claim.  

In this regard, the presumption of soundness stipulates that every veteran is taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111.

Here, as documented in the Veteran's March 1990 enlistment examination report, he was diagnosed with pes planus upon entry into service. Specifically, his feet were noted as abnormal due to this disability that was documented in the examination report. As such, the Board concludes that a preexisting bilateral pes planus disability was noted at service entry and that the presumption of soundness does not apply.

A preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated by active service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease. 38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306 (a). Aggravation may not be conceded where the disability underwent no increase in severity during service on the basis of all the evidence in the record pertaining to the manifestations of the disability prior to, during, and subsequent to service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.306 (b). Temporary or intermittent flare-ups during service of a preexisting injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered "aggravation in service" unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, is worsened. Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 297 (1991).

During the relevant evidentiary window, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination to determine whether his bilateral pes planus was aggravated during service. As noted herein, the Veteran presented competent and credible reports to indicate that he hurt his feet while working aboard a Navy ship, where he was required to do prolonged standing, bending, and lifting. Additionally, at the October 2023 VA examination for his knee conditions, the examiner stated that the Veteran has flat feet, which caused him to have bilateral knee pain, and that the Veteran's military occupational specialty in the Navy required him to lift heavy objects; thereby suggesting that the Veteran's pes planus disability may have been aggravated in service. As such, a remand is required to afford the Veteran a VA examination to address his bilateral pes planus disability. See McLendon, supra. Based on the evidence of record, not affording the Veteran a VA examination for his bilateral pes planus within the relevant evidentiary window constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Further, it is also necessary for the VA examiner to provide an opinion as to the functional impairment caused by the Veteran's reported foot pain. Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1368. Accordingly, remand for a new examination is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hand disability. The examiner should review the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and indicate such on the examination report. If deemed appropriate by the examiner, schedule the Veteran for an examination.  

After review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to:

a.	Identify and diagnose any bilateral hand disability that presently exists or that has existed during the appeal period.

b.	Then, for any diagnosed bilateral hand disability, indicate whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the disability is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include complaints and treatment for a bilateral hand condition noted in the Veteran's service treatment records in January 1992, or to any presumed environmental exposures experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia. The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

c.	The examiner should address whether the Veteran's hand disability is an undiagnosed illness, a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology, or a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with partially explained etiologies.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. These reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the clinician finds any medical reason to reject the lay reports, then an explanation must be provided.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinions expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why.

2. Also, schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiologies of his GERD and hemorrhoids disabilities. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be reviewed by the clinician. The medical opinion report should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions. All indicated tests and studies should be conducted, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

The clinician is asked to:

a.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's GERD disability is related to his active service, to include any presumed environmental exposures experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia. The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

b.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's hemorrhoids disability is related to his active service, to include any presumed environmental exposures experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia. The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

c.	The examiner should address whether the Veteran's GERD and hemorrhoids disabilities are diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses of unknown etiologies, or diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illnesses with partially explained etiologies.

d.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD disability is due to (or the result of), or aggravated (made worse) by, the service-connected irritable bowel syndrome.

e.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hemorrhoids disability is due to (or the result of), or aggravated (made worse) by, the service-connected irritable bowel syndrome.

The examiner must be advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and events known to him, and the Veteran's reports must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and whether there is additional evidence that would permit the opinion to be provided. 

3. Also, schedule the Veteran for appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his left knee disability, to include pain. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be reviewed by the clinician. The medical opinion report should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions. All indicated tests and studies should be conducted, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. 

The examiner should respond to the following:

a.	Identify and diagnose all left knee disabilities the Veteran has had throughout the appeal period.

If the examiner finds there to be no pathology to attribute the Veteran's left knee pain, the examiner should address the functional effects or limitations of the Veteran's left knee pain, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity.

b.	Then, as to each diagnosed left knee disability, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the disability is related to the Veteran's active service, to include his military occupational specialty and associated duties, his prolonged standing on Navy ships, and all presumed environmental exposures experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia.  The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

c.	If it is determined that the Veteran does not have a left knee disability that can be attributed directly to service, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's disability pattern is consistent with: (1) an undiagnosed illness, or (2) part of a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms.

d.	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left knee disability is due to (or the result of), or aggravated (made worse) by, his bilateral pes planus or the service-connected right knee strain.

The examiner must be advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and events known to him, and the Veteran's reports must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports regarding current or past symptoms, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and whether there is additional evidence that would permit the opinion to be provided.

4. Also, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the etiology of his bilateral foot disability. The examiner must review the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this Remand, and note such review in the examination report. The examiner must ensure that all indicated tests and studies are conducted.

The examiner must also respond to the following:

a.	Identify or diagnose all foot disabilities that the Veteran has had throughout the appeal period.

b.	The Veteran's bilateral pes planus is noted in his March 1990 enlistment examination report and is found to have preexisted his active service.

Is there clear and unmistakable (undebatable) evidence that the Veteran's preexisting bilateral pes planus was not aggravated during service? If the Veteran's pes planus underwent any increase in disability in service, the examiner should opine as to whether that increase in disability was due to the natural progression of the disorder.

c.	For any other foot conditions diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that it had its onset in service, is related to an incident of service, or began within one year after discharge from active service?

The examiner must address the Veteran's reports that he hurt his feet while working aboard a Navy ship, where he was required to do prolonged standing, bending, and lifting.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A clear explanation for all opinions should be provided, with a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.