Citation Nr: A25033147
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 210827-183487
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

A 50 percent rating is granted for migraine headaches from December 10, 2018, subject to the law and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

A 70 percent rating is granted for unspecified bipolar and related disorder (acquired psychiatric disorder) from March 2, 2018, subject to the law and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

A 10 percent rating is granted for residuals of traumatic brain injury (TBI) from March 2, 2018, subject to the law and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

An effective date of November 3, 2018, is granted for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU), subject to the law and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

An effective date of November 3, 2018, is granted for the award of basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA). 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence as to whether the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches were manifested by very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability throughout the period on appeal from December 10, 2018, is at least in equipoise.

2. The evidence as to whether the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder was manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas throughout the period on appeal from March 2, 2018, is at least in equipoise; the evidence is persuasively against a finding that his disability was manifested by total occupational and social impairment during that time. 

3. The evidence as to whether the Veteran's service-connected TBI residuals have been manifested by a complaint of mild loss of memory throughout the period on appeal from March 2, 2018, is at least in equipoise; the evidence is persuasively against a finding that the condition was manifested by more severe symptoms in any of the relevant facets during that time.

4. The evidence as to whether a combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, including an acquired psychiatric disorder, TBI residuals, and headaches, precluded him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation throughout the period on appeal from November 3, 2018, is at least in equipoise; the evidence is persuasively against a finding that his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder and TBI, either singly or in combination, precluded him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation prior to that date.

5.  From November 3, 2018, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities were of such a nature and severity as to be permanent in nature and reasonably certain to continue throughout his lifetime. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for a 50 percent rating for migraine headaches have been met from December 10, 2018. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for a 70 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met from March 2, 2018. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, DC 9432.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for a 10 percent rating for residuals of TBI have been met from March 2, 2018. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, DC 8045.

4. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for an effective date of November 3, 2018, for the award of a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 3.400, 4.3, 4.15, 4.16, 4.19.

5. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for basic eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. chapter 35 have been met from November 3, 2018. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.301, 3.155, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from April 1974 to April 1976. His decorations include the National Defense Service Medal. 

This matter arises from a May 2021 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Following a denial on Higher-Level Review in August 2021, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) later that month, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 AOJ rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the Veteran's claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Higher Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is in turn based on the average impairment of earning capacity caused by a given disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the evaluations to be assigned to the various disabilities.

If there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. If different disability ratings are warranted for different periods of time over the life of a claim, "staged" ratings may be assigned. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. An approximate balance of the evidence includes, but is not limited to, equipoise. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Evidence is not in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. Id.

1. Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches prior to July 24, 2019, and in excess of 30 percent thereafter

In the May 2021 rating decision, the AOJ continued the Veteran's rating for migraine headaches at 30 percent, and also found and that an "earlier effective date" for the 30 percent award was not warranted. On appeal, the Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted. Specifically, in a June 2021 submission, his representative contended that the Veteran's migraines were constant and productive of severe economic inadaptability, which is consistent with a 50 percent rating.  

Historically, in a January 2019 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection and an initial 0 (zero) percent (noncompensable) rating for migraine headaches, effective November 3, 2018. The AOJ continued the 0 percent rating in a March 2020 rating decision. In a September 2020 rating decision, the AOJ increased the rating for migraine headaches from 0 to 30 percent, effective August 24, 2020. Thereafter, in a November 2020 Higher-Level Review rating decision, the AOJ continued the rating at 30 percent, but found that an effective date of July 24, 2019, was warranted for the 30 percent rating. As noted, in the May 2021 rating decision from which the present matter arises, the AOJ continued the rating at 30 percent and found that an "earlier effective date" for the 30 percent rating was not warranted.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim since the submission of a December 2019 application for an increased rating. Continuous pursuit of a claim or an issue can be achieved by timely and properly filing an appropriate review option, generally within one year. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c). If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, as opposed to the date the most recent request for review was received. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500(c).

Here, the Veteran did not appeal the January 2019 rating decision that assigned an initial 0 percent rating for migraine headaches, as well as an effective date of November 3, 2018, for the award of service connection. Rather, he submitted a new claim for an increased rating (a VA Form 21-526EZ) on December 10, 2019. The March 2020 rating decision was issued in response to the December 2019 application for an increased rating; and the Veteran thereafter submitted a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) in August 2020, seeking review of the March 2020 decision. The submission of the August 2020 supplemental claim was a valid review option as it applied to the March 2020 rating decision and thereby constituted continuous pursuit of his claim since the submission of the December 2019 application for an increased rating. As noted, the September 2020 rating decision increased the rating to 30 percent, effective August 24, 2020. In October 2020, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review of the September 2020 rating decision. The AOJ issued a Higher-Level Review rating decision in November 2020, and the Veteran filed his current supplemental claim for an increased rating in January 2021.

Because the Veteran timely and properly filed an appropriate review option within a year of the March 2020, September 2020, and November 2020 rating decisions, he has continuously pursued his claim for a higher rating since December 2019. Inasmuch as the claim is a non-initial, increased rating claim, the rating period also includes a one-year 'look back" period from the date of the claim - or, put another way, the rating period begins on December 10, 2018, one year prior to the submission of his application for increase.

The Board acknowledges that both the Veteran and the AOJ have indicated that the Veteran is seeking an "earlier effective date" for the award of his 30 percent rating for migraine headaches. However, pursuant to applicable law, the Board understands that the benefit being sought is in effect a 50 percent rating for migraine headaches over the course of the entire appeal period, rather than an earlier effective date for the 30 percent rating per se. In essence, the AOJ has staged the Veteran's rating for migraine headaches over the course of the appeal period. The Board understands that the Veteran is seeking the highest rating possible throughout the entire appeal period, rather than an "earlier effective date" for the 30 percent increased rating reflected in the current, staged rating.  

The Veteran's migraine headaches have been evaluated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100. Under that diagnostic code, a 0 percent rating is assigned for less frequent attacks than for a 10 percent rating. A 10 percent evaluation is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A 50 percent rating is assigned for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018), that DC 8100 contain successive rating criteria, as each disability level builds on another in terms of duration and frequency and requires that a veteran rated at a higher level satisfy all of the requirements at the lower level. While the criteria for a 50 percent rating therefore contain a frequency requirement, they additionally require that a veteran have "completely" prostrating and "prolonged" attacks which are "productive of severe economic inadaptability." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.

In determining whether the Veteran experiences the type and frequency of prostrating attacks of migraine headaches necessary for a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 8100, the Board observes that the rating criteria do not define "prostrating," nor has the Court. Cf. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999) (in which the Court quoted Diagnostic Code 8100 verbatim but did not specifically address the matter of how to define a prostrating attack.).

By way of reference, the Board notes that according to WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY OF AMERICAN ENGLISH, THIRD COLLEGE EDITION (1986), page 1080, "prostration" is defined as "utter physical exhaustion or helplessness." A very similar definition is found in DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY (28th Ed. 1994), page 1367, in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."

The Court has held that the phrase "productive of severe economic inadaptability" should be construed to mean either "producing" or "capable of producing" severe economic inadaptability. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445 (2004). Moreover, in making that assessment, the ameliorative effects of medication cannot be taken into account. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).

Turning to the evidence of record, the Board notes that a February 2019 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran reported that his headaches started in service and that he felt them all over his head. He indicated that the pain could sometimes be 10 out of 10. He was positive for sensitivity to light and sound, and he reported that headaches typically lasted three hours, that there were no triggers, and that he did not take medications. He indicated that they occurred on a frequency of three times per week, and that he felt like they had worsened over time. In a December 2019 VA treatment record, he reported that he had had headaches since suffering a concussion during service. He reported that they lasted for hours to days, that they occurred up to two to three times per month, and that he also got milder headaches almost daily which were occipital and in the bifrontal region. He added that he needed to rest in a dark, cool room to avoid them, and that he had sensitivity to light and sound. He added further that he had taken Advil and trazadone daily for years to treat the condition. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim in January 2020. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's treatment plan included taking continuous over-the-counter medication, such as Advil. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had headache pain that was throbbing, and that the typical duration of a headache was one to two days, occurring on both sides of the head. The examiner indicated further that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine and/or non-migraine headache pain. 

In an August 2020 submission, the Veteran reported that while he was working, he had migraines two to three times per week, and that he would have to cut the lights out and lay in a dark room until the pain stopped, reporting further that this would take at least eight hours. He added that he would put a cold compress over his eyes, and that he had been using medications to treat the condition since 1998. He stated that he still had about five to seven migraines per month and had other types of headaches daily. He stated further that when he felt a migraine coming on, he knew to lay in his bed as soon as the pain got worse and that he still had to lay there in a completely dark and quiet room with a cold compress over his eyes for a good four to five hours before the pain became manageable. He added that after a migraine, he was worn out and exhausted for the rest of the day. 

The Veteran was afforded a new VA examination in connection with his claim in August 2020. The examiner noted that his treatment plan included taking continuous medication, including over-the-counter analgesics and Advil, as needed. The examiner noted symptoms of pain, vomiting, sensitivity to light and sound, and changes in vision, indicating that the typical duration of a headache was less than one day. She then indicated that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine and/or non-migraine headache pain once per month, but that he did not have frequent, very prostrating and prolonged attacks that were productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

In a January 2021 submission, the Veteran reported that he had about two migraines per week, that there was no relief, and that the pain could last anywhere up to five or six hours. He stated that if he felt one coming on, he would lie down in a bed as soon as the pain started and would have to lay there in a completely dark and quiet room with a cold compress over his eyes for a good four to five hours before the pain became manageable. He stated that he was completely exhausted after the pain stopped, and that he had to isolate as people annoyed him and that that could start a migraine.

Finally, the Veteran was afforded a third VA examination in connection with his claim in May 2021. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he had had seven headaches over the past month, three of which were prostrating migraine headaches. He reported that on average he experienced two or three headaches per week, and typically one migraine each week, and that they had accompanying vision changes and occasional nausea to the point of vomiting, as well as increased sensitivity to sound. The examiner also noted the Veteran's report that he coped by lying in bed and letting them pass even if they rose to the level of a migraine, and that he had never been prescribed medications. However, she noted that his treatment plan nevertheless included taking continuous medication, to include over-the-counter analgesics and Advil. The examiner then indicated that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks once per month, but that he did not have frequent and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

On review of the evidence, and with resolution of reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for a 50 percent rating for migraine headaches have been met for the entire period on appeal. Throughout the appeal period, the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's migraines have occurred on a frequent basis, even where he has been taking medications to help alleviate the condition. The Board acknowledges that the VA examiners of record indicated that the Veteran did not have symptoms consistent with a 50 percent rating; however, their findings in that regard are inconsistent with other evidence of record, including VA treatment records and the Veteran's statements in August 2020 and January 2021. Still further, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms he experiences, including the duration, frequency, and severity of his migraines. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). Finally, while the VA examiners acknowledged that the Veteran took medication to treat his headaches, there is no indication that any of them discounted the ameliorative effects of medication in making their assessments as to the severity of his migraine headaches. In that regard, the Board notes that the evidence indicates that even with medication, his headaches have occurred on a very frequent basis.

The Board finds further that the Veteran's migraines have also been completely prostrating and prolonged, inasmuch as the evidence demonstrates that when he has one, he needs to lie down in a dark room, take medications, and wait for symptoms to subside before he can engage in any other activity. The evidence also clearly demonstrates that his migraine headaches produce, or are capable of producing, severe economic inadaptability. He has stated that they occurred frequently while he was working, and that he had to lie down in a dark room to alleviate their symptoms, even when taking into account the ameliorative effects of medication. Without the ameliorative effects of medication (which is how the Board must analyze the Veteran's claim), his migraines would clearly produce economic inadaptability to a very significant degree. 

Given the frequency and severity of the Veteran's migraine headaches as reported during the appeal period, the Board resolves doubt in his favor and finds that it is at least as likely as not that his headaches have satisfied the criteria for the maximum 50 percent rating under DC 8100 for the entire period on appeal, to include the one-year look back period beginning on December 10, 2018. The full benefit sought on appeal is granted.

Inasmuch as the Veteran appealed the "effective date" of the 30 percent rating, the Board has also considered whether his appeal might be interpreted to include a challenge of the original effective date of November 3, 2018, assigned by the AOJ in the January 2019 rating decision, which granted service connection. However, as noted, the Veteran did not appeal the January 2019 decision with respect to either the rating or the effective date assigned in that decision. Rather, he submitted a new claim for increase in December 2019. Because the effective date assigned in the January 2019 rating decision was not appealed, that matter is not properly before the Board. See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for residuals of TBI

In the May 2021 rating decision from which the present matter arises, the AOJ continued the Veteran's rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder at 50 percent, finding that an "earlier effective date" for the 50 percent rating was not warranted. The AOJ also continued the Veteran's rating for residuals of TBI at 0 percent.

With respect to his acquired psychiatric disorder, the Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted. Specifically, in a June 2021 submission, his representative contended that a 70 percent rating was warranted from March 2, 2018, which is the effective date of the award of service connection for that disability. With respect to TBI residuals, the Veteran has not advanced any specific argument; however, the Board understands him to be seeking the highest rating possible for TBI, and from the earliest possible date.  

At the outset, the Board notes that, historically, the AOJ has at times rated the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder together with TBI residuals, and at other times has rated the disabilities separately. The difference in how the disabilities have been rated, either singly or in combination, has been based on VA examiners' opinions as to whether the symptoms of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder and TBI residuals can be clearly differentiated. The Board therefore finds it prudent to address the history of how these disabilities have been rated. 

Historically, in a September 2018 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and residuals of TBI (rating them together), and assigned an initial 30 percent rating therefor, effective March 2, 2018. On November 3, 2018, the Veteran filed an application for an increased rating for the disability (a VA Form 21-526EZ), which as noted, was rated in a combined manner at that time. In a January 2019 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for TBI residuals separately, assigning an initial 0 percent rating, effective November 3, 2018.

In a February 2019 rating decision, the AOJ increased the rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder from 30 to 50 percent, effective November 3, 2018. Thereafter, in December 2019, the Veteran filed a new claim for increase for his TBI residuals (a VA Form 21-526EZ). In a March 2020 rating decision, the AOJ again combined the rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder and his TBI, finding that a 50 percent rating was warranted for both disabilities in combination. 

In July 2020, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review with respect to the February 2019 rating decision. Subsequently, in August 2020, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim (a VA Form 20-0995) for an increased rating for his acquired psychiatric and his TBI in response to the March 2020 rating decision which combined the ratings. It appears that the AOJ did not accept the August 2020 supplemental claim with respect to the rating(s). In its September 2020 rating decision which was issued in response to the Veteran's August 2020 supplemental claim, the AOJ did not address the ratings for either his acquired psychiatric disorder or TBI residuals. Rather, the AOJ issued a Higher-Level Review rating decision in November 2020, in which it noted that it was specifically being issued in response to the Veteran's July 2020 request for Higher-Level Review.

The November 2020 rating decision, however, while addressing the Veteran's rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, did not address the rating for residuals of TBI, either singly or in combination with his rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. While the November 2020 rating decision continued the rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder at 50 percent, it also found that an effective date of March 2, 2018, was warranted for the 50 percent rating (i.e., that a 50 percent rating was warranted from the date of the award of service connection). In January 2021, the Veteran submitted the current supplemental claim for an increased rating (a VA Form 20-0995) for an acquired psychiatric disorder. While he did not include a claim for an increased rating for TBI residuals in that application, the AOJ nevertheless addressed that issue in the May 2021 rating decision on appeal separately from the rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder. 

In light of the foregoing, with respect to the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, the Board finds that he has continuously pursued his claim since the submission of his November 2018 application for an increased rating. The AOJ issued a rating decision in response to that application in February 2019, and in response the Veteran submitted a request for Higher-Level Review of that rating decision in July 2020. While his July 2020 request was not submitted within a year of the issuance of the February 2019 rating decision, the AOJ accepted it as timely (likely due to COVID-related delays) and issued a Higher-Level Review rating decision in November 2020. Thereafter, in January 2021, the Veteran submitted the current supplemental claim for an increased rating. 

Because the Veteran is deemed to have timely and properly filed an appropriate review option as to the February 2019 and November 2020 rating decisions, the Board finds that he has continuously pursued his claim for a higher rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder since the submission of his November 2018 application for increase. In addition, because the claim is a non-initial increased rating claim, the period on appeal also includes the one-year look back period from the date of the claim. However, in the instant case, service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder has been established only as of March 2, 2018 (less than a year prior to when he filed his November 2018 application for an increased rating).

The Board also acknowledges that both the Veteran and the AOJ have indicated that the Veteran is seeking an "earlier effective date" for the award of his 50 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. However, the Board understands that the benefit being sought is in effect a rating in excess of 50 percent over the course of the entire appeal period. In that regard, the Veteran has expressly indicated that he is seeking a 70 percent rating as of March 2, 2018, and no earlier.

With respect to TBI residuals, the Board acknowledges that the procedural history is more complex given that the disability has sometimes been rated singly, and sometimes in combination with the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder. It can be stated with certainty, however, that the Veteran submitted a new application for an increased rating for TBI residuals in November 2018, that in a January 2019 rating decision, the AOJ granted a separate, noncompensable rating, and that in December 2019, the Veteran submitted a new claim for an increased rating for TBI residuals. Thereafter, in March 2020, the AOJ again combined the rating for TBI residuals with the rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. In August 2020, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for an increased rating for residuals of TBI alone, though it appears that the AOJ did not take action on that claim. Rather, in the May 2021 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ reconsidered the rating as part of the Veteran's January 2021 supplemental claim for an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. In this regard, the Board resolves any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that because his claim as to an acquired psychiatric disorder has at times been considered along with his claim for an increased rating for TBI residuals, the claims should be fully considered both together and separately, so as to afford the Veteran the best possible outcome on the claim(s). As such, the Board finds that the period on appeal as to the Veteran's TBI residuals also runs from March 2, 2018 (i.e., the effective date of the award for service connection an acquired psychiatric disorder with TBI residuals). As noted, the evidence as to these two disabilities is intertwined, and the Board will therefore address the claims together. 

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder has been evaluated under DC 9432 for unspecified bipolar and related disorder. Psychiatric disabilities other than eating disorders are evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted if the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks (more than once a week); difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted if the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech that is intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The highest available rating, 100 percent, is warranted if the disorder is manifested by total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting oneself or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, one's own occupation, or one's own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411; see also Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002) (indicating that the Secretary's use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms, particular to each Veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation).

The Veteran's residuals of TBI are rated under DC 8045, which provides for an evaluation based on three main areas of dysfunction that may result from TBI and have profound effects on functioning: (1) cognitive, which is common in varying degrees after a TBI; (2) emotional/behavioral; and (3) physical. Each of those areas of dysfunction may require evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045. 

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain. Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive. Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others. In an individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day. Cognitive impairment is evaluated under the table entitled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of a TBI or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction. Subjective symptoms that are residuals of a TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, are evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." However, any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, should be evaluated separately even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

Emotional/behavioral dysfunction is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, the schedule of ratings for mental disorders, when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder. When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, emotional/behavioral symptoms are evaluated under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

Physical (including neurological) dysfunction is evaluated based on the following list, under an appropriate diagnostic code: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of a TBI. For residuals not listed that are reported on an examination, the residual is to be evaluated under the most appropriate diagnostic code. Each condition is evaluated separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation, and combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 for each separately rated condition. The rating assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the rating for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability ratings.

Cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms are evaluated using the table entitled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified," which contains 10 important facets of a TBI related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms. That table provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a fifth level, the highest level of impairment, labeled total. However, not every facet has every level of severity. The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than total, because any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling. A 100 percent rating is assigned if total is the level of evaluation for one or more facets. If no facet is evaluated as total, the overall percentage rating is based on the level of the highest facet. If the highest is 0, then a 0 percent rating is assigned. If the highest is 1, then a 10 percent rating is assigned. If the highest is 2, then a 40 percent rating is assigned. If the highest is 3, then a 70 percent rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

There may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the table entitled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another diagnostic code. In such cases, more than one evaluation based on the same manifestations is not to be assigned. If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated, a single evaluation is assigned under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions. However, if the manifestations are clearly separable, a separate evaluation is assigned for each condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045, Note (1).

Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present in order to assign a particular evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045, Note (2).

Instrumental activities of daily living refer to activities other than self-care that are needed for independent living, such as meal preparation, doing housework and other chores, shopping, traveling, doing laundry, being responsible for one's own medications, and using a telephone. Those activities are distinguished from activities of daily living, which refers to basic self-care and includes bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out of bed or a chair, and using the toilet. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045, Note (3).

The terms mild, moderate, and severe TBI, which may appear in medical records, refer to a classification of TBI made at, or close to, the time of injury rather than to the current level of functioning. That classification does not affect the rating assigned under DC 8045. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045, Note (4).

The table entitled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" provides the following evaluations:

Impairment of memory, attention, concentration, and executive functions are assigned numerical designations of 0 for no complaints of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions; 1 for a complaint of mild loss of memory (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing; 2 for objective evidence on testing of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment; 3 for objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in moderate functional impairment; and total for objective evidence on testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in severe functional impairment.

Impairment of judgment is assigned numerical designations of 0 for normal; 1 for mildly impaired judgment for complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision; 2 for moderately impaired judgment, for complex or unfamiliar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, although has little difficulty with simple decisions; 3 for moderately severely impaired judgment, for even routine and familiar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision; and total for severely impaired judgment, for even routine and familiar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, for example, unable to determine appropriate clothing for current weather conditions or judge when to avoid dangerous situations or activities.

Impairment of social interaction is assigned numerical designations of 0 for social interaction is routinely appropriate; 1 for social interaction is occasionally inappropriate; 2 for social interaction is frequently inappropriate; and 3 for social interaction is inappropriate most or all of the time.

Impairment of orientation is assigned numerical designations of 0 for always oriented to person, time, place, and situation; 1 for occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation; 2 for occasionally disoriented to two of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation or often disoriented to one aspect of orientation; 3 for often disoriented to two or more of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation; and total for consistently disoriented to two or more of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation.

Impairment of motor activity (with intact motor and sensory system) is assigned numerical designations of 0 for motor activity normal; 1 for motor activity normal most of the time, but mildly slowed at times due to apraxia (inability to perform previously learned motor activities, despite normal motor function); 2 for motor activity mildly decreased or with moderate slowing due to apraxia; 3 for motor activity moderately decreased due to apraxia; and total for motor activity severely decreased due to apraxia.

Impairment of visual spatial orientation is assigned numerical designations of 1 for mildly impaired, occasionally gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps or following directions, is able to use assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system); 2 for moderately impaired, usually gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps, following directions, and judging distance, has difficulty using assistive devices such as GPS; 3 for moderately severely impaired, gets lost even in familiar surroundings, unable to use assistive devices such as GPS; and total for severely impaired, may be unable to touch or name own body parts when asked by the examiner, identify the relative position in space of two different objects, or find the way from one room to another in a familiar environment.

Subjective symptoms are assigned numerical designations of 0 for subjective symptoms that do not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships, examples are mild or occasional headaches, mild anxiety; 1 for three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships, examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, hypersensitivity to light; and 2 for three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships, examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: marked fatigability, blurred or double vision, headaches requiring rest periods during most days.

Neurobehavioral effects are assigned numerical designations of 0 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that do not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction, examples of neurobehavioral effects are: Irritability, impulsivity, unpredictability, lack of motivation, verbal aggression, physical aggression, belligerence, apathy, lack of empathy, moodiness, lack of cooperation, inflexibility, and impaired awareness of disability, any of these effects may range from slight to severe, although verbal and physical aggression are likely to have a more serious impact on workplace interaction and social interaction than some of the other effects; 1 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them; 2 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them; and 3 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that interfere with or preclude workplace interaction, social interaction, or both on most days or that occasionally require supervision for safety of self or others.

Impairment of communication is assigned numerical designations of 0 for able to communicate by spoken and written language (expressive communication), and to comprehend spoken and written language; 1 for comprehension or expression, or both, of either spoken language or written language is only occasionally impaired, can communicate complex ideas; 2 for inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time, can generally communicate complex ideas; 3 for inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, at least half of the time but not all of the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, at least half of the time but not all of the time, may rely on gestures or other alternative modes of communication, able to communicate basic needs; and total for complete inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, unable to communicate basic needs.

Impairment of consciousness is assigned a designation of total for persistently altered state of consciousness, such as vegetative state, minimally responsive state, coma. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

The Board is precluded from differentiating between symptomatology attributed to a non-service-connected disability and a service-connected disability in the absence of medical evidence which does so. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998), citing Mitchem v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 136, 140 (1996).

Following review of the evidence, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating, and no higher, is warranted for his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder from March 2, 2018. The Board finds further that a 10 percent rating, and no higher, is warranted for his TBI residuals from that same date. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim for TBI residuals in April 2018. The examiner indicated that he had a complaint of mild memory loss, subjective symptoms that did not interfere with work, family, or other close relationships, and one or more neurobehavioral effects that did not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction. All other facets were indicated to be normal, and the examiner opined that there were no other residuals that were attributable to a TBI. In a June 2018 VA treatment record, the Veteran was noted to be stable and doing well, with no suicidal or homicidal ideation. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination as to his acquired psychiatric disorder in August 2018. The provider indicated that it was not possible to differentiate between symptoms attributable to TBI residuals as opposed to his mental health disorder. She indicated that he had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks. She noted that the Veteran was married and lived with his wife at the time, and that they had two adult children. She noted further that the Veteran was unemployed, and that he last worked in November 2017. Symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and impaired abstract thinking. On mental status examination, the Veteran was pleasant and intermittently maintained interest, his speech often rambled and at times he seemed absent-minded, and the examiner noted that other symptoms included impaired concentration, deficits in immediate retention and recall, insecurity, inferiority, and guilt. 

In November 2018, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination as to his acquired psychiatric disorder. The examiner indicated that it was possible to differentiate between the symptoms of his TBI residuals and mental health disorder, noting that headaches were the only symptom of TBI residuals. She indicated that his acquired psychiatric disorder caused occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of an inability to perform occupational tasks. She noted that the Veteran lived with his wife of 23 years and a brother, and that while his wife did most of the housework, he was able to shop for groceries and prepare simple meals. He was also noted to care for his lawn and to shovel snow in winter. He reported that he had no friends or hobbies, but that he was able to drive a car, preferred to be alone, and was frequently fatigued. He denied suicidal ideation, stating that he had come too far and that it was not his life to take. Symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, disturbance of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work and a work-like setting. Mental status examination was largely normal, with fair eye contact and grooming noted. Thought content was without delusions, and he denied audio and visual hallucinations. 

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination as to TBI residuals in November 2018. The examiner noted that he had subjective symptoms that did not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships. He also had one or more neurobehavioral effects that did not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction. All other facts were indicated to be normal. The examiner also stated that as to neurobehavioral effects, they were better explained by the Veteran's longstanding mental disorder rather than TBI. The examiner also indicated that residuals included headaches, including migraine headaches. 

The Veteran was afforded a new VA examination as to TBI residuals in January 2020. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had subjective symptoms that did not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships, but that all other facets were normal. The examiner also indicated that residuals included headaches, including migraine headaches. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination as to his acquired psychiatric disorder in March 2020. The examiner indicated that it was possible to differentiate between symptoms of his TBI residuals and mental health disorder, stating that TBI residuals included cognition issues. She indicated that his acquired psychiatric disorder caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability, but added that symptoms between TBI residuals and an acquired psychiatric disorder appeared to be inseparable. Symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and impaired abstract thinking. On mental status examination, the Veteran was noted to have some difficulty recalling digits forward and backward. 

In an August 2020 submission, the Veteran stated that he got angry a lot, that he was in the process of a divorce, and that he had no friends. He stated that the only people he could deal with were his daughters and grandchildren, and even then, only for small amounts of time. He added that he had emotional instability and that he could go three to five days without showering or changing his clothing. He stated that he had had thoughts of suicide, more so early on when he had no answers, and that he still had thoughts of suicide and of wanting to harm others, but that he did his best not to act on those things. He stated further that he had a hard time being able to concentrate and focus, that he got distracted easily, and that he had memory problems and a lot of nightmares. He added that all of the symptoms he had described had been present since service and that they were only getting worse. 

In a January 2021 submission, the Veteran stated that he got very angry and had a lot of problems with emotional instability and depression. He stated that he cried every day for no reason, and that he had a hard time concentrating and focusing, with daily nightmares. He added that he sometimes could hear someone calling his name and that there is not anyone there, and that that happened several times a month. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination as to his acquired psychiatric disorder in May 2021. The examiner indicated that the Veteran was able to differentiate between symptoms attributable to his TBI residuals and acquired psychiatric disorder, indicating that his cognition issues were attributable to TBI residuals. He indicated that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, but that he was not able to differentiate symptom attribution for the level of impairment. The examiner noted that the Veteran was responsible for maintaining his residence, and that he enjoyed close relationships with both daughters and four granddaughters, and that he had initiated a divorce a year prior after having been married for 25 years. Symptoms included chronic sleep impairment, impaired abstract thinking, and disturbances of motivation and mood. On mental status examination, thought content was unremarkable for suicidal ideation and homicidal ideation, as well as for audio and/or visual hallucinations. 

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination as to TBI residuals in May 2021. The examiner indicated that there had been no cognition issues since his last VA examination, but noted that the Veteran had subjective symptoms that did not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships. All other facets were indicated to be normal, and the examiner indicated that residuals included headaches and a mental disorder. 

Following review of the evidence, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, and no higher, is warranted for the entire period on appeal. The November 2018 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms at that time included difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work and a work-like setting, which is consistent with a 70 percent rating. In his August 2020 submission, the Veteran described both past and present suicidal ideation, a symptom which is also consistent with a 70 percent rating. Importantly, he stated that he had been experiencing suicidal ideation since service. The Board is persuaded that evidence as to these symptoms, along with the others noted in the record, more nearly approximates the criteria for a 70 percent rating for the acquired psychiatric disorder for the entire period on appeal. The Board acknowledges that each of the VA examiners of record indicated that the Veteran had a level of social and occupational impairment that did not meet the criteria for a 70 percent rating. However, only the May 2021 VA examiner had the opportunity to review the Veteran's August 2020 and January 2021 submissions in which he described his psychiatric symptoms in more detail. Even then, it does not appear that the May 2021 VA examiner fully considered the Veteran's submissions in assessing the severity of his acquired psychiatric disorder. Taken as a whole, the Board is persuaded that the criteria for a 70 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met from March 2, 2018. 

The Board finds further that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of the next highest, 100 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. None of the evidence suggests that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder ever caused total occupational and social impairment, which is required for a 100 percent rating. Simply put, there is no evidence that the Veteran ever has had gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. None of the VA examinations of record suggest such a level of impairment, or indeed any of the sample symptoms listed under the criteria for a 100 percent rating.

While acknowledging that the Veteran has described significant social impairment during the appeal period (i.e., in his August 2020 submission he stated he was in the process of a divorce and had no friends), the evidence does not show total social impairment. Indeed, in his August 2020 submission he stated that he could deal with his daughters and grandchildren, albeit only for small amounts of time. During the May 2021 VA examination, he reported that he enjoyed close relationships with both of his daughters and four granddaughters. During the earlier part of the appeal period, the evidence demonstrates that his social impairment was even less severely affected by his acquired psychiatric disorder. 

The Board also acknowledges that in his August 2020 submission, the Veteran stated that he could go three to five days without showering or changing his clothes, and that in his January 2021 submission, he stated that he sometimes could hear someone calling his name but that no one was there. While those reports clearly contemplate intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living in terms of personal hygiene, and potential audio hallucinations, the Board finds that the reports of such symptoms appear to be isolated in nature.

Importantly, none of the objective mental status examinations of record indicate that the Veteran has had any problems with hygiene or hallucinations, and in fact indicate the opposite. At the November 2018 VA examination, he reported that he was able to shop for groceries, prepare simple meals, care for his lawn, and shovel snow in winter. Mental status examination at that time showed fair grooming and the Veteran expressly denied having audio hallucinations. Thought content was also unremarkable for audio hallucinations at the time of the May 2021 VA examination. Still further, at each of the TBI VA examinations, examiners noted that the Veteran had subjective symptoms that did not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships. Simply put, the evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran has had a chronic intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, or that he has had persistent hallucinations at any time during the appeal period. More importantly, the evidence does not suggest, and the Veteran does not otherwise contend, that his acquired psychiatric disorder causes total occupational and social impairment. In this regard, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent for any portion of the appeal period is not warranted. 

Turning next to the matter of the Veteran's entitlement to a compensable rating for TBI residuals, as noted, the Board acknowledges that there is a conflict in the evidence as to whether symptoms of TBI residuals and an acquired psychiatric disorder can be clearly differentiated. The August 2018 VA examiner found that it was not possible to differentiate between symptoms attributable to each disability. The November 2018 VA examiner indicated that it was possible to differentiate between them, finding that the only residuals of a TBI were headaches. The March 2020 VA examiner offered a somewhat conflicting opinion on the matter, stating that it was possible to differentiate between symptoms between the two disabilities, but adding later that symptoms between TBI residuals and an acquired psychiatric disorder appeared to be inseparable. The May 2021 VA examiner also offered a somewhat conflicting opinion on the matter, stating that he was able to differentiate between symptoms attributable to TBI residuals and an acquired psychiatric disorder, but that he was not able to differentiate symptom attribution for the level of impairment in terms of occupational and social functioning.

As noted, when rating residuals of TBI, there may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the table entitled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another diagnostic code. In such cases, more than one evaluation based on the same manifestations is not to be assigned. If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated, a single evaluation is assigned under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions. However, if the manifestations are clearly separable, a separate evaluation is assigned for each condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045, Note (1).

In the present case, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that a 10 percent rating, and no higher, is warranted for residuals of TBI from March 2, 2018. Given the conflict in the evidence as to the differentiation of symptoms, and to avoid further delay in the adjudication of this case, the Board resolves the conflict in the evidence in the Veteran's favor. Three of the VA examiners of record found, at least to some degree, that symptoms between residuals of TBI and an acquired psychiatric disorder could be differentiated, a finding expressly adopted by the AOJ during the period on appeal, given that the AOJ, at least at times, rated the two disabilities separately. 

In reviewing the VA TBI examinations of record, the Board notes that only the first examination, in April 2018, demonstrates that the Veteran had symptoms consistent with a 10 percent rating. In that examination, the examiner found that the Veteran had a complaint of mild memory loss, which indicated a Level 1 impairment on the table of facets, and therefore corresponds to a 10 percent rating per the pertinent DC. The April 2018 VA examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had any other symptoms that rose to a Level 1 impairment (or any other level) in any of the other facets as to TBI. The November 2018, January 2020, and May 2021 VA examinations do not suggest that the Veteran has any compensable symptoms in any of the table of facets as to TBI. Indeed, those VA examiners largely indicated that his TBI residuals included his acquired psychiatric disorder and/or his migraine headaches, for which he is being separately compensated. The Board also notes that treatment records during the period on appeal do not contain evidence that addresses the relevant rating criteria as to TBI residuals.

In conclusion, the only evidence of record which supports even a 10 percent rating is the April 2018 VA examination regarding a complaint of mild memory loss. While acknowledging that the April 2018 VA examiner also indicated that symptoms between TBI residuals and an acquired psychiatric disorder could not be differentiated, the Board emphasizes that given the somewhat complicated procedural history of the two disabilities being rated at times in combination and at other times separately, it has resolved doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that a 10 percent rating, and no higher, for residuals of TBI is warranted from March 2, 2018. As noted, none of the evidence of record supports a higher rating, and in this regard, the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent for any portion of the appeal period. 

In sum, the Board finds that the criteria for a 70 percent rating, and no higher, for an acquired psychiatric disorder, and the criteria for a 10 percent rating, and no higher, for TBI residuals, have been met from March 2, 2018. To that extent, the appeal of these issues is granted. 

4. Entitlement to an effective date prior to July 24, 2019, for the award of a TDIU

In the May 2021 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted a TDIU, effective July 24, 2019. The rating decision shows that the AOJ assigned an effective date of July 24, 2019, because that was the date on which the Veteran first met the schedular criteria for an award of a TDIU. On appeal, the Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted. Specifically, in a June 2021 submission, his representative noted that if the Board granted a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder as of March 2, 2018, then the Veteran would be eligible for, and should be awarded, a TDIU on a schedular basis as of that same date.

A TDIU is warranted where the evidence of record shows that a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, consistent with his education and occupational experience, as a result of service-connected disability, without regard to advancing age. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a). Provided, however, that if there is only one such disability, the disability must be rated at 60 percent or more, and that if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

For purposes of assigning an effective date, an award of TDIU is an award of increased disability compensation. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 367, 369 (1991). In the case of a claim for an increased rating, if an increase in disability occurred during the one-year period prior to the receipt of a claim for increase, the increase is effective as of the date the increase became "factually ascertainable." If the increase in disability occurred more than one year prior to the claim, the increase in compensation is effective from the date of claim. If the increase in disability occurred after the date of claim, the effective date of the increased rating is the date of the increase in disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125 (1997); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).

Therefore, in determining an effective date for an award of a TDIU, VA must make two essential determinations. It must determine (1) when a claim for TDIU was received, and (2) when a factually ascertainable increase in disability occurred so as to warrant entitlement to TDIU. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400(o)(2).

When taking into account the awards granted herein, the Board notes that from March 2, 2018, the Veteran is service connected for an acquired psychiatric disorder with a 70 percent rating, residuals of TBI with a 10 percent rating, and a scar of the back of head with a 0 percent rating. His combined rating as of March 2, 2018, is 70 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  He is thus eligible for consideration of a TDIU on a schedular basis as of that date.

For informational purposes, the Board notes that service connection for migraine headaches was granted with a 0 percent rating, effective November 3, 2018. When taking into account the 50 percent rating for migraine headaches granted herein, effective December 10, 2018, his combined rating as of that date is 90 percent, which is, of course, still less than total.

As noted, the present appeal arises from a May 2021 rating decision. However, the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim for an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder since November 2018, when he filed a new claim for increase. Although he did not thereafter file a formal claim for a TDIU until August 2020, pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), his claim for a TDIU can be considered part and parcel of, and relates back to, his pending claim for a higher rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. As noted, the date of claim regarding the acquired psychiatric disorder, and therefore by extension the claim for a TDIU, is March 2, 2018. Also as noted, the Veteran met the requirements for consideration of a TDIU on a schedular basis as of that date. The primary question for the Board, then, is when, on or after May 2, 2018, did the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, either singly or in combination, prevent him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation.

In his August 2020 application for a TDIU, the Veteran indicated that his acquired psychiatric disorder, TBI residuals, and migraine headaches combined to prevent him from securing or following a substantial gainful occupation. He stated further that he last worked full time in 1998, and that he last worked part time in 2017. The Veteran also indicated that he had completed 1 year of college, but that he had to drop out due to his acquired psychiatric disorder and migraines. 

In the May 2021 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran met the criteria for a TDIU based on a combination of his service-connected disabilities. The AOJ noted that he reported significant limitations in relation to his migraine headaches and his acquired psychiatric disorder, specifically noting that each of those disabilities contributed to his unemployability. 

The AOJ's findings in the May 2021 rating decision demonstrate that VA has found that the Veteran is unable to follow or secure a substantially gainful occupation by reason of the combined effect of his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder and migraine headaches. On that basis, and after considering the relevant evidence and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board is satisfied that the evidence supports an award of a TDIU from November 3, 2018, which is the date the Veteran was first service connected for migraine headaches. He was eligible for a schedular award as of that date, and the evidence reasonably demonstrates that he was unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment due a combination of his acquired psychiatric disorder and migraine headaches as of that date.

The Board further finds, however, that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of an effective date prior to November 3, 2018, for the award of a TDIU. As noted, prior to that date, the Veteran's only service-connected disabilities were an acquired psychiatric disorder, TBI residuals, and a scar. Based on review of the evidence as outlined above, in previous portions of this decision, the Board finds that the evidence does not support that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder and/or TBI residuals, either singly or in combination, prevented him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation at any time during the period on appeal prior to November 3, 2018. The evidence also does not support, and the Veteran has not alleged, that his service-connected scar has impacted his ability to work in any way. 

In his August 2020 application for a TDIU, the Veteran expressly stated that his acquired psychiatric disorder, TBI residuals, and migraine headaches prevented him from securing or following a substantial gainful occupation. He also stated that he dropped out of school due to his acquired psychiatric disorder and migraines (i.e., in combination). In an August 2020 submission, he described in great detail how his headaches affected him while he was still working. That submission constitutes strong evidence that his headaches greatly impacted his ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation. Still further, none of the VA examinations of record indicate that he was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation solely as a result of his acquired psychiatric disorder or TBI residuals, either singly or in combination. As outlined previously, each of the VA mental disorders examiners indicated that the Veteran's level of occupational impairment was well below total, and none of the VA TBI examiners indicated that the Veteran had any compensable symptoms of TBI aside from a complaint of mild memory loss.

The final determination with respect to a veteran's entitlement to a TDIU is an adjudicatory, and not a medical, function. Here, the totality of the evidence, to include the available medical evidence, is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran was rendered incapable of securing or following a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected disabilities prior to November 3, 2018.

In arriving that this conclusion, the Board is cognizant of the Veteran's representative's argument as forwarded in a June 2021 submission to the effect that because the Veteran is eligible for consideration of a TDIU on a schedular basis as of March 2, 2018, the Board should also grant a TDIU effective as of that date. In that regard, the Board emphasizes that schedular eligibility is not the only criterion which must be met to warrant a TDIU. In addition, the award requires evidence showing that service-connected disabilities, either singly or in combination, prevent a claimant from securing or following a substantial gainful occupation. Here, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's disabilities rendered him incapable of securing or following a substantially gainful occupation prior to November 3, 2018.

5. Entitlement to an effective date prior to July 24, 2019, for the award of basic eligibility to DEA benefits

Basic eligibility for DEA arises if a veteran is discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable and has a permanent total service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 3501; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807.

In the May 2021 rating decision, the AOJ assigned an effective date of July 24, 2019, for the award of DEA. On appeal, the Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted. Specifically, in a June 2021 submission, he contended that if the Board granted a 70 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder as of March 2, 2018, then the Veteran would be eligible for a TDIU as of that date, and that his award of a TDIU and DEA benefits should be made effective as of that date.

As a result of the Board's decision, above, finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities support the assignment of a TDIU from November 3, 2018, the earliest date for a permanent total service-connected disability rating is also November 3, 2018. Therefore, the Board finds that basic eligibility to DEA benefits has been established, effective November 3, 2018. To that extent, the appeal of this issue is granted. 

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Oldroyd, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.