Citation Nr: A25033600
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240124-411506
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The claim for a rating higher than 70 percent for generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder is denied.

The claim for a rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity varicose veins is denied.

The claim for a rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity varicose veins is denied.

REMANDED

The claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for a right ankle fracture with osteoarthritis, to include restoration of a 30 percent rating from January 23, 2023, is remanded.

The claim for a higher rating for painful right ankle scars, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to January 23, 2023 and 10 percent disabling thereafter, is remanded. 

The claim for a higher rating for left knee instability, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to January 23, 2023 and 10 percent disabling thereafter, is remanded. 

The claim for a rating higher than 10 percent for a left knee meniscal tear with osteoarthritis is remanded.

The claim for special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance of another person is remanded. 

The claim for SMC based on housebound status is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1. The Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder most nearly approximates deficiencies in most areas of work, school, family relationships, thinking, judgment, and mood without total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran's right lower extremity varicose veins manifest varicose and spider veins that most nearly approximate intermittent nonpitting edema with aching and fatigue after prolonged standing relieved by elevation and compression hosiery. 

3. The Veteran's left lower extremity varicose veins manifest varicose and spider veins that most nearly approximate intermittent nonpitting edema with aching and fatigue after prolonged standing relieved by elevation and compression hosiery. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating higher than 70 percent for generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

2. The criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity varicose veins are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.10, 4.104, Diagnostic Codes 7120, 7121.

3. The criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity varicose veins are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.10, 4.104, Diagnostic Codes 7120, 7121.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from July 1978 to July 1981. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2023, March 2023, and November 2023 rating decisions, and a January 2024 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) automatically applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400 (a)(1). Here, the decisions on appeal were issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in response to the Veteran's claims for increased ratings and SMC. The February 2023, March 2023, November 2023, and January 2024 decisions constitute initial decisions, and the AMA applies.

This case has a complex procedural history due, in part, to the number of claims filed and decisions issued by VA. The Board finds that a chronological review of the procedural history is necessary to clarify the claims on appeal, as well as the Board's jurisdiction.

On May 3, 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability). This claim was interpreted by the AOJ to include a request for higher ratings for the Veteran's service connected right ankle and left knee disabilities. The AOJ issued a September 2022 rating decision awarding service connection for TDIU from July 26, 2021, continuing a 10 percent evaluation for a left knee meniscal tear, and continuing a noncompensable evaluation for postoperative right ankle scars. The September 2022 rating decision also reduced the disability evaluations assigned the Veteran's right ankle fracture, right ankle painful scars, and left knee instability effective May 26, 2022. Notice of the rating decision was provided to the Veteran on September 26, 2022. 

The Veteran responded to the September 2022 rating decision with a VA Form 20-0996 (Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR)) on September 27, 2022. He disagreed with the assigned effective date for TDIU, the reductions of the ratings assigned his right ankle, scars, and left knee, and included an inferred claim for SMC. The AOJ issued a HLR decision in October 2022 awarding TDIU from March 16, 2021, and continuing the ratings assigned the Veteran's right ankle fracture, painful right ankle scars, and left knee instability. The October 2022 HLR decision did not address the Veteran's contentions regarding SMC.

On November 28, 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ (Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits) formally requesting SMC based on the need for aid and attendance and for housebound status. These claims were denied in a December 2022 rating decision with notice provided to the Veteran on January 4, 2023. 

The Veteran then filed a VA Form 20-0995 (Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim) on January 6, 2023, disagreeing with the denial of SMC in the December 2022 rating decision, as well as the rating reductions in the September 2022 rating decision and the denial of higher ratings in the October 2022 HLR decision. 

The AOJ responded to the January 2023 supplemental claim with a February 2023 rating decision further decreasing the evaluation assigned to the Veteran's right ankle fracture from 30 percent to 20 percent effective January 23, 2023. The AOJ also assigned increased  ratings of 10 percent for the Veteran's left knee instability and painful right ankle scars, both effective January 23, 2023, and continued the current 10 percent evaluation for a left knee meniscal tear and noncompensable rating for postoperative right ankle scars. The claim for SMC was denied. Notice of the rating decision was provided to the Veteran on February 7, 2023. 

On February 10, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ claiming higher ratings for right and left varicose veins. A March 2023 rating decision increased the disability evaluations assigned to the varicose veins of each lower extremity to 10 percent, effective February 10, 2023. Notice of the rating decision was mailed to the Veteran on March 23, 2023. 

On November 1, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 requesting higher ratings for his right ankle fracture and left knee disabilities, as well as SMC. Notably, the November 2023 VA Form 20-0095 was limited to claims for increased ratings and did not object to the reduction of any disability evaluations. 

In response, the AOJ issued a November 2023 rating decision continuing the ratings assigned the Veteran's disabilities-a 20 percent evaluation for a right ankle fracture, a 10 percent evaluation for left knee instability, and a 10 percent evaluation for a left knee meniscus tear. SMC based on both aid and attendance and housebound was also denied. Notice of the rating decision was mailed on December 4, 2023. 

Three days later, on December 7, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ claiming a higher rating for his service connected generalized anxiety disorder with major depressive disorder. The current 70 percent evaluation was continued in a January 2024 rating decision. The Veteran responded with a VA Form 20-006 request for HLR on January 11, 2024 disagreeing with the denial of a higher rating for his psychiatric disorder, as well as requesting SMC based on housebound status. A January 2024 HLR decision again denied a rating higher than 70 percent for the Veteran's anxiety disorder with depression and denied SMC. Notice was mailed to the Veteran on January 22, 2024.

On January 24, 2024, the Veteran filed his VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal). The VA Form 10182 disagreed with multiple adjudications in multiple rating decisions. First, and most recent, the Veteran disagreed with the denial of a rating higher than 70 percent for anxiety with depression and housebound SMC in the January 2024 HLR. The Veteran also disagreed with the denial of higher ratings for his left knee disabilities and right ankle fracture, as well as the denial of SMC for aid and attendance in the November 2023 rating decision. The January 2024 VA Form 10182 is also timely with respect to the denial of increased evaluations for right and left varicose veins in the March 2023 rating decision. The  Veteran also disagreed with the February 2023 rating decision to the extent it reduced the rating assigned the right ankle fracture from 30 to 20 percent disabling effective January 23, 2023 and denied a rating higher than 10 percent for painful right ankle scars. 

The Veteran elected to place this appeal on the Direct Review docket. As a valid and timely VA Form 10182 was received, the appeal is properly before the Board with respect to the specific claims identified above.  The VA Form 10182 also expressed disagreement with the reduction of the disability evaluations assigned the Veteran's right ankle fracture, painful right ankle scars, and left knee instability in the September 2022 rating decision. Unfortunately, the January 24, 2024 VA Form 10182 was received more than a year after notice of the September 2022 rating decision was mailed to the Veteran and is therefore not timely with respect to these rating reductions. As such, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review these claims.

As noted above, the Veteran elected to place this appeal on the Direct Review docket on the January 2024 VA Form 10182. Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 rating decision (right ankle rating reduction and increased rating for painful right ankle scars), the March 2023 rating decision (increased ratings for right and left varicose veins), the November 2023 rating decision (increased ratings for the right ankle fracture, left knee instability and meniscal tear, and SMC based on aid and attendance), and the January 2024 rating decision (increased rating for anxiety with depression and SMC based on housebound status). In other words, the Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the AOJ issued the February 2023 rating decision, March 2023 rating decision, November 2023 rating decision, and January 2024 rating decision with respect to the specific claims addressed by each decision.

As a final procedural matter, the Veteran's August 2024 VA Form 10182 includes an attached statement from the Veteran's representative. Typically, this would necessitate clarification of the Veteran's document selection, as the Direct Review docket does not allow the Board to consider any evidence added to the record after the issuance of the September 2023 decision. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023). However, the representative's August 2024 statement constitutes argument (as opposed to evidence), and a docket clarification is not necessary. Furthermore, in the February 2, 2024 docketing letter issued by the Board, the Veteran and his representative were specifically notified that the statement accompanying the VA Form 10182 could not be considered by the Board. They were also informed they could request to switch dockets to allow for the consideration of additional evidence by the Board. No reply to this letter was received. The Board will therefore proceed with a decision in this case, to include consideration of the argument submitted along with the VA Form 10182.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. Where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different evaluations at any point during the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings is appropriate. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to a rating higher than 70 percent for generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder characterized as an unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress was granted in a June 2021 rating decision. An initial 50 percent evaluation was assigned effective March 16, 2021. Three months later, in a September 2021 rating decision, the RO awarded an increased 70 percent evaluation for the disability effective July 26, 2021 and recharacterized the service connected disability to generalized anxiety disorder with major depressive disorder.

The January 2024 HLR decision on appeal continued the current 70 percent evaluation for the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder with major depressive disorder based on the evidence of record at the time of the January 8, 2024 rating decision. The Veteran contends that a higher total (100 percent) schedular rating is warranted for the disability following the death of his spouse in 2023 which resulted in increased depression and social withdrawal. 

As a preliminary matter, the Veteran's representative argued that a January 2024 VA examination is inadequate as it did not consider all the Veteran's mental health symptomatology. Specifically, on the January 11, 2024 VA Form 20-0996, the Veteran's representative alleged that the January 4, 2024 VA examination was not adequate as the examiner did not consider the Veteran's reports that the recent loss of his spouse affected his "ability to engage socially" and had "all but extinguished" his purpose in living. Review of the January 2004 VA examination report shows that the VA examiner documented the passing of the Veteran's spouse in May 2023, in the "Other Symptoms" section of the report, also recorded the Veteran's grief, chronic worry, and anger as well. 

The examination report also noted that the Veteran's social connections were limited to his immediate family, and he experienced "difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships." Finally, the January 2004 VA examiner documented the Veteran's passive suicidal ideations, to include his thoughts of self-harm, as well as the Veteran's reports that he had "no current or [history of] intentions of doing so." Based on the above, the Board finds that the January 2024 VA psychiatric examination is adequate, and fully addresses both the Veteran's reports of social withdrawal and suicidal ideations following the death of his spouse. The Board will therefore proceed with a decision addressing the appropriate rating for the service connection anxiety and depressive disorders.

The Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder with major depressive disorder is currently rated as 70 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 9400 in accordance with the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Under the general rating formula, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted if the veteran exhibits: occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine actives; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

A maximum 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id. 

The symptoms listed in the rating formula are examples and are not an exhaustive list. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002) (finding that "any suggestion that the Board was required... to find the presence of all, most, or even some of the enumerated symptoms is unsupported by a reading of the plain language of the regulation"). However, "a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). "The regulation's plain language highlights its symptom-driven nature" and "symptomatology should be... the primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Id.

As such, consideration is given to the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remission, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment to the extent specified in the rating criteria, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a).

The Board finds that the Veteran's current 70 percent evaluation for his anxiety and depressive disorders is appropriate, and a higher rating is not warranted at any time during the relevant rating period. VA treatment records dated during the relevant period, as well as the report of the January 2024 VA examination, establish the Veteran's condition manifests symptoms including depression, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, suicidal ideation, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective relationships. These symptoms are all contemplated by the current 70 percent evaluation. The January 2024 VA examiner also specifically found that the Veteran's impairment due to his anxiety and depressive disorders most nearly approximates deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. This level of impairment is also associated with the current 70 percent evaluation.

The evidence of record also establishes that the Veteran does not manifest total occupational and social impairment. The Veteran clearly experiences significant occupational impairment due to his anxiety and depressive disorders; as noted above, the record establishes memory impairments, as well as difficulty establishing and maintaining relationships. Additionally, the January 2024 VA examiner specifically found that the Veteran's difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances affected his ability to function in a work-like setting. However, the Board cannot conclude that the Veteran has total impairment to occupational functioning due to his mental health condition. Notably, the examiner did not conclude the Veteran's experiences an "inability" to establish work relationships (instead characterizing the Veteran's impairment as "difficulty"), and also specifically found that the Veteran's condition was consistent with impairment in most areas including work, but not total impairment. As such, the Board cannot conclude that the Veteran's anxiety and depressive disorders result in total occupational impairment.

Similarly, the Board finds that the Veteran's condition is not productive of total social impairment. The Veteran has described experiencing social isolation, and VA treatment records and the January 2024 VA examination report do not document his involvement in any social activities or friendships. However, the competent evidence also establishes that the Veteran lives with his son and maintains relationships with his adult stepdaughters. The Veteran also reported to his VA Medical Center (VAMC) provider in December 2023 that he recently found out one of his daughters has cancer, and he assists her treatment by driving her to chemotherapy appointments. As the Veteran continues to maintain several close familial relationships, the Board finds that his anxiety and depressive disorders do not most nearly approximate total social impairment. 

The Board has also considered the specific symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent evaluation under the general rating criteria. There is no evidence the Veteran manifests hallucinations or delusions, nor does he experience an inability to perform his activities of daily living due to his psychiatric disorder, or memory loss of comparable severity to forgetting his own name or those of close relatives. The Veteran was also consistently oriented during psychiatric evaluation during the rating period and had linear and coherent thoughts during the January 2024 VA examination. The Veteran reported a passive suicidal ideation at the VA examination, but also denied having any actual intent to harm himself. Thus, while the Veteran indicated the presence of some suicidal ideation during the relevant rating period it was not of the severity or frequency contemplated by the criteria for a 100 percent evaluation and did not most nearly approximate a "persistent danger of hurting [him]self or others." 

The Veteran reported bathing only once a month at the January 2024 VA examination, and the examiner found that he neglected his personal appearance and hygiene. This finding is associated with a total schedular rating under the general rating formula. However, the Board finds that this one symptom is not of sufficient severity to conclude the Veteran's anxiety and depressive disorders most nearly approximate total social and occupational impairment. As noted above, consideration is given to the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms, and given his normal thought processes and close family relationships, the Board finds that the presence of some impairment to hygiene is not sufficient to conclude the Veteran's condition most nearly approximates total impairment. 

In short, while the Veteran experienced mental health symptoms during the relevant rating period such as depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation, and neglect of personal appearance, these symptoms were clearly not of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those contemplated by a total 100 percent evaluation under the general rating formula. See Vazquez-Claudio at 112, 118 (A Veteran's symptoms are the "primary consideration," but 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 also requires an ultimate finding of total occupational and social impairment for a 100 percent evaluation.). The Board acknowledges the Veteran reports an increase in his depression since the death of his spouse in 2023, but finds that the severity of his service connected anxiety and depressive disorders do not most nearly approximate total social and occupational impairment during the relevant rating period. 

The Board therefore finds that the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder with major depressive disorder most nearly approximates the criteria contemplated by the current 70 percent evaluation. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claim for an increased rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity varicose veins.

3. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity varicose veins.

Service connection for bilateral varicose veins, postoperative excision of the left leg was granted in a June 1987 rating decision with a single noncompensable evaluation assigned effective July 22, 1986. The March 2023 rating decision on appeal assigned separate 10 percent evaluations for varicose veins of each lower extremity effective February 10, 2023. The Veteran generally contends that higher ratings are warranted for his varicose veins, though the Board notes that he has not provided any specific argument in support of the claims. 

The Veteran's varicose veins are currently assigned separate 10 percent evaluations for each lower extremity under Diagnostic Code 7120-7121. Diagnostic Code 7120 specifically pertains to varicose veins and provides for rating the condition under Diagnostic Code 7121 for post-phlebitic syndrome of any etiology.

Under this diagnostic code, intermittent edema of an extremity or aching and fatigue in leg after prolonged standing or walking, with symptoms relieved by elevation of extremity or compression hosiery is rated as 10 percent disabling. Findings of persistent edema, incompletely relieved by elevation of extremity, with or without beginning stasis pigmentation or eczema, are rated 20 percent disabling. Persistent edema and stasis pigmentation or eczema, with or without intermittent ulceration, are rated 40 percent disabling. Persistent edema or subcutaneous induration, stasis pigmentation or eczema, and persistent ulceration are rated 60 percent disabling. Massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest are rated 100 percent disabling. A Note following Diagnostic Codes 7120 and 7121 provides that these ratings are for involvement of a single extremity. If more than one extremity is involved, each extremity is to be rated separately and combined, using the bilateral factor, if applicable. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.25, 4.26, 4.104.

The words "intermittent," and "persistent" as used in Diagnostic Code 7121 are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence, to the end that its decisions are equitable and just. 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating. 38 C.F.R. §§4.2, 4.6. 

The adjective "intermittent" is defined as "coming and going at intervals: not continuous," and "occasional." Intermittent, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/intermittent, Definition 1 (last visited April 8, 2025). "Persistent" is defined as "existing for a long or longer than usual time or continuously" and "continuing to exist despite interference or treatment." Persistent, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/persistent, Definitions 1 and 2 (last visited April 8, 2025). 

It is noted that the Veteran has not provided any alternative definitions of these terms for the Board's consideration. Therefore, the Board finds that the current 10 percent evaluations for varicose veins of the right and left lower extremity are appropriate and higher evaluations are not warranted. 

Treatment records from the VAMC dated during the relevant rating period document findings of multiple scattered spider veins on the legs with "mild nonpitting edema" during a March 2022 vascular evaluation. At that time, the Veteran also denied any claudication of the buttocks, thighs, or calf with ambulation or experiencing pain at rest. A month later, he was provided compression stockings at the VAMC emergency room after seeking treatment for a swollen right calf. Stasis edema was observed, but an ultrasound of the right leg showed normal blood flow in the posterior tibial vein and no evidence of a blood clot. Treatment records therefore document two isolated findings of lower extremity edema and the Veteran's denial of claudication or pain with ambulation or rest. These findings are consistent with the currently assigned 10 percent evaluations and intermittent (i.e., occasional) edema.

The report of a February 2023 VA examination also does not support the award of higher disability ratings. The VA examiner noted the presence of varicose veins of both lower extremities characterized as "visibile spider veins." The Veteran reported having aching and fatigue of both legs after prolonged standing, but the examiner specifically found the Veteran's symptoms were relieved by elevation or compression hosiery. The Veteran also had no edema, stasis pigmentation, or ulceration of either lower extremity. As the Veteran did not manifest persistent (meaning continuous) edema, and his symptoms were relieved with elevation and compression hosiery, the findings of the February 2023 VA examination are consistent with the current 10 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 7120. 

The Board, therefore, concludes that ratings higher than 10 percent are not warranted for the service connected varicose veins of the right and left lower extremities. The Board has considered the Veteran's general contentions that his symptoms are more severe than reflected by the rating above, but he has not provided any specific lay statements or argument in support of the claims. The Board finds the competent medical evidence, based on objective testing and medical expertise, is more probative than the Veteran's general lay contentions regarding the severity of the service-connected disability. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating, but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claim for increased ratings. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for a right ankle fracture with osteoarthritis, to include restoration of a 30 percent rating from January 23, 2023.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for painful right ankle scars, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to January 23, 2023 and 10 percent disabling thereafter.

3. Entitlement to a higher rating for left knee instability, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to January 23, 2023 and 10 percent disabling thereafter.

4. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for a left knee meniscal tear with osteoarthritis.

5. Entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance. 

6. Entitlement to SMC based on housebound status.

The Board regrets additional delay in this case, but finds that a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional errors of the duty to assist. Specifically, a remand is necessary to obtain records of private medical treatment relevant to the claims for higher right ankle and left knee ratings and to conduct an additional VA scar examination.

VA treatment records document the Veteran's reports that he received treatment with a private orthopedist, neurosurgeon, and physical therapist as part of VA's Community Care Network (CCN). In May 2023, the Veteran reported seeing a private orthopedist and neurosurgeon as part of the Care in the Community (CITC) program, and stated that his orthopedist recommended he undergo bilateral knee arthroscopic surgery. Additionally, in September 2023, the Veteran was authorized to receive up to 15 sessions of private physical therapy. The Veteran has repeatedly reported receiving physical therapy for his right ankle and left knee conditions during the relevant rating period. Furthermore, VAMC records show that the Veteran received treatment in April 2023 with the Georgetown University Neurosurgery department, and records from this consultation were scanned into the Veterans Health Information System Technology Architecture (VistA) imaging system and are part of the Veteran's Electronic Health Record (EHR). 

The Board does not have access to the Veteran's EHR or the VistA imaging system. Records from these systems must therefore be obtained and added to the claims file. Similarly, the duty to assist requires VA to make attempts to obtain records of private treatment relevant to the Veteran's claims. In this case, the evidence indicating the presence of relevant private treatment (and EHR records) was documented in the claims file prior to the issuance of the November 2023 rating decision. The failure to obtain these records is a pre-decisional error of the duty to assist that must be corrected before the Board addresses the claims for increased right ankle and left knee ratings.

The Board also finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA examination addressing the severity of the Veteran's service-connected painful right knee scars. There is some disagreement in the record regarding the number of scars present on the Veteran's ankle, as well as whether any of the scars are painful or manifest underlying tissue damage. The Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for painful right ankle scars, as well as separate postsurgical scars, but the record does not establish the total number of scars, and the specific symptoms associated with each scar. For example, VA examinations conducted in August 2021 and January 2023 identified the presence of two right ankle scars, while a May 2022 VA examiner noted the presence of three right ankle scars. A November 2023 VA examination also identified only one right ankle scar. A July 2022 VA medical opinion report also noted that some scars were "erroneously omitted" from the April 2022 examination. Given the conflicting evidence regarding the number of right ankle scars, as well as their symptoms, the Board finds an additional VA examination is required.

Finally, the Board finds that the claims for SMC are inextricably intertwined with the remanded claims for higher ratings for the right ankle, scars, and left knee disabilities. The claims for SMC are accordingly also remanded. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's records stored in VA's VistA Imaging system and EHR pertaining to private and community care for the right ankle and left knee during the period dating from May 2021 through November 2023.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for all private and community providers who treated his right ankle and left knee disabilities during the period dating from May 2021 through November 2023.

If adequate medical release forms are received and records from the identified providers are not included in the Veteran's VistA and EHR systems, make two requests for the authorized records from the identified provider(s), unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected painful right ankle scars. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria, to include specifying the total number of right ankle scars and whether they are painful, tender, or include underlying tissue damage.  

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

M. Riley, Attorney for the Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.