Citation Nr: A25033434
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241017-483302
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

As new and relevant evidence has been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for arthritis of the lower back is granted.

As new and relevant evidence has been received, readjudication of the claim for cold injury residuals, left hand, is granted.

As new and relevant evidence has been received, readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, right hand, is granted.

As new and relevant evidence has been received, readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, left hand, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, right hand, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the lower back is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New evidence was received after the September 2007 rating decision that is relevant to the nexus element of entitlement to service connection for lower back arthritis.

2. New evidence was received after the September 2007 rating decision that is relevant to the disability element of entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, left hand. 

3. New evidence was received after the September 2007 rating decision that is relevant to the disability element of entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, right hand. 

4. New evidence was received after the September 2022 rating decision that is relevant to the nexus element of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for low back arthritis have been met. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

2. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for residuals of a cold injury, left hand, have been met. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

3. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for residuals of a cold injury, right hand, have been met. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

4. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD have been met. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1968 to October 1969.  

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for low back arthritis, right hand cold injury residuals, and left hand cold injury residuals, most recently addressed in a September 2007 rating decision.  In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received.  

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for PTSD, most recently addressed in a September 2022 rating decision.  In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received.  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing on the matters of service connection for low back arthritis, right hand cold injury residuals, and left hand cold injury residuals was held on December 18, 2024, and a separate Board hearing on the matter of service connection for PTSD was held on July 10, 2024.  

Therefore, for the matters of whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for cold injury residuals of the left hand, for cold injury residuals of the right hand, and for low back arthritis, and the matters of entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals of the left hand and cold injury residuals of the right hand, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the December 2024 hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

For the matter of whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for PTSD, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the July 2024 hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran initially appealed the matter of entitlement to service connection for PTSD in his January 2023 NOD; however, the Board dismissed the matter in a November 2024 decision due to a prohibited concurrent election, as the matter was also appealed by the Veteran in the case hand.  As the Veteran had a Board hearing on this matter in July 2024, the omission in not taking testimony again on this issue in the December 2024 hearing was harmless.  The Board notes that the November 2024 Board decision took jurisdiction over the matter of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD, to include depression, and remanded the matter for additional development.

New and Relevant Evidence 

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38C.F.R. § 3.156(d). In the AMA, new and relevant evidence must be presented or secured with respect to a supplemental claim to warrant readjudication of the claim. In this regard, "new evidence" is existing evidence not previously submitted to agency decisionmakers, while "relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove the matter at issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for arthritis of the lower back

The Veteran testified at his December 2024 hearing that his back began bothering him during service when he was injured by a cable and continued to bother him throughout his career.  He additionally testified that his VA doctor told him that his current back disability began a while ago, and the disability took a while to get as serious as it currently is.  As this testimony was not already of record is relevant to the nexus element of the claim, readjudication of the claim is therefore warranted.

Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for cold injury residuals, left hand

Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim for entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, right hand 

The Veteran testified at his December 2024 hearing that during service after his frostbite injury to his hands, his hands kept hurting, but he did not report it because he did not want to seem weak.  He stated that during service he was given a special pair of insulated gloves to help with his symptoms, and he indicated that in 1996 he had a rehabilitation specialist that helped him gain strength in his hands, but his symptoms continued to persist.  As this testimony was not already of record is relevant to the disability, in-service occurrence, and nexus elements of the claims, readjudication of the claims is therefore warranted.

Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD

The Veteran submitted a September 2024 private medical report by Dr. D.W. indicating that the Veteran's PTSD is associated with his experience of his friend falling off a ship and being lost at sea during his service.  As this report was not already of record is relevant to the nexus element of the claim, readjudication of the claim is therefore warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, left hand is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals, right hand is remanded.

When the Board readjudicates a claim after the AOJ has denied readjudicating that same claim, the matter generally must be returned to the AOJ for consideration of the merits. Hickson v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 394, 399 (2010). Accordingly, remand is currently required. The RO's failure to adjudicate the Veteran's claim on the merits constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the lower back is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for arthritis of the lower back. 

The Veteran stated in his May 2007 statement that his back disability is due to a refueling cable snapping and pinning him to the bulkhead and frostbite. August 2009 VA treatment records diagnosed low back arthritis.  As there is an indication that the Veteran's currently diagnosed low back arthritis may be related to service, the Board finds that a remand for a medical opinion is necessary. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The Board notes that under the modernized review system, remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for PTSD.  

In August 2022, the AOJ attempted to research the Veteran's claimed in-service stressor, but instead of searching the ship history and deck logs for the U.S.S Guam, they researched the ship history of the U.S.S. Grant County.  The Veteran testified at his July 2024 hearing that his friend R.P. was assigned to the U.S.S. Guam, and it was on this ship from which he fell overboard.  As such, the Board finds that the issue must be remanded in order to attempt to verify the Veteran's claimed in-service stressor.  

The Board notes that under the modernized review system, remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. New and relevant evidence has been received, and the application to readjudicate the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals of the left and right hands has been granted. Readjudicate these issues on the merits.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the low back arthritis.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

a.	Did the Veteran's low back arthritis (1) begin during active service, (2) manifest within a year after discharge from service, or (3) was it noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?

b.	Is the Veteran's lower back arthritis caused by his service, to include as due to his alleged cable injury?  

When answering the above-mentioned questions, the examiner must consider August 2009 VA treatment records indicating that the Veteran indicated that he has had back pain since 2006, denied any particular injury or accident, and stated that he has been doing electrical work for the past 30 years working in suboptimal conditions, such as cramped spaces, the Veteran's May 2007 statement that his back disability is due to a refueling cable snapping and pinning him to the bulkhead and frostbite, and September 2006 VA treatment records indicated that the Veteran was assessed as having back pain and reported a car accident in 2005.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

Provide a rationale to support the opinion(s).  

3. Conduct research to verify whether a servicemember by the name of R.P. fell overboard and/or was lost at sea onboard the U.S.S. Guam between April 1969 and May 1969. 

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ahuva D. Sunshine

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.