Citation Nr: A25033900
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-457762
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

From August 21, 2022, entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent, but not higher, for generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder is granted, subject to controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.  

FINDING OF FACT

Since the award of service connection, the Veteran's service-connected generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder symptoms and overall impairment have more nearly approximated reduced reliability and productivity, but not deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

From August 21, 2022, the criteria for an initial rating of 50 percent, but not higher, for generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2018 to August 2022.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which increased the rating for generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder from noncompensable to 30 percent effective July 10, 2023, creating a staged rating. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Higher Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § Part 4. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. Where there is a question as to which of two disability ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. § § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where the Veteran is appealing the initial assignment of a disability rating, the severity of the disability is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Where a claimant appeals the denial of a claim for an increased disability rating for a disability for which service connection was in effect before, he filed the claim for increase, the present level of disability is the primary concern, and past medical reports should not begiven precedence over current medical findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 57-58 (1994). Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms which would warrant different ratings, different or staged ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-510 (2007).

Generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder 

The Veteran is currently assigned an initial noncompensable rating prior to July 10, 2023, and 30 percent rating thereafter for her service-connected generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder.  In the summary of argument attached to the notice of disagreement, the Veteran's representative emphasized that under 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500, a claimant may request review of a prior evaluation in a specific review lane rather than as a claim for increase.  The representative requested at least a 50 percent rating from August 1, 2022 and for the following reasons the Board finds that a 50 percent rating is warranted from that date.

The criterion for rating generalized anxiety disorder is contained in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.  

Under those criteria, a 10 percent rating is assigned where there is evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is assigned where there is evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation, due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, weekly or less often panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, recent events.

A 50 percent rating is assigned when there is evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory, for example, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when there is evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene; disorientation to time and place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Symptoms listed in the VA's general rating formula for mental disorders serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating and are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-44 (2002). The list of symptoms under a given rating is a non-exhaustive list, as indicated by the words "such as" that precede each list of symptoms. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115 (Fed. Cir. 2013). In Vazquez-Claudio, the Federal Circuit held "that a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Id. at 117. Other language in the decision indicates that the phrase "others of similar severity, frequency, and duration," can be thought of as symptoms of like kind to those listed in the regulation for a given disability rating. Id. at 116.

For the following reasons, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating is warranted throughout the entire appeal period. 

An October 2022 VA examination report shows the Veteran exhibited depression. The examiner concluded the Veteran exhibited a mental condition, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication. 

A May 2023 VA clinical record shows the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depression, anxiety, and sleep impairment.  

A June 2023 private evaluation shows the Veteran reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, panic attacks weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment to short and long term memory, disturbances of motivation and mood, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. She reported decrease participation in physical/social activities, social withdrawal, irritability, and fatigue. The nurse practitioner concluded that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A July 2023 VA examination report shows the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner concluded that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

As noted above, where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

Here, the October 2022 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms were not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  The June 2023 private examiner concluded that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The July 2023 VA examiner indicated the symptoms and impairment were equivalent to occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication. An examiner's description of the level of disability in terms of the applicable regulation is not, however, binding on the Board, as this is an adjudicatory determination. 38 C.F.R. § 3.100(a) (delegating the Secretary's authority "to make findings and decisions... as to the entitlement of claimants to benefits" to, inter alia, VA "adjudicative personnel"); 38 C.F.R. § 4.2 ("It is the responsibility of the rating specialist to interpret reports of examination... so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present").

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran has exhibited symptoms and impairment that more nearly approximate the criteria for a 50 percent rating.  For example, an October 2022 VA examination report shows the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depression. A May 2023 VA clinical record shows the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depression, anxiety, and sleep impairment.  A June 2023 private evaluation shows the Veteran reported symptoms of impairment of short- and long-term memory, disturbances of motivation and mood, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. The July 2023 VA examination report shows the Veteran exhibited difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Based on the evidence of record, including the medical records and the Veteran's competent and credible statements, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms and impairment more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The Veteran is not, however, entitled to a higher 70 percent rating during any period on appeal. The evidence reflects that the Veteran did not experience symptoms such as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively. The Veteran did not exhibit impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, or neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The Veteran adapted to stressful circumstances as she has enrolled in college and works part-time at a Target store with current work performance reported as satisfactory, resulting in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Moreover, the Veteran is well connected with friends from high school as well as the Navy and is close with eight friends who served with her.  

With consideration of both the lay statements and medical evidence of record, the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder symptoms do not cause impairment that more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas. Rather, they cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Therefore, a rating higher than 50 percent is not warranted.

As noted above and in the representative's argument, the private clinician indicated in her June 2023 independent rating evaluation that the Veteran's symptoms and impairment most nearly approximated the criteria for a 50 percent rating.  While a clinician's conclusion in this regard is not binding on the Board, here it is consistent with the above evidence.  

For the foregoing reasons, an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for generalized anxiety disorder with social anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder is warranted. The above analysis reflects that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether higher disability ratings are warranted at any point during the appeal period.  Rather, the evidence weighs persuasively against any higher disability rating other than that assigned herein. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Walker, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.