Citation Nr: A25033695
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240208-415687
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for anemia is denied.

Entitlement to an initial 50 percent rating for service-connected migraines is granted from May 10, 2021, to January 2, 2024, is granted, but a rating in excess of 50 percent is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The persuasive evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's anemia had its onset in service, is causally related to service, or that it manifested to a compensable degree within one year of active service.

2. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran has more nearly approximated very frequent prostrating migraine headaches productive of severe economic inadaptability.

3. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD has not resulted, or more nearly approximated, total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for anemia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating an initial 50 percent rating for service-connected migraines is granted from May 10, 2021, to January 2, 2024, have been met, but the criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.156, 3.400, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 3.102, 4.130.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2011 to July 2015.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in March 2023 and November 2023; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1).  The March 2023 rating decision denied service connection for anemia, bilateral pes planus, and plantar fasciitis, and also denied an increased rating for service-connected migraines.  The November 2023 rating decision denied increased ratings for service-connected migraines and PTSD.  

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Under the Legacy system, the Board decided the appropriate rating to be assigned up to the date of the Board decision.  The AMA statutes and regulations are silent as to when the rating period on appeal ends.  However, the intent of the AMA was to streamline VA's adjudicatory process to make the Board more of an appellate body.  See 83 Fed. Reg. 39,818 (Aug. 10, 2018).  Although not precedential in nature, a Memorandum Decision by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) addressed whether the rating period on appeal could end at the date of the AOJ decision on appeal rather at the time of the Board decision.  In Meuzelaar v. McDonough, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 446 (March 28, 2024), the Court specifically noted "we cannot find any statute or regulation that supports such an interpretation of the AMA."  See Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge memorandum decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  The Board finds this reasoning to be persuasive.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of pes planus, plantar fasciitis, and TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for anemia.

The Veteran seeks service connection for anemia which she contends is related to being anemic while pregnant during active-duty service, or due to experiencing syncope (also noted as heat exposure) during service.  The Board observes that the Veteran is not service-connected for syncope or heat exposure and will therefore not address secondary service connection.

Generally, to establish service connection a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease incurred or aggravated during service."  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of their current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (U.S. 1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson, 581 F.3d at 1316; Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (U.S. 2011); see also Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The benefit of the doubt applies when the evidence for and against is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal," but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Turning to the facts, the Veteran was diagnosed with anemia in July 2013 during service and it was specifically noted as a pregnancy complication.  Anemia was noted throughout her pregnancy as a complication.  At a postpartum exam in October 2013, anemia was no longer listed in her medical records.  Post-service, the Veteran underwent labs to test iron levels in May 2021, with normal results.  

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA examination for anemia.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's history of an anemia diagnosis, but noted that the condition has resolved.  The examiner found that no iron supplementation was noted in the Veteran's medical records.  

The probative value of a medical opinion is based, in part, on whether the examiner relied upon an accurate factual predicate.   Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993).  The Board is the ultimate fact finder on matters which do not require medical training.  See generally, Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).

Here, the Board accepts a history of the Veteran having anemia during her pregnancy in service.  However, her anemia resolved after pregnancy and medical records do not reflect any iron deficiencies or supplementation after service.  Therefore, the Board finds that the persuasive evidence is against a finding of persistent or recurrent symptoms since service.  Service connection for anemia based on continuity of symptomatology since service under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), or as manifesting to a compensable degree within one year of service discharge under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), is not warranted.

Ultimately, the Board finds the lay and medical evidence weighs persuasively against the claim.  As the evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's claimed condition is due to her active service or that her symptoms manifested in or persisted since service, there is no benefit of the doubt left to resolve in her favor, and the claim for service connection for anemia is denied.   38 U.S.C. § 5107.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to a higher initial rating for service-connected migraines.

The Veteran appeals the initial rating of 30 percent disabling for service-connected migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100, effective from May 10, 2021, to January 2, 2024, and a 50 percent rating since January 3, 2024.

The Veteran sought service connection for migraines in a November 2019 claim, which was denied in a January 2020 rating decision and became final.  A supplemental claim for headaches was filed in May 2021, and a June 2021 rating decision granted service connection for migraines rated noncompensable from May 10, 2021.  A September 2021 supplemental claim was filed for migraines, and a December 2021 rating decision increased the rating of migraines to 30 percent effective May 10, 2021.  Increased rating claims for migraines were filed in November 2022 and July 2023.  The rating decisions on appeal of March 2023 and November 2023 both continued the 30 percent rating for migraines.  The Board finds that the AMA continuous pursuit rules apply and that the Veteran has continuously pursued the initial rating claim per AMA rules.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(c)(3), 3.2500(f), 3.2500(h).  See also Chisholm v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336 (March 13, 2025) (holding that a supplemental claim must be filed on a form prescribed by the Secretary but it need not be filed on any specific form).  Therefore, the period on appeal is from May 10, 2021.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months.  A maximum 50 percent rating is warranted for very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

The term "productive of severe economic inadaptability" is not defined by VA regulations.  The Court, however, has stated that this term is not synonymous with being completely unable to work and that the phrase "productive of" could be read to mean either "producing" or "capable of producing" economic inadaptability.  See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 446-47 (2004).  

The term "characteristic prostrating attacks" means migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018).  Completely prostrating attacks must render a veteran to be entirely powerless.  Id. at 253.

The Board notes that, when words are not specifically defined in the regulations, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words according to their ordinary dictionary readings at the time the regulations were promulgated.   Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 336 (2018).   In the context of medical definitions, the Court has found it appropriate to refer to definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary.   See, e.g., Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 71 (2020).  Accordingly, the Board will employ the Merriam-Webster dictionary meanings. 

The term "severe" is defined as of a great degree.  See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.  Prolonged is defined as "continuing for a notably long time; extended in duration."  https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/prolonged.  "Frequent" has been defined as happening at short intervals; often repeated or occurring.  See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/frequent.  "Very" has been defined as to a high degree; exceedingly.  See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/very.

Historically, a December 2018 medical record noted that the Veteran experienced occasional headaches when taking Motrin.  She was advised to take Tylenol. At a VA examination in January 2020, she described headaches which occurred 3 times per day and 4 times a week which would temporarily improve with Tylenol.  She described calling out of work due to headaches approximately twice a week, having issues "dealing" with her kids during her headaches, and having to be in a dark, quiet room.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran described characteristic prostrating attacks which occurred once every month.

Turning to the facts, in May 2021 the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in which the clinician diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches.  In a May 2021 statement, the Veteran described headaches which occurred 1 to 2 times per week which knocked her out of commission to the point of total incapacitation and being unable to do any normal activities of daily living for 3 hours.

Also in May 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination and reported to the VA examiner that since onset, her migraines have worsened.  She experienced symptoms of sensitivity to light and sound, visual changes, and pulsating or throbbing head pain localized to one side of the head.  Head pain lasted less than one day typically.  The Veteran experienced prostrating attacks with less frequent attacks.  She took over-the-counter pain medication for relief.  The Veteran described having difficulty concentrating and focusing on work-related tasks while having a headache.

In June 2021 in the clinic setting, the Veteran requested medication for her migraines.

At an October 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported worsening migraines occurring three to four times per month.  Her symptoms included pulsating or throbbing head pain localized to one side of the head, worsening with physical activity, nausea, and light and sound sensitivity.  Head pain lasted one to two days.  The Veteran experienced prostrating attacks with less frequent attacks.  She took Eletriptan as needed for relief.  The Veteran described inability to concentrate, focus, or perform at work at the time of a migraine, increased absences, and decreased breaks.  

In November 2021 in the clinic setting, the Veteran requested a refill of her migraine medication.

In February 2022, the Veteran requested a clinic appointment because she was having more migraines than usual.

In September 2022, the Veteran reported that her headaches were "doing ok."

In October 2022, the Veteran requested stronger medication for headaches and stated that the medication she was on barely helps anymore.

In November 2022, the Veteran reported experiencing headaches about four to five times per month and reported this has been ongoing for a year.  She stated that she usually had to go home from work during an episode.  

At a later November 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that her current migraine medication, Eletriptan, was not working anymore and she was requesting stronger medication.  Her symptoms included pulsating or throbbing head pain localized to one side of the head, worsening with physical activity, nausea, and light and sound sensitivity.  Head pain lasted one to two days.  The Veteran now experienced prostrating attacks once per month.  The Veteran described having difficulty in concentrating and completing tasks at work during migraine episodes, and having to avoid bright light and loud noises.  

At a November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported having frequent headache episodes.  She reported taking over-the-counter pain medication for relief.  Her symptoms were described as sharp right side head pain, and light and sound sensitivity.  Head pain lasted one to two days.  The Veteran reported having prostrating attacks once per month.  She described that the head pain from migraines affected her concentration and impacted her ability to work in positions requiring concentration.  The Veteran reported having lost one to two weeks of work time in the last 12 months.  

After review of the evidence, the Board finds that the persuasive evidence more nearly approximates the criteria for a 50 percent rating for the entire appeal period. The Veteran submitted a written statement in May 2021 describing headaches occurring 1 to 2 times per week which knocked her out of commission to the point of total incapacitation - or commensurate with rendering her entirely powerless.  See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.  This is consistent with a completely prostrating attack occurring 1 to 2 times per week.  She reported in November 2022 that 4 to 5 times per month she had to absent herself from work.  

On the other hand, the VA examination reports do not contain a fully descriptive self-account of the frequency, severity and duration of prostrating attacks other than an examiner assessment that her prostrating attacks were once per month or less without any basis in the record to determine why some headaches were deemed prostrating while others were not.  The Board finds that the Veteran's lay descriptions establish that, for the entire appeal period, she has more nearly approximated very frequent prostrating migraine headaches productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The Board notes that the 50 percent rating is the maximum allowable schedular rating, and the criteria for very frequent prostrating migraine headaches productive of severe economic inadaptability is broad and encompasses all aspects and functional impairment attributable to her migraine headache disorder.  As such, a higher rating still is not warranted for any time during the appeal period.

The Board has considered all potentially applicable provisions of 38 C.F.R. Parts 3 and 4, whether or not they have been raised by the Veteran or her representative, as required by Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  The Board has considered whether a higher rating by analogy is available through another other diagnostic code that considers similar symptoms but has found none.  In this case, the Board finds no other provision upon which to assign a rating higher than 50 percent disabling for migraines.  

2. Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD.

Procedurally, an October 2020 AOJ rating decision continued a 70 percent rating for PTSD.  By letter dated October 29, 2020, the Veteran was notified of this decision and her appellate rights.  Within one year of the notice of decision, the Veteran did not submit any form prescribed by VA, such as a supplemental claim for VA Form 21-526 EZ, for a same or similar benefit - a higher rating for PTSD or claim of unemployability.  See generally Chisholm v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336 (March 13, 2025).  There was no continuous pursuit from the October 2020 AOJ rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  Also notable, the Veteran elected opt-into into the Rapid Appeals Management Program (RAMP) in March 2018.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400; 19.2(d).

The Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for PTSD in July 2023.  The appeal period is determined by using the date of receipt of the Veteran's claim for an increased rating, which was July 25, 2023, plus the one-year lookback period.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  

All psychiatric disorders are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Under the general rating formula, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Further, "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  Thus, "[a]lthough the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'"  Id. at 118.

As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment associated with the rating code to determine whether an increased evaluation is warranted.

Turning to the evidence, in the VA clinic setting in September 2022, the Veteran reported passive suicidal ideation occurring once recently.  She stated that her mental health was doing fairly well, although she had a recent "dip" attributed to the season or rain.  She lived with her children but had had no other family around and did not have much contact with other family.  At that time, she was working as a purchasing agent for the Air Force.  

The Veteran submitted a lay statement in July 2023 describing her PTSD symptoms.  She reported that she is unable to keep relationships, she is falling deeper into depression, her drinking has increased, she self-isolates, cries, regularly calls out of work, lays in bed all day, and does not bathe.  She stated that she is depressed, self-medicating, and spiraling out of control.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023 to assess her PTSD.  The VA examiner summarized the Veteran's psychiatric disorder as causing occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  During the examination, the Veteran reported living with her partner and three children.  She characterized herself as not being engaged or being distant with her children.  She reported not staying in touch with family and that she is pulling away from others.  The Veteran stated that her motivation and energy to do anything have decreased over the last year.  She stated she tries to get out on the porch, but spends most of her time in bed.

Regarding the Veteran's occupational history, she reported working for three years as a material handler for the Air Force.  She would call out of work a lot, or just not go to work, which she attributed to migraines and not wanting to be around anybody.  The Veteran stated she had some difficulty completing job tasks and making mistakes due to poor concentration, for which she was verbally reprimanded.  The month prior [approximately October 2023], she had a verbal altercation with her supervisor and stated "I just left."  She did not know if she was still employed.  

The Veteran exhibited the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, near-continuous panic or depression, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  At the examination, she also discussed the following symptoms: anxiety; easily irritated around others; avoidance of people, crowds, and public places; difficulty falling asleep; nightmares; depressed; no motivation, interest, or energy; self-isolating; feelings of being worthless, hopeless, and helpless; avoidance of the military; startle response; sporadic panic attacks; problems with memory and concentration; sometimes thinking that someone is in her room at night; drinking wine; and eating less.  The Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.  She had tried therapy the year prior, but did not like the experience.  She reported no medications or hospitalizations.

The examiner made the following behavioral observations: the Veteran was dressed in blue jeans and a hooded sweatshirt and displayed good hygiene.  She had good eye contact, and mood and affect were within normal limits.  Tone, rate, and volume of speech was normal.  There was no evidence of hallucinations, delusions, or thought disorder.  The Veteran was spatially oriented and exhibited good insight and judgment.

Upon review of the medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran demonstrates symptoms that are contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria.

The remaining inquiry is to whether the frequency, duration and severity of the Veteran's symptoms result in "total" occupational and social impairment.

The Board notes that the word "total" is not specifically defined in the regulation.   As such, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words according to their ordinary dictionary readings at the time the regulations were promulgated.  Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 336 (2018).  In the context of medical definitions, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has found it appropriate to refer to definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary.   See, e.g., Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 71 (2020).  Accordingly, the Board will employ the Merriam-Webster dictionary meaning.   The word "total" is defined as "absolute, utter."   https://merriam-webster.com/dictionary/total.   The word "persistent" is defined as "existing for a long or longer than usual time or continuously."  https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/persistent.

The record shows that the Veteran reported in September 2022 of having one recent instance of passive suicidal ideation.  Later at her November 2023 VA examination, she denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.  The Board thus finds that while the Veteran's report of passive suicidal ideation one time has some probative value, she does not exhibit symptoms of persistent danger of hurting self or others.  The Veteran reports not bathing and laying in bed all day.  In contrast, she was able to maintain her employment for several years and had good hygiene at her VA examination.  The Board finds that there is some element of the Veteran being unable to perform activities of daily living, such as maintaining her personal hygiene. 

Thus, while the lay and medical evidence shows some occupational and social impairment, the evidence does not demonstrate symptoms that have caused absolute - or total - occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas for the 100 percent disability rating.  See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 116-17.  Therefore, a rating in excess of 70 percent is denied.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  There is no doubt of material fact to be resolved in the Veteran's favor.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, a record on appeal may be developed further by a remand to the AOJ when it has committed a pre-decisional, duty-to-assist error.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 20.802(a).  The error must have been committed prior to the issuance of the decision being reviewed.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(g).  When the Board identifies the error, then unless the highest level of the benefit sought can be awarded, the Board must return the appeal to the AOJ with instructions to correct the error.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(g).  A remand is also permitted under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) to satisfy a statutory or regulatory duty that could aid in substantiating the claim.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus.

2. Entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis.

The Veteran has stated that she had arched feet prior to joining the military, which became worse due to wearing Army boots, ruck marches, extended periods of standing, and service generally.  As a result, she also experiences foot pain.

The record reflects that the Veteran's feet were marked as abnormal with mild, asymptomatic pes planus on her December 2010 enlistment exam.  Thereafter on her March 2015 separation exam, her feet were marked normal, and were indicated as having normal arches.  Post-service, the Veteran sought treatment for heel pain in October 2022.

Every veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition upon entry into service except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of entry. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  In order to rebut the presumption of soundness, it must be shown with clear and unmistakable evidence that a disorder preexisted service and that the disorder was not aggravated by service.  Id.

The Veteran was afforded VA feet examinations in January 2023 and February 2023.  The January 2023 examiner noted a history of foot pain in 2019 and that pes planus existed prior to service, and subsequently opined that the Veteran's plantar fasciitis was aggravated by her "service-connected condition."  The Veteran is not service-connected for pes planus.  The February 2023 examiner did not provide an opinion.  The Board finds that remand is required as both the January 2023 and February 2023 examinations are inadequate; the appropriate legal standards were not considered nor was all relevant evidence discussed.  

3. Entitlement to TDIU.

Notwithstanding formal TDIU claims, the matter of the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU may be considered a component of an increased rating claim when such is expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  In this case, the Veteran sought TDIU by way of a formal claim in August 2017 and such was denied in a November 2017 rating decision.  However, the evidence received in conjunction with her increased rating claims for service-connected PTSD and migraines may have raised entitlement to TDIU, thereby triggering the application of Rice.  It is unclear from the Veteran's comments in a November 2023 VA PTSD exam if she was gainfully employed at that time.  The Board will remand for further development to see if the Veteran is seeking TDIU.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Develop the Veteran's TDIU claim.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of her pes planus and plantar fasciitis.  In so doing, please discuss:

(a.) Was the Veteran's pes planus aggravated by service?  In answering, address whether there is evidence of permanent worsening of the Veteran's underlying condition?

(b.) Whether the Veteran's plantar fasciitis first manifested in or is otherwise due to her active service?  

The examiner's attention is directed to the following:

"	The Veteran has stated that she had arched feet prior to joining the military, which became worse due to wearing Army boots, ruck marches, extended periods of standing, and service generally.  As a result, she also experiences foot pain.

"	December 2010 enlistment exam in which Veteran's feet marked as abnormal with mild, asymptomatic pes planus.

"	March 2015 separation exam in which Veteran's feet were marked normal with normal arches.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale and explanation for all opinions expressed should be fully explained.

 

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Estes

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.