Citation Nr: A25033609
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 231031-390581
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for a waiver of the recoupment of an overpayment debt in the amount of $52,152 is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran (a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation beneficiary and a convicted prisoner held at a state correctional facility administered by the State of Tennessee Department of Corrections (DoC/TN) serving his 60-year prison sentence that, being imposed based on the Veteran's felony conviction, began on July 12, 2016, and will end on October 27, 2072) had active duty from January 1998 to June 1999. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on his appeal from the September 2023 decision of the VA Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) that dismissed the Veteran's claim for a waiver of the recoupment of his overpayment debt in the amount of $52,152 as untimely filed in light of the VA Debt Management Center (DMC) issuing the Veteran a demand letter on September 16, 2018. 

Upon pointing out that the period of limitations to file a waiver claim is 180 days from the date of the issuance of the demand letter, COWC dismissed the Veteran's waiver claim since it was received on July 23, 2023. However, the document that COWC deemed to be the Veteran's untimely waiver claim is merely his lay statement that points out that the Veteran is serving a life sentence (seemingly with eligibility for parole) and includes observations reflecting the Veteran's interest in when he might be entitled to receipt of his VA benefits (reduced in terms of the amount payable) in light of his incarceration. In light of this inquiry, the Board presumes that the DMC is currently withholding the amount payable of the Veteran's VA benefits toward recoupment of his overpayment debt.

However, the Board acknowledges that the DMC sent its demand letter to the Veteran upon mailing it to the N.C.C. facility operated by the DoC/TN, while the Veteran is currently held at the T.T.C.C. facility operated by the DoC/TN. Further, the Board acknowledges that, in March 2018, i.e., six months prior to when the DMC sent its demand letter to the Veteran, the Veteran had notified the VA agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) that - in light of his lengthy penal sentence - the Veteran had been appointing his sister as the holder of his general power of attorney (POA) and that he had also been requesting that all VA mailings would be sent to his POA so that to ensure delivery regardless of his transfers from one DoC/TN facility to another. Thus, mindful that the Veteran was likely not present at the N.C.C. at the time when the DMC demand letter was delivered there, and also aware of the myriad of complexities in terms of the interplay between the period of limitation and the realities of prisoners' life, the Board finds that the Veteran was not properly notified of his right to seek a waiver regardless of the lack of return mailing entry in the record related to the DMC demand letter. Hence, the Veteran is eligible for a review of his waiver claim on the merits. Further, since it does not appear that he was availed to an opportunity to file his VA Form 21-5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), the Board would direct VA to afford the Veteran such an opportunity.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Mail one blank copy of the FSR to the Veteran at the address of his POA (the Veteran's sister designated as his general POA in March 2018) and another copy to the Veteran's address that would be reflected at the time of the mailing on the website of the DoC/TN as the Veteran's place of current confinement. The inmate search website of the DoC/TN is https://foil.app.tn.gov/

foil/search.jsp. The Board stresses that the Veteran's DoC/TN address must include his eight-digit state ID number (SID) available at the DOC/TN website, and the SID must be visible in the sense that the SID must be included in the address printed on the envelope or visible through the cut-out envelope window without opening the envelope.

2. Afford the Veteran a period of 120 days to complete and file his FSR and, upon receipt of the FSR or the expiration of the 120-day period, forward the Veteran's claims file to COWC for an adjudication of the Veteran's waiver claim on the merits. 

3. Upon completion of the foregoing, notify the Veteran of the outcome and clarify to him that the Veteran's timely and proper actions would be required in the event he desires further review by the Board because his waiver claim would not be returned to the Board automatically.

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna Kapellan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.