Citation Nr: A25033875
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250107-506313
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer and any residuals of prostate cancer (hereafter referred to as "prostate cancer") is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer and any residuals of skin cancer (hereafter referred to as "skin cancer") is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from May 1966 to February 1970.

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with or, within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  In this case, evidence was received within 90 days of receiving the January 2025 VA Form 10182.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer and entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection for Prostate Cancer and Service Connection for Skin Cancer

Remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The Veteran contends that his prostate cancer and skin cancer were caused by exposure to radiation in service aboard the U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, a nuclear submarine, and his duties aboard the submarine which included cleanup of a sunken nuclear submarine. See July 2023 VA 21-526EZ, October 2023 Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet, March 2024 VA 27-0820 Report of General Information, May 2024 Correspondence - Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet, and July 2024 VA Examination. 

Service connection for a disability that is claimed to have resulted from a veteran's in-service exposure to ionizing radiation may be established by three distinct means. First, a radiation-exposed Veteran may be presumptively service-connected for any of the specific diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d), which encompass a variety of different forms of cancer. If the requirements for presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d)(3) (which defines "radiation-exposed veteran") are not met, service connection may also be established if the evidence shows the existence of any other "radiogenic" diseases, such as any form of cancer listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b)(2) or other claimed diseases considered to be radiogenic through a showing of competent scientific or medical evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b)(4). Finally, direct service connection may be established by demonstrating that the disease or malady was incurred during, or aggravated by, service. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

When it has been determined that: (1) a Veteran has been exposed to ionizing radiation; (2) the Veteran subsequently develops a specified radiogenic disease; and (3) the disease first becomes manifest five years or more after exposure, the claim will be referred to the Under Secretary for Benefits for further consideration in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(c). When such a claim is forwarded for review, the Under Secretary for benefits shall consider with reference to 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(e) and may request an advisory opinion from the Under Secretary of Health. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b), (c)(1). The medical advisor must determine whether sound scientific and medical evidence supports a conclusion that it is "at least as likely as not" that the disease resulted from in service radiation exposure or whether there is "no reasonable possibility" that the disease resulted from in service radiation exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(c)(1).

Initially, the Board is bound by favorable AOJ findings as they are not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Here, the AOJ made the following favorable findings. First, the Veteran has a diagnosis of residuals of prostate cancer. See July 2024 VA Examination. Second, the Veteran has a diagnosis of skin cancer. See July 2024 VA Examination. Third, the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). Specifically, due to the Veteran serving as a Navy Interior Communications Electrician he was exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JP8, JP-4, industrial solvents used in cleaning, degreasing, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, and possible lead and Asbestos dust. See March 2024 TERA Memorandum. 

The Board also notes that the Veteran's claimed disabilities are radiogenic diseases as defined by 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.311(b)(vii), 3.311(b)(xxiii), and 3.311(b)(xxiv). 

The records shows that the Veteran was a Navy Interior Communications Electrician, in addition to being a driver for Commander Submarine Flotilla Six, specifically the Admiral. See DD-214, Military Personnel Record - Certificate of Appointment, and Military Personnel Record - Report of Enlisted Performance Evaluation for April 1968 to October 1968, October 1968 to April 1969, and November 1969 to February 1970. His duties specifically included using "radiac instruments" to perform monitoring and surveying operations on surfaces exposed to chemical, biological, and radioactive agents. See Military Personnel Record - Record of Practical Factors. 

The Veteran served on the U.S.S. Andrew Jackson. In the course of his duties a Record of Occupational Exposure to Ionizing Radiation log was kept for the dates of March 1967 to April 1967, April 1967 to May 1967, May 1967 to June 1967, and September 1967 to December 1967. There are no records for July 1967 to September 1967. See Service Treatment Records - Record of Occupational Exposure to Ionizing Radiation. 

The Veteran submitted two Radiation Risk Activity Worksheets, one in October 2023 and one in May 2024. Several of the U.S.S. Andrew Jackson's patrols remain classified to this date. The Veteran walked over the nuclear reactor every time he crossed to the Engine Room. The Veteran reported that during one of his patrols the submarine was diverted from its normal patrol area to secure the location of a sunken nuclear submarine that was off the coast of the Azores and assist with clean up. During a patrol there was a hydrogen fire that resulted in the loss of one of the oxygen generators, and respirators were required to be used. The Veteran reports that film badges were issued during his time aboard the U.S.S. Andrew Jackson and used constantly. The badges were retrieved weekly by the ship's doctor but at no time were the results presented to the Veteran or any crew member.

In May 2024, the RO requested an opinion passed on the Blue Water Navy Act, and Sergent First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act). A TERA opinion, based on the conceded TERA in the March 2024 TERA Memorandum, was requested for residuals of prostate cancer and residuals of skin cancer. There was no request for a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's contention of potential exposure to radiation for either disability. See May 2024 Exam Request. 

During a July 2024 VA Examination, the Veteran once more stated that his prostate cancer and skin cancer were a result of his exposure to radiation in service. The VA examiner opined that review of available claim files does not show Veteran service connected for prostate cancer. Residuals for prostate cancer is secondary to prostate cancer, not toxic exposures. Review of the available claim files have objective evidence of the Veteran treated for prostate cancer with surgery and radiation treatments in 1994. In November 2023 the Veteran had a procedure of cystoscopy left ureteral stent placed, dilation of bladder neck contracture. Current medical literature discusses causal relationship between bladder neck contracture, radical prostatectomy, and radiation therapy however the direct cause is not clearly understood. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnosis of residuals of prostate cancer s/p cystoscopy with dilation of bladder neck contracture with left ureteral stent placement, was less likely than not caused by the Served as Navy Interior Communications Electrician know to be exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JP8, JP-4, industrial solvents used in cleaning, degreasing, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, and possible lead and Asbestos dust after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. No nexus established.

The July 2024 VA examiner opined that a review of the claim files does not have objective evidence of service connection for skin cancer/basal cell carcinoma. Review of available claim files confirms Veteran's diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma treated with Mohs Micrographic surgery in 2020. Veteran has minimal scarring, hard to visualize from Mohs Micrographic surgery. Current medical literature does not support toxic exposure as causal to residual of cancer conditions, but more likely etiology is Mohs Micrographic surgery. The claimed residuals of skin cancer condition was less likely than not caused by the Served as Navy Interior Communications Electrician know to be exposed to fuel products such as diesel, JP8, JP-4, industrial solvents used in cleaning, degreasing, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, and possible lead and Asbestos dust after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The Board finds the July 2024 VA opinions inadequate to decide the claim. Neither opinion addressed the Veteran's assertion that he was exposed to radiation during service, nor do the opinions discuss the Veteran's specific history. Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) [A medical opinion is inadequate if it is based solely on the absence of documentation in the record and does not take into account the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination); Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) [A medical opinion that relies on the absence of general medical literature supporting nexus without discussing the specific facts of the case is inadequate]. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran did not raise the theory of service connection under the PACT Act, the Blue Water Navy Act, or any other toxic exposure other than radiation exposure. However, the record before the Board has raised the theory of entitlement to service connection based on a TERA and, as such, that theory must be addressed. 

In the course of this appeal, the Veteran has consistently and repeatedly asserted that he was exposed to radiation during service. However, to date, no dosage assessment or attempts to obtain any available records concerning the Veteran's exposure to radiation have been undertaken.  

Therefore, the AOJ did not perform the required development for disabilities claimed as due to radiation in service under 38 C.F.R. § 3.311 and did not obtain adequate medical opinions, including a TERA opinion per 38 U.S.C § 1168, to decide this claim.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Complete all appropriate development to aid in verifying the Veteran's claimed exposure to ionizing radiation in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.311. Such development should include procuring service records, including the Record of Occupational Exposure to Ionizing Radiation (DD Form 1141) (if existent), and clarifying any statements regarding the specifics of radiation exposure via his duties as a Navy Interior Communications Electrician aboard the nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson in service.  Those records should be forwarded to the Under Secretary for Health, for preparation of a dose estimate, to the extent feasible. 

For any classified documents pertaining to the Veteran's service, all efforts should be undertaken to confirm or verify these service records including working with the classified records archivists at the Naval History and Heritage Command (NHHC), and the custodian of classified records for Navy vessels/units. 

Then, obtain an opinion pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(c) from the Under Secretary for Benefits regarding whether the Veteran's prostate cancer and any residuals thereof, and the Veteran's skin cancer and any residuals thereof, are at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to exposure to ionizing radiation. 

2. Then, forward the claim to an appropriate VA examiner to obtain adequate etiology/TERA opinions.  If an examination is indicated, please schedule one.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to:

(a)	Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's prostate cancer and residuals of prostate cancer, and skin cancer and residual of skin cancer are at least as likely as not related to any verified exposure to ionizing radiation in service.  Please note that the Veteran's rating was a Navy Interior Communications Electrician, and he served aboard the U.S.S. Andrew Jackson.

(b)	Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's prostate cancer and residuals of prostate cancer, and skin cancer and residual of skin cancer, are at least as likely as not due to his conceded exposure to fuel products such as diesel, JP8, JP-4, industrial solvents used in cleaning, degreasing, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, and possible lead and Asbestos dust.

  (c) Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's prostate cancer and residuals of prostate cancer, and skin cancer and residual of skin cancer, are at least as likely as not related to the combined effect of his exposures in service, including to diesel, JP8, JP-4, industrial solvents used in cleaning, degreasing, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, and possible lead and Asbestos dust; AND any verified radiation exposure in service.  

The TERA opinion must consider the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

In formulating the opinion for the Veteran's prostate cancer and residuals of prostate cancer, and skin cancer and residual of skin cancer disabilities, the examiner's rationale must consider all relevant lay and medical evidence, including:

"	The Veteran's statements that he was exposed to radiation during the course of his duties - See July 2023 VA 21-526EZ, October 2023 Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet, March 2024 VA 27-0820 Report of General Information, May 2024 Correspondence - Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet, and July 2024 VA Examination. 

"	Service Treatment Records - Record of Occupational Exposure to Ionizing Radiation. Please note that dates from June 17, 1967, to September 8, 1967, are missing.

"	The Veteran's duties specifically included using "radiac instruments" to perform monitoring and surveying operations on surfaces exposed to chemic, biological, and radioactive agents. See Military Personnel Record - Record of Practical Factors. 

"	The Veteran's statements that he participated in a sunken nuclear submarine clean up mission, that he was frequently near the nuclear reactor on the U.S.S. Andrew Jackson as part of his duties, and that there was a fire aboard the submarine that required the use of respirators. - See October 2023 Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet and May 2024 Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet.

"	The March 2024 TERA Memorandum confirming that the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to diesel, JP8, JP-4, industrial solvents used in cleaning, degreasing, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, risk of electrical burns and fatal electrical shock, toxic welding fumes, and possible lead and Asbestos dust.

"	September 2023 Ionizing Radiation Registry Exam - CAPRI

"	Medical opinions from PA-C K.S., APRN L.L., and Dr. S.C., opining that the Veteran's cancers, and specifically his prostate cancer and skin cancer, were a result of prolonged radiation exposure during his time on a nuclear submarine. - See January 2025 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility and February 2025 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The clinician must not rely solely on the lack of medical documentation as the basis for a negative opinion.  

A complete rationale with clear conclusions, citations to medical evidence, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two must be provided for all expressed opinions.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elsbach, E. R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.