Citation Nr: A25033751
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240730-460227
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1982 to August 1986, February 1990 to June 1990, and from August 2004 to June 2007. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss.

The Veteran seeks service connection for his right ear hearing loss disability. VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), received January 5, 2024.  

At the outset, the Board notes that the AOJ made the following favorable findings in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal regarding the first and second elements of service connection, respectively: "The evidence shows that you currently have hearing loss in your right ear for VA purposes;" and "Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded. You have verified service in the Southwest theater of operations and exposure as a Cannon Crewman. The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service. Noise conceded MOSs of Cannon Crewman and Field Artillery Target Technician." Rating Decision - Narrative, dated March 11, 2024. Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings unless they are rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence. 38?C.F.R. §§?3.104(c), 20.801(a). After a thorough review of the Veteran's electronic claims file, the Board concludes that such clear and unmistakable evidence does not exist. 

Thus, the final question is whether there is a medical nexus between the Veteran's current right ear hearing loss disability and his conceded in-service hazardous noise exposure.

To answer the question, the Veteran attended multiple VA audiology examinations, the most recent of which was administered by M.S., Au.D., in February 2024. See C&P Exam, received February 21, 2024. After this evaluation, Dr. M.S. opined that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss was attributable to military service but provided a negative nexus opinion for the Veteran's right ear hearing loss disability as follows: "Veteran had MOSs of Cannon Crewman and Field Artillery Target Technician, both of which had a HIGH probability of hazardous noise exposure. However, there is no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance to separation, which is objective evidence of no permanent auditory damage on active duty from conceded noise. There is no report of complaint/treatment for hearing decrease in STRs or at separation. Although noise exposure is conceded and the relationship of noise, auditory damage and hearing loss is well-established, auditory damage and hearing loss are not conceded based on noise alone. There must be a nexus of auditory damage to relate current hearing loss to military noise and not another etiology. The evidence is against a nexus in this case; therefore, it is of the opinion that the hearing loss at the right ear is less likely than not related to or caused by military noise exposure." Id. 

The Board finds Dr. M.S.'s opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right ear hearing loss disability inadequate and lacking in probative value.? 

First, the Board notes that normal hearing at separation is not fatal to a claim of service connection for hearing loss. See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3?Vet. App.?87, 89 (1992). Evidence of a current hearing loss disability and a medically sound basis for attributing such disability to service may serve as a basis for a grant of service connection for this condition. Hensley v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?155, 157 (1993). 

Second, Dr. M.S.'s rationale conflicts with previous VA examination reports. In opining that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss is attributable to military service, Dr. M.S. stated, "There is a significant permanent shift in hearing threshold beyond test variability from entrance to separation, indicative of possible auditory damage from conceded noise on active duty." C&P Exam, received February 21, 2024. In contrast, as noted above, Dr., M.S. determined that there was "no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance to separation" in the Veteran's right ear. Id. 

However, a VA hearing loss and tinnitus report from July 2015 stated, "For the period of active duty service 2004-2007, an audiogram dated 1/10/04 (normal hearing, bilaterally) was compared to the 4/12/07 retirement audiogram (right ear--normal hearing except for a mild hearing loss at 4k Hz, left ear--normal hearing). When comparing these audiograms, there was a significant threshold shift at 4k Hz in the right ear, and there were no significant threshold shifts in the left ear." C&P Exam, received July 10, 2015; see also STR - Medical, pg. 11, received March 23, 2015; STR - Medical, pgs. 27, 47, 51, received March 23, 2015; Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility, pg. 3, received August 27, 2014. Dr. M.S. did not attempt to resolve this discrepancy and, in fact, provided very little indication that he reviewed the July 2015 VA audiology examination report or the Veteran's service treatment records from his most recent period of active-duty service, which occurred between August 2004 and June 2007. Therefore, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error in relying on Dr. M.S.'s VA inadequate opinion and underlying rationale in denying the Veteran's claim for service-connected right-ear hearing loss. 

Finally, the record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to allow the Board to decide the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss. Thus, while the Board regrets the delay, it nonetheless finds that this claim must be remanded for another VA medical examination and opinion, with a specific emphasis on the Veteran's assertions regarding the onset and chronology of his symptoms. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).?

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with the appropriate medical examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his right ear hearing loss. 

Following a review of the complete claims file, the examiner is asked to answer or otherwise address the following: 

1. Whether it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right ear hearing loss had its onset in service or is related to service. 

*The examiner is advised that exposure to loud noise in service is conceded.

**The examiner must consider the following in arriving at his or her opinion: 

1.	February 2024 VA hearing loss and tinnitus examination report. C&P Exam, received February 21, 2024.

2.	July 2015 VA hearing loss and tinnitus examination report. C&P Exam, received July 10, 2015. 

3.	In-service medical records demonstrating decreased left ear hearing loss. See STR - Medical, pg. 11, received March 23, 2015; STR - Medical, pgs. 27, 47, 51, received March 23, 2015; Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility, pg. 3, received August 27, 2014.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions.? 

In?rendering the requested opinion, it should be noted?that the absence of in-service evidence of a hearing disability during service is not always fatal to a service connection claim. Evidence of a current hearing loss disability and a medically sound basis for attributing that disability to service may serve as a basis for a grant of service connection for hearing loss where there is credible evidence of acoustic trauma due to significant noise exposure in service, post-service audiometric findings meeting the regulatory requirements for hearing loss disability for VA purposes, and a medically sound basis upon which to attribute the post-service findings to the injury in service.? 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with the complete rationale for any conclusions reached.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cross, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.