Citation Nr: A25033686
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-434682
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder, claimed as shortness of breath, other than rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder, claimed as sleep disturbances and stress, other than chronic sleep impairment associated service-connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from February 2012 to February 2024.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints.

2. Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder, claimed as shortness of breath, other than rhinitis.

The Veteran contends that she acquired bilateral shin splints, rhinitis, and shortness of breath as a result of her active duty service. See September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Unfortunately, a remand is necessary before the Board may address the merits of these claims.

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here the Board finds remand is warranted to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

The record documents that the Veteran filed for disability compensation prior to her release from active duty, and that the evidence of record prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal demonstrated in-service complaints or diagnoses of rhinitis, bilateral shin splints, and shortness of breath. See, e.g., STR associated with claims file September 29, 2023.  The Board notes that, although the AOJ requested Veterans Evaluation Services (VES), a VA-contractor, to schedule examinations to determine the nature and severity of these contended disabilities, the Veteran failed to attend examinations scheduled for December 27, 2023.  November 2023 Exam Request; December 2023 Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellations.  Thereafter, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran called the AOJ to explain that, while she had attended prior examinations for psychological and audiological disabilities (on November 29 and December 1, 2023, respectively), she was unable to attend the December 27, 2023, examinations because she was undergoing a life-saving surgery.  January 2024 VA 27-0820. 

VA is obligated to provide an examination or obtain an opinion where there is: (1) competent credible evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or illness, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 82-83 (2006).

In claims for service connection, failure to report to any scheduled examination, without good cause, may result in denial of the claim. Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, death of an immediate family member, etc. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (a).

In light of the evidence of record prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Board finds good cause?has been shown for missing the scheduled examinations, specifically, the illness or hospitalization of the Veteran.  Consequently, remand is necessary to reschedule the VA examinations and obtain adequate VA medical opinions to address the Veteran's claim of service connection for bilateral shin splints, rhinitis, and a respiratory disorder claimed as shortness of breath. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 82-83 (2006).

4. Entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder, claimed as sleep disturbances and stress, other than chronic sleep impairment associated service connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder.

The Veteran contends she experiences sleep disturbance and stress which onset during active duty service.  September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Unfortunately, a remand is necessary to a correct duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

Here, the evidence of record prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal demonstrated in-service complaints of symptoms or diagnoses of a sleep disorder. See, e.g., STR associated with claims file September 29, 2023, date of service (DOS) October 18, 2021 (diagnosing unspecified sleep-wake disorder by a certified nurse midwife); and July 11, 2016, July 13, 2017, and October 20, 2017 (noting Veteran complained of snoring in service).  

In November 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA-contracted psychological examination, which resulted in a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder, which noted symptoms including chronic sleep impairment.  November 2023 Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  Following the November 2023 psychological evaluation, the AOJ awarded service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder, effective February 7, 2024.  March 2024 Rating Decision.  

Nevertheless, the Board observes that the November 2023 examining psychologist's report provides no discussion of the Veteran's symptoms related to her claimed sleep disturbance and stress, other than noting chronic sleep impairment as a symptom of major depressive disorder with unspecified anxiety disorder.  Moreover, the November 2023 report does not specifically address the evidence of sleep disturbances noted in the service treatment records, including the in-service diagnosis of unspecified sleep-wake disorder and reports of snoring. 

The Board must address all issues raised by the claimant or the evidence of record.  Robinson v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 545 (2008). Moreover, the Board must consider all possible schedular bases for separate ratings, including secondary service connection. See Morgan v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 162, 167 (2018). Finally, VA is obligated to provide an examination or obtain an opinion where there is: (1) competent credible evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or illness, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 82-83 (2006).

In the present claim, the November 2023 psychologist examination is not adequate to resolve the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder other than chronic sleep impairment associated service-connected major depressive disorder with unspecified anxiety disorder.  Thus, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error to obtain an adequate medical examination addressing all issues raised by the claimant and the evidence of record, including entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder, claimed as sleep disturbances and stress, other than chronic sleep impairment associated service connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of any current bilateral shin splints disability. The examiner should review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand, before answering the following: 

(a.) Please identify any bilateral shin splints disability by either (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment. 

(b.) As to any bilateral shin splints disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include the service treatment records which document a May 2012 diagnosis of bilateral shin splints.  

2. Schedule a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of the Veteran's contended rhinitis disability. The examiner should review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand, before answering the following: 

(a.) Whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of rhinitis during the appeal period and/or proximate to the claim.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any disability diagnosed had its onset in service and/or is etiologically related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include the service treatment records which documented diagnoses of rhinitis in April 2013, and in August and December 2019. 

3. Schedule a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of any current respiratory disability other than rhinitis, claimed as shortness of breath. The examiner should review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand, before answering the following: 

(a.) Identify any respiratory disability, other than rhinitis, by (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment.

(b.) As to each respiratory disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include the service treatment records which note the Veteran's complaint of "shortness of breath" at a June 20, 2013, post-deployment physical. 

(c.) As to each respiratory disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability was caused by her service-connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder. Why or why not? 

(d.) As to each respiratory disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability was aggravated (worsened) by his service-connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder. Why or why not? 

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether the Veteran has a sleep disorder, other than chronic sleep impairment associated service-connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder. The examiner must review the entire claims file in conjunction with the examination, including, but not limited to the service treatment records.

(a.) The examiner must first determine whether the Veteran has a sleep disorder, other than chronic sleep impairment associated service-connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder, and if so, whether it is a mechanical disorder such as sleep apnea; or, whether it is psychological in nature, such as insomnia, taking into consideration the Veteran's reports of symptoms related to a sleep disorder both during and since service.

(b.) The examiner must provide a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) any diagnosed sleep disorder had its onset during active service, has been continuous since service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

(c.) The examiner must provide a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) any diagnosed sleep disorder is caused or aggravated (worsened) by her service-connected major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for each opinion. 

If the examiner rejects any lay evidence as to onset and continuity of symptomatology, they must provide a reason for doing so.

If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, they should explain why this is so and what additional evidence, if any, would be necessary before an opinion can be rendered.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Stamm, Haley S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.