Citation Nr: A25033914
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-438686
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1980 to August 1992. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In May 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request, Board Appeal, Notice of Disagreement, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), and selected direct review.

The Veteran is advised that under direct review the Board is only able to consider evidence received as of, and prior to, the March 2024 decision. Any evidence received after the March 2024 rating decision cannot be considered. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300. However, as remand is warranted for the issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus any new evidence associated with the case file concerning that issue will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Under the AMA framework, the Board may remand where there has been a duty to

assist error prior to issuance of a rating decision. The VA has the duty to make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in securing evidence necessary to substantiate their claim for VA benefits. See 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159(c).

As part of the basis for denying the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, it was determined in the March 2024 rating decision that the Veteran's tinnitus did not result from toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) because the evidence does not show that he participated in TERA. However, the Veteran's Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active Duty, Form DD 214, shows that the Veteran had a military occupational specialty of an aircraft mechanic crew chief. As an aircraft mechanic, the Veteran would have been exposed to multiple toxins, including but not limited to jet fuel, oil, exhaust fumes, carbon monoxide, metals, dust, and solvents. The Veteran may also have been involved in TERA in his military occupational specialty as a ground radio communication technician. 

The TERA memorandum completed by the AOJ in March 2024 indicates that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA. In completing this memorandum, the AOJ did not acknowledge the Veteran's military occupational specialties and did not identify any of the exposures that he would have experienced during service. Moreover, the AOJ did not generate an Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) to assess all of the TERA the Veteran was involved in during service. Therefore, the Board finds that the March 2024 TERA memorandum is erroneous, and the duty to assist was not fulfilled. As such, a new TERA memorandum must be completed. Furthermore, in completing the TERA memorandum, the AOJ must provide the Veteran with an opportunity to submit evidence of TERA he was involved in during his military service, as well as generate an ILER.

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA tinnitus examination. The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is less likely than not the result of his military service. The rationale provided by the March 2024 examiner for the conclusion was that it is unlikely that the tinnitus began over 20 years after his military service if it was associated with noise exposure in the 1980's. This is a conclusory rationale that provided no medical analysis to support the opinion. Furthermore, the examiner did not discuss or even note the Veteran's post-service noise exposure, or lack thereof. Medical evidence is considered probative when it is factually accurate, fully articulated, and provides sound reasoning for the conclusion. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion. See Id.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that remand is warranted for further development.    

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must conduct any appropriate development to determine all of the Veteran's toxic exposures during military service, to include generating an ILER for TERA and issuing a letter to the Veteran providing him the opportunity to submit evidence of the TERA he was involved in during his military service. The AOJ must then prepare a TERA memorandum, specifically addressing the Veteran's military occupational specialty of an aircraft mechanic crew chief and ground radio communication technician.

2. After completing the development directed above, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate examiner not previously associated with the claim for the issuance of a medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of his tinnitus. The examiner must thoroughly review the Veteran's entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand.

The examiner is asked to provide the following:  

a.)	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's tinnitus is related to his military service, to include his noise exposure and TERA during military service.

The examiner must consider all toxic exposures during the Veteran's military service. The examiner is asked to consider total potential exposure and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  

The examiner is reminded that a lack of evidence cannot be corroborating to conclude that there is no relationship between the Veteran's current disability and his military service. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be considered along with the other evidence of record in formulating the requested opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. If the examiner is unable to opine without resorting to speculation, a basis for reaching this conclusion must be provided.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Temple, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.