Citation Nr: A25033198
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-435033
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for migraine is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The April 2024 VA Form 10182 is untimely as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of a claim of entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.109, 3.2400, 20.201, 20.202, 20.203, 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran has active service in the United States Army from August 1999 to June 2001 and from February 2003 to February 2004. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision granting service connection for migraines with noncompensable evaluation and denying service connection for urinary incontinence.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to a compensable rating for migraines and entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition.

As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges that in her April 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran indicated that, in addition to two issues referenced above, she was also appealing the issue of service connection for cervical spine condition. The Veteran indicated a date of December 21, 2011, as the date of rating decision in question.

The Board first notes that the April 2024 rating decision on appeal does not include a determination on an issue of service connection for cervical spine condition. It does, however, include a denial-of-service connection for cervicitis, an unrelated medical condition. Upon review of the available evidence, the Board concludes that the Veteran did not intend to appeal the denial-of-service connection for cervicitis. The Board specifically notes the appellate brief submitted by the Veteran's representative, which specifies that the only matters at issue are the entitlement to a compensable rating for migraines, and entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence. See May 2025 Appellate Brief. 

Thus, the Board will now turn to determine whether the Veteran's attempt to contest a previous denial of service connection for cervical spine condition constitutes a valid appeal.

By way of procedural history, the Veteran filed the initial claim for service connection for cervical pain in June 2011. In a December 2011 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for cervical spine condition. The Veteran did not appeal this decision within a required on-year time frame.

In January 2024, the Veteran filed a new claim for, among others, "neck and back pain." See January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ. Following that filing, the RO sent the Veteran a letter informing him that a claim for previously denied service connection for neck and back pain must be filed on a proper form. See January 30, 2024, VA Letter.

On April 19, 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), listing, among others, "cervical spine condition" as an issue on appeal. 

The Board finds, that if it were to construe the April 2024 VA Form 10182 as seeking to appeal the RO's prior denial of service connection for cervical spine condition, VA Form 10182 is the incorrect form to express disagreement with the December 2011 rating decision, and the correct form (VA Form 21-0958, Notice of Disagreement) was not received with one year of issuance of the prior denial (i.e., within one year of December 2011). VA regulations provide that a notice of disagreement must be filed within one year from the date the RO mails a notice of decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b). 

Further, the Board notes that following the December 2011 rating decision, the VA has not issued any subsequent appealable decision on the issue of entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition. The January 2024 letter from the VA does not constitute an appealable decision, as the RO did not decide any question of law or fact related to the claim, but merely notified the Veteran that VA regulations required that he seeks review of his claim on a proper form. Although directed to do so in the VA correspondence, the Veteran did not file VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.    

Although the Board may not dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction due to an untimely VA Form 21-0958 (for legacy rating decisions), an untimely VA Form 10182 (for AMA rating decisions), or submission of the incorrect form to appeal a given rating decision (e.g., submission of VA Form 21-0958 to appeal a rating decision in AMA), it may dismiss the appeal due to non-jurisdictional reasons, such as a procedural defect, where the claimant did not substantially comply with proper claims processing rules. See Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262 (2024) (stating VA can require a claimant to fill out a particular form and can dismiss nonconforming or untimely filings, but a failure to follow claims processing does not affect the Board's jurisdiction); see also Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333 (2021).   

In this case, to the extent that the Veteran may have sought to appeal RO's prior denial of service connection in December 2011 rating decision, she did not comply with the claims processing rules for the appeal. In the December 22, 2011, Notification Letter, sent to the Veteran in conjunction with the issuance of the rating decision, the RO notified the Veteran that if she disagreed with the decision, she must initiate her appeal within one year from the date of the notification letter. The Veteran did not file VA Form 21-0958, neither did she submit any other communication expressing her disagreement as to the issue of service connection for cervical spine condition within the requisite period, or thereafter. The Board finds that the Veteran was adequately informed as to how and by when to appeal the December 2011 rating decision, as to the denial of her claim for service connection for cervical spine condition. Thus, any presumed attempt to appeal the December 2011 rating decision is considered untimely.

The Board has also considered the applicability of any waiver that would permit extending the filing period but finds no such evidence. See Hall v. McDonough, at 332 (2021) (regulatory claims-processing rules may be waived without affecting jurisdiction to adjudicate appeal); Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37, 45 (2009) (VA may implicitly or explicitly waive any issue of timeliness in the filing of a Substantive Appeal). 

The Veteran did not file a motion for an extension and has not provided good cause to extend the filing period, and no other waiver is applicable here. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b) (Time limits within which claimants or beneficiaries are required to act to perfect a claim or challenge an adverse VA decision may be extended for good cause shown.); 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(c) ("An extension of the period for filing a Notice of Disagreement or a request to modify a Notice of Disagreement may be granted for good cause. A request for such an extension must be in writing and must be filed with the Board).

Finally, the Board has also considered whether it waived its right to enforce the filing deadline by virtue of docketing the appeal. See Percy v. Shinseki, at 46-47 (2009) (holding that VA waived any objection to the timeliness of the legacy substantive appeal because "VA consistently treated th[e] matter as if it was part of the timely filed Substantive Appeal[] "for over five years."). The Veteran filed her VA Form 10182 on April 19, 2024, and shortly thereafter, on May 7, 2024, the Board sent a letter acknowledging receipt of the VA Form 10182 and placement of the appeal on the direct review docket, as elected on her VA Form 10182. The Board finds that this letter acknowledging receipt and the mere administrative act of assigning the attempted appeal a docket, in and of itself, does not constitute a waiver of timeliness by the Board. Indeed, whether the Board has waived any objection the timeliness of a notice of disagreement should be based on all facts and circumstances of that case. Id. at 46 (discussing VA's actions in that case in finding VA had treated the substantive appeal as timely filed). 

In this case, the Board did not continuously "engage in substantive and procedural development" of the appeal. The Board took no actions that could lead Veteran to believe that the merits of the case were being examined and developed in a substantive way. The Board's notice of receipt of the Veteran's purported appeal did not convey any intent to forego reliance on the laws applicable to docketing. Thus, the Board finds that mere sending of the docketing letter did not constitute a waiver of the timeliness requirements for VA Form 10182. 

Based on the foregoing, as no good cause has been shown and no waiver (implicit or explicit) was made as to the timeliness of the April 2024 VA Form 10182, (to the extent the Veteran potentially sought to appeal the December 2011 rating decision), the Board finds that the April 2024 VA Form 10182 was, and remains, untimely, as it relates to the service connection for cervical spine condition. Therefore, the present appeal must be dismissed based on Veteran's failure to comply with the claims processing rules.

Overall, the Board emphasizes that there was no appealable decision as to service connection for cervical spine condition issued in the year prior to receipt of the April 2024 VA Form 10182. Accordingly, the matter is not properly before the Board and must be dismissed. 

If the Veteran wishes to request a readjudication of her claim for service connection for cervical spine condition, she may submit VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for migraine.

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to a compensable disability rating for her service-connected migraines. See April 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement. 

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of increased rating and finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist and conduct further development before the claim can be decided. 

The Board notes that the March 2024 VA Examination for headaches is inadequate for the following reasons. First, the examiner opined that the Veteran does not have any characteristic prostrating attacks, or completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine. However, when discussing the functional impact of the migraines, the examiner notes that Veteran lost "1-2 weeks work" during previous 12 months and that "[w]hen the Veteran experiences a headache, she must stop work, go into a dark room and put an ice pack on her head until the headache subsides." As these symptoms could be considered a description of a prostrating attack of migraine, a clarification is needed to reconcile those conflicting findings. 

Further, the Board notes that the examiner acknowledges that the Veteran has been receiving treatment, including medication, for her migraines. See March 2024 Headaches (Including Migraine Headaches) DBQ. Private treatment notes provided by the Veteran further indicate medication use for migraines and include Veteran's reports of improvement of symptoms due to medication. See September 2023 Treatment Note. As the applicable diagnostic code does not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012). Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of such medication, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's migraines. Id. As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence.

The Veteran asserts that she is entitled to service connection for urinary incontinence. See April 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement. 

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of service connection and finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist and conduct further development before the claim can be decided. 

Section 303 of the PACT Act implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. A Veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; or, if VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim, or the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure. An examination under this provision must consider (1) total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (2) synergistic, combined effect of all TERA.

In this case, the Veteran has evidence of participation in TERA. See February 2024 VA Memorandum. Further, there is evidence of disability, as the Veteran has a current diagnosis of urinary incontinence. See February 2024 Urinary Tract (Including Bladder and Urethra) Conditions (Excluding Male Reproductive System) DBQ. 

Thus, as there are indications of disability, the Veteran has participated in TERA, and the evidence of record is not sufficient to establish service connection, a VA medical opinion is required that meets the requirements of 38 U.S.C. § 1168. The Veteran has not received any such opinion in connection with urinary incontinence. Therefore, a remand is necessary to provide the Veteran with an opinion that complies with the statutory duty imposed by the PACT Act. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the Veteran's migraines. An examination should only be scheduled if the clinician deems one is necessary to provide the requested opinions. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety, including a copy of this remand. 

(a)	The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service-connected migraines.

(b)	If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms would be without the medication, to include during flare-ups. 

(c)	In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record.  

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

2. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to address the etiology of Veteran's urinary incontinence. If the examiner determines that an examination is necessary, one should be scheduled. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety, including a copy of this remand.

Upon completion of the review, and any examination as needed, the examiner should answer the following questions:

(a)	Is Veteran's urinary incontinence at least as likely as not etiologically related to service?

(b)	Is Veteran's urinary incontinence at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's presumed toxin exposure?

(c)	In providing this opinion, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential toxin exposure through all applicable deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

A detailed rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Blaszkiewicz, Adam

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.