Citation Nr: A25033119
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 221222-308377
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disorder as secondary to the service-connected cervical spine disability is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disorder as secondary to the service-connected cervical spine disability is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to the service-connected lumbar spine disability, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's bilateral upper extremity nerve disorders are proximately due to the service-connected cervical spine disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disorder as secondary to the service-connected cervical spine disability are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disorder as secondary to the service-connected cervical spine disability are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from July 2000 to April 2008.  

In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an August 2022 decision.  In November 2022, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 202 decision.  In the December 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran has another appeal pending for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  This will be the subject of a separate Board decision.  

The Veteran contends that he has a bilateral upper extremity nerve disorder that is secondary to his service-connected cervical spine disability.  June 2021 statement.  

There is conflicting evidence as to whether the Veteran has a diagnosed bilateral upper extremity nerve disorder.  An August 2021 VA cervical spine examination shows that the Veteran had radiculopathy with involvement of C7 nerve root (middle radicular group) bilaterally.  An August 2021 VA peripheral nerves examination reveals that the Veteran's radial and musculocutaneous nerves bilaterally were affected.  However, neither examination specifically listed diagnoses of a bilateral upper extremity nerve disorder.

An addendum opinion to clarify if the Veteran had a bilateral upper extremity nerve disorder was obtained in August 2022.  This opinion was provided by a medical professional who did not physically examine the Veteran.  The examiner stated to disregard the selection of radial nerve and musculoskeletal nerve as they were selected in error.  The examiner further stated to disregard the selection of middle radicular group as it was selected in error.  They also stated to disregard the diagnosis of cervical lordosis as it was not a diagnosis, but is the normal anatomical positioning of the cervical spine.  Notably, the initial grant of service connection for a cervical spine disability dating back to 2008 was for slight reversal of cervical lordosis.  Following an increased rating claim in 2018, his disability was changed to cervical lordosis.  The addendum opinion does not adequately explain why a change in the diagnosis of the service-connected cervical spine disability was warranted, especially considering the initial diagnosis from 2008.  

In this case, the Board accords more probative value to the 2021 examinations showing impairment of bilateral upper extremity nerves, as the examiner had the opportunity to physically examine the Veteran.  The examiner also opined that the Veteran's upper extremity nerve disorders were the direct result of the cervical lordosis; a rationale was provided.  Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran has a current bilateral upper extremity nerve disorder that is proximately due to the service-connected cervical spine disability.  Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disorder is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the August 2022 rating decision.  The AOJ obtained an August 2021 medical opinion prior to the August 2022 rating decision.  However, this medical opinion did not address whether the Veteran's hypertension is aggravated by the service-connected lumbar spine disability.  Further, the opinion did not address the Veteran's contention that his hypertension is due to be overweight due to being unable to exercise because of his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  A remand for an addendum opinion is necessary.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion from the August 2021 VA hypertension examiner (or, if unavailable, from a medical professional with appropriate expertise) to determine the etiology of the diagnosed hypertension.  The examiner is requested to review the record and offer opinions as to the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any diagnosed hypertension is aggravated by the service-connected lumbar spine disability.  Aggravation" covers situations where: 1) there was worsening directly due to the lumbar spine disability; and/or 2) the hypertension would have been less severe but for the lumbar spine disability because the lumbar spine disability resulted in the inability to treat the hypertension.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity?

(c.) If the answer to (b.) is yes, was the obesity a substantial factor in causing or aggravating the Veteran's hypertension?

(d.) If the answer to (c.) is yes, would hypertension not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability?

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Barstow, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.