Citation Nr: A25033631
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230412-338162
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

As severance of entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) was proper, restoration is not warranted.

As severance of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was proper, restoration is not warranted.

As severance of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was proper, restoration is not warranted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Appellant received an under Other than Honorable (OTH) discharge in lieu of court martial; the VA determined the Veteran's discharge was under dishonorable conditions.

2. The Appellant had three in-service incidents of willful and persistent misconduct, to include drug use, and two periods of being Absent without Leave (AWOL).

3. The Appellant was sane at the time of his discharge.

4. There has been no removal of any bar to VA benefits via an upgrade to the Appellant's character of discharge by the service department.

5. The Appellant was notified of the proposed severance of service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, in August 2021; he was afforded 60 days to submit additional evidence and argument, to include an opportunity for a predetermination hearing, prior to the final severance rating decision, in May 2023.

6. The correct facts, as they were known at the time of the May 2018 decision (which granted service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve (effective January 23, 2018), were before the AOJ, but the AOJ made erroneous factual findings and statutory or regulatory provisions extant at the time were not correctly applied.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) was properly severed, and the criteria for restoration of service connection have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1159, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103, 3.105.

2. Service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was properly severed, and the criteria for restoration of service connection have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1159, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103, 3.105.

3.  Service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was properly severed, and the criteria for restoration of service connection have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1159, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103, 3.105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Appellant served on active duty from January 2006 to August 2011. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Whether the severance of service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome, was proper.

2. Whether the severance of service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was proper.

3. Whether the severance of service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was proper.

The Appellant seeks restoration of service connection for his back and lower extremity disabilities.

The AOJ initially granted service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, in a May 2018 rating decision.

Service connection will be severed only where evidence established that it is clearly and unmistakably erroneous (CUE), the burden of proof being on the Government. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

When severance of service connection is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Id. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice ot the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. Id. The initial question before the Board is whether the AOJ followed the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) for severing service connection.

To establish that a grant of service connection was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a)(1)(i).

In most respects, the CUE standard for severing service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a); Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 488 (2006).

When a person is seeking VA benefits, it first must be shown that the service member, upon whose service such benefits are predicated, has attained the status of veteran. Holmes v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 38, 40 (1997). "The term veteran means a person who served in the active military, naval, air, or space service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable." 38 U.S.C. § 101(2). Except as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.13(c), the entire period of service constitutes one period of service, and entitlement will be determined by the character of the final termination of such period of service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.13(b).

There are two types of character of discharge bars to establishing entitlement for VA benefits: statutory bars found at 38 U.S.C. § 5303(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c) and regulatory bars listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d). In this case, the applicable regulations are 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d). The former provides that benefits are not payable where the former service member was discharged or released by reason of the sentence of a general court-martial. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(2).

A discharge or release from service under one of the conditions specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.12 is a bar to the payment of benefits unless it is found that the person was insane at the time of committing the offense. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(b). Specifically, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5303(b), "if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, at the time of the commission of an offense leading to a person's court-martial, discharge or resignation, that person was insane, such person shall not be precluded from benefits under laws administered by the Secretary based upon the period of service from which such person was separated." 38 U.S.C. § 5303(b). If a person was discharged or released by reason of the sentence of a general court martial, only a finding of insanity or a decision of a board of correction of records established under 10 U.S.C. § 1552 can establish basic eligibility to receive VA benefits. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(6); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(b).

Analysis

In an August 2021 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to sever service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve as the May 2018 rating decision mistakenly found that the Appellant had the requisite character of discharge to establish service connection. The AOJ informed the Appellant he had 60 days to provide evidence refuting the determination or request a personal hearing within 30 days. In a May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ severed the Appellant's grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve.

Based on the foregoing, all due process requirements were met in the severance of service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). 

The issue before the Board, then, is whether the grant of service connection for the Appellant's lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, was clearly and unmistakably erroneous.

As noted, the AOJ's decision to sever service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve was based on the determination that the Appellant's character of discharge was not honorable for VA purposes and is a bar to benefits.

To support severance of service connection, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision.

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. at 62.

In this case, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding. The AOJ determined that the Appellant was discharged as a result of one period of AWOL, which was more than 180 days. However, the evidence indicates that the Appellant had two periods of AWOL, as well as a drug related offense. Specifically, the Appellant's military personnel record indicates that the Appellant was AWOL from October 15, 2006, to March 25, 2011, for a period of 1670 consecutive days. The Appellant returned to military control on March 25, 2011, and went AWOL on March 26, 2011, to June 5, 2011.

This evidence would allow for the application of a statutory bar for a period of prolonged AWOL and a regulatory bar for willful and persistent misconduct, which the adjudicator did not apply correctly in this case. This error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated, as the Appellant's military personnel records clearly indicate the incidents of misconduct detailed above. The adjudicator found that a "personal statement was found in his DPRIS response documents explaining his AWOL actions. Mother was diagnosed with less than 6 months to live. Service member had already waited 3 months for a transitioning MOS and still was not granted leave to visit mother. Service member felt that circumstances did not warrant waiting any longer and time was short." There is no evidence to support this statement. The adjudicator did not address the Appellant's first period of AWOL, nor the Appellant's return to military control and subsequent departure within one day for another period of AWOL. The adjudicator also did not address the prolonged nature of the AWOL, nor the Appellant's combined acts of misconduct, to include drug use, and the periods of AWOL.

Furthermore, the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision, as the adjudicator found that the Appellant eligible for VA benefits without correctly applying the statutory and regulatory bars to benefits.

Given the foregoing, the Board must conclude that the initial award of service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, did involve clear and unmistakable error, as the evidence establishes that the character of the Appellant's discharge from service, for the period from January 2006 to August 2011, was dishonorable for VA purposes and was, therefore, a bar to VA benefits. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12, 3.360(b). The evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Appellant was insane at the time of the offense that led to his court-martial or that his character of service has been upgraded to the requisite character of discharge to establish eligibility for VA benefits. Accordingly, severance of service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve was proper, and the appeal is denied.

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. O'Connor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.