Citation Nr: A25033290
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230815-371226
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance, and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only.

Entitlement to specially adapted housing.

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from July 1980 to September 1980, November 1990 to May 1991, November 2001 to September 2002, and February 2003 to June 2004.  His appeal stems from a July 2018 rating decision that denied entitlement to allowance for an automobile, other conveyance, or adaptive equipment, as well as entitlement to specially adapted housing and a special home adaptation grant.  He timely submitted a Notice of Disagreement and in October 2018, chose to participate in VA's test program, the Rapid Appeals Modernization Project (RAMP), requesting a higher-level review (HLR) of the initial July 2018 decision.  

In a January 2019 RAMP HLR decision, the AOJ again denied the Veteran's claims.  He subsequently submitted a February 2019 appeal to the Board pursuant to RAMP and an April 2019 Form 10182 in accordance with the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In his April 2019 Form 10182, he requested that his appeal be reviewed on the Hearing Review Docket.  As such, he was afforded a June 2022 hearing before a Veterans Law Judge, a copy of which has been associated with the claims file, and the Board considered the appeal based on the evidence of record at the time of the January 2019 RAMP HLR decision, as well as evidence submitted alongside and within 90 days of his June 2022 hearing.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.302.  

In November 2022, the Board remanded the claims for further development.  Subsequently in May 2023, the AOJ again denied entitlement to an allowance for an automobile, other conveyance, or adaptive equipment, as well as entitlement to specially adapted housing and a special home adaptation grant.  The Veteran timely appealed via an August 2023 Form 10182 and requested that his appeal be reviewed on the Direct Review Docket; as such, the Board has reviewed his claims on the basis of the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision currently on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.301

Regrettably, remand is again warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, as noted above, the Board remanded the Veteran's claims in November 2022 for further development.  Specifically, the Board instructed the AOJ to obtain medical opinions assessing the Veteran's ability to use his hands, feet, and extremities, as well as any functional impairments caused by his service-connected disabilities.  Of note in this regard, the Veteran has been service-connected throughout the period on appeal for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), a lumbar spine disorder to include spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease (DDD), bilateral meibomian gland atrophy with dry eye syndrome, neuropathy of the right lower extremity, neuropathy of the left lower extremity, arthritis of the left shoulder, degenerative changes of the cervical spine, and hypertension (HTN).

Under the relevant laws and regulations, financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only.  38 U.S.C. § 3902; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.  Eligibility for such financial assistance will be warranted if the claimant has one of the following as a result of injury or disease incurred in or worsened during active service: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); (2) a severe burn injury that precludes effective operation of an automobile; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes; (4) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; or (5) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet.  In addition, the "eligible person" may be eligible for adaptive equipment only if he has ankylosis of one or both knees or hips.  38 C.F.R. § 3.808(b)(6).

Relevant here, the laws and regulations governing automotive and adaptive equipment benefits do not specifically define the phrase "loss or permanent loss of use."  However, the term "loss of use" is defined in several places throughout the statutes and regulations governing VA benefits.  Notably, in the context of special monthly compensation (SMC), loss of use of a hand or foot exists when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally served by an amputation stump at the site of election below the elbow or knee with the use of a suitable prosthetic appliance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(2)(i).  

A less restrictive definition is written in the laws and regulations regarding specially adapted housing.  Specifically, the relevant laws and regulations specify that loss of use is defined by the adjacent modifier "such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair."  38 U.S.C. § 2101; 38 C.F.R. § 3.809; see also Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).  However, the laws and regulations governing the automotive allowance currently at issue do not contain this modifier.  Therefore, loss of use under 38 U.S.C. § 3901 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.808 will be taken to mean actual loss of functional use of the body part with any need of assistive devices being relevant to, but not dispositive of, the question of whether the Veteran experiences permanent loss of use.  

With respect to specially adapted housing, the benefit is available to veterans who have a permanent and total service-connected disability due to: (1) ALS rated at 100 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) a permanent disability due to blindness in both eyes, having central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion or two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.  

Specially adapted housing is also available to veterans with a permanent and total service-connected disability that precludes locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to: (5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or (7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affects the functions of balance and propulsion.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.  

Next, specially adapted housing may be available to veterans who served on or after September 11, 2001, who have a permanent disability that was incurred during such service, and which results in loss or loss of use of one or more extremities which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude ambulation without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a)(2)(C). 

Finally, if entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, veterans can qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if they have a service-connected disability that has been rated as permanently and totally disabling and: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of one or more extremities or the trunk; or (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)).  38 C.F.R. § 3.809a (b)-(c).  

In December 2022, the Veteran was afforded VA medical opinions assessing his functional capacity.  The examiner offered that there was no evidence of loss of use of one lower extremity together with either residuals of an organic disease or injury or the loss of use of one upper extremity that so affected the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or wheelchairs.  The examiner additionally found no evidence that the Veteran's lower extremities precluded locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair.  Finally, the examiner found no evidence that he had permanent loss of his right or left hands or his right of left feet due to a service-connected disability.  

The Board errs as a matter of law when it fails to ensure compliance with the instructions of its prior remands.  See Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268 (1998).  Here, to the extent that the examiner provided rationales for the December 2022 findings, they were generic and unclear.  Specifically, the examiner noted "no diagnosis of the claimed condition" for each finding without providing any further explanation.  Therefore, the December 2022 opinions are inadequate for rating purposes and remand for further development is warranted.  See generally Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (where VA undertakes to obtain an examination or medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or medical opinion is adequate).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the functional capabilities of his hands and feet, to specifically include his ability to use his hands, feet, and extremities.  The claims file and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.  All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.  

2. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, the clinical records, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is instructed to provide opinions responsive to the following questions:

(a.) Does the Veteran have a permanent loss of use of one or both feet due to a service-connected disability?

(b.) Does the Veteran have a permanent loss of use of one or both hands due to a service-connected disability? 

(c.) Do the Veteran's service-connected lower extremity disabilities, to specifically include neuropathy, "preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair?"

(d.) Does the Veteran have loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of an organic disease or injury which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair?

(e.) Does the Veteran have loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss of use of one upper extremity which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair?

3. The clinician is advised that the term "preclude motion" means the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or canes as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other means may be possible.

4. In forming the opinions as to permanent loss of use, the clinician is instructed to specifically address each hand and foot (left hand, right hand, left foot, and right foot) separately.  

5. In forming the opinions, the clinician must also only address those functional impairments caused by service-connected disabilities alone, where any such distinction can be made.  If a distinction cannot be made between impairments caused by service-connected and non-service-connected disabilities, the clinician must specify that this is the case. 

6. The examiner must provide specific, detailed rationales for all opinions.  If specific, detailed rationales are not provided, the opinions will be returned as inadequate.    

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Spigelman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.