Citation Nr: A25033702
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-437463
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome, lumbosacral facet hypertrophy, scoliosis, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity sciatica is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbar spine disability has not manifested forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, ankylosis, or incapacitating episodes. 

2. The Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy has resulted in mild, incomplete paralysis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected lumbar spine disability, are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243.

2. The criteria for a rating of 40 percent for the right lower extremity radiculopathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1991 to April 1994. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The claim is now before the Board on a May 2024 Direct Review Request by the Veteran under the Appeals Modernization Act (2019) ("AMA"). Under the AMA, when a claimant seeks appellate review through the Board's direct docket, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 131 Stat. 1114, 38 U.S.C. § 7113(b). The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the rating decision on appeal.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. The new evidence includes March 2025 VA examinations for the lumbar spine and radiculopathy. As the Board is deciding the claims of entitlement to an increased rating for the lumbar spine and right lower extremity radiculopathy, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes in the VA form 10182 the Veteran expressed disagreement with disability evaluation for the low back condition and right lower extremity sciatic pain. However, after expressing disagreement with the right lower extremity sciatic pain, the Veteran noted, "my right hip issue deserves a higher rating." The January 2024 rating decision did not adjudicate a right hip condition. Furthermore, in March 2024 and February 2025, the Veteran submitted an application for benefits for a right hip condition. As such, the Board will proceed with the right lower extremity radiculopathy. 

Additionally, the Board notes an August 2024 rating decision increased the right lower extremity radiculopathy to 40 percent effective July 20, 2023. As such, the Board will be addressing entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent during the relevant appeal period. Under the circumstances, the appeal period encompasses any evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by application of the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. An evaluation of the level of disability present must also include consideration of the functional impairment of the Veteran's ability to engage in ordinary activities, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. Consideration must also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").

With any form of arthritis, painful motion is an important factor of disability, the facial expression, wincing, etc., on pressure or manipulation, should be carefully noted and definitely related to affected joints. Muscle spasm will greatly assist the identification. Sciatic neuritis is not uncommonly caused by arthritis of the spine. The intent of the schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. It is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. Crepitation either in the soft tissues such as the tendons or ligaments, or crepitation within the joint structures should be noted carefully as points of contact which are diseased. Flexion elicits such manifestations. The joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection of parts of the musculoskeletal system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. The functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints, and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective innervation, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for a lumbar spine disability 

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity sciatica

The Veteran contends a rating in excess of 20 percent for the lumbar spine and a rating in excess of 40 percent for the right lower extremity radiculopathy is warranted. The January 2024 rating decision granted service connection for a lumbar spine disability with a 20 percent evaluation effective July 20, 2023, and right lower extremity sciatica disability with a 10 percent evaluation effective July 20, 2023. An August 2024 rating decision increased the right lower extremity radiculopathy to 40 percent effective July 20, 2023

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is rated as Intervertebral disc syndrome under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243. 

This disability is evaluated either upon application of the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine ("General Formula"), or as intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes ("IVDS Formula"), whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. See VBA Training Letter 02-04 (October 24, 2002).

Under the General Formula, a 10 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; for combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; for muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or for vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. The next higher rating of 20 percent is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; for combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or for muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. A 40 percent rating is assignable for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or for favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, and a 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, note (2); see also Plate V.

Unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision, restricted opening of the mouth and chewing, breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration, gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen, dyspnea or dysphagia, atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation, or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula, Note (5).

Alternatively, the rating criteria under the General Rating Formula provides a separate evaluation for any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235 to 5243 (2017) (Note 1). Under the IVDS Formula, ratings are based on evidence of incapacitating episodes, defined as periods of acute signs and symptoms that require bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. A 10 percent is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months. A 20 percent is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months. A 40 percent is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. The maximum rating of 60 percent is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.

Effective February 7, 2021, Diagnostic Code 5243 instructs assignment of a rating under its provisions only when there is disc herniation and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root and to apply Diagnostic Code 5242 for all other disc diagnoses. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243 (effective February 7, 2021).

Given that the current appeal began after February 7, 2021, a rating under Diagnostic Code 5243 for IVDS is not available in the absence of disc herniation or irritation of the adjacent nerve root.

The Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a Diagnostic Code 8520 which provides ratings for paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Under that code, a 10 percent rating is provided for mild, incomplete paralysis. Id. A 20 percent rating is provided for moderate, incomplete paralysis. Id. A 40 percent rating is provided for moderately severe, incomplete paralysis. Id. A 60 percent rating is provided for severe, incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy. Id. An 80 percent rating is provided for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, where the foot dangles and drops, no active movement is possible for muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost. Id.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis of the nerve. When incomplete paralysis is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, moderate degree. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for disorders that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for disorders that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376, 380 (2017)

Complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve is indicated where the foot dangles and drops, there is no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

The terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in the rating schedule. Merriam-Webster defines mild as "gentle in nature or behavior" and "not severe." See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mild. Merriam-Webster defines moderate as "limited in scope or effect." See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate. Severe is defined as "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree." See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe. The term "moderately severe" includes impairment that is considered more than moderate but not to the extent as to be considered severe.

The Board notes that use of terminology such as moderate, moderately severe, and severe by VA examiners or other physicians, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue. Using the above definition as guidance, the Board must arrive at an equitable and just decision based on an evaluation of all relevant evidence. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

Turning to the evidence, a January 2024 VA examination report indicated review of the Veteran's claims file, recounted the Veteran's history, and recited his complaints. He was diagnosed with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), lumbosacral facet hypertrophy, right sciatica, and scoliosis. He reported pain and current treatment includes medication. He denied flare-ups. He has functional loss as he indicated it is difficult to bend over and pick things up and he experiences pain after sleeping in certain positions. Forward flexion was limited to 45 degrees with pain; extension was limited to 15 degrees; and the bilateral lateral flexion and rotation was limited to 15 degrees with pain. There was no objective evidence of crepitus.  Upon observed repetitive use there was no additional loss in range of motion. Upon repeated use over time the examiner estimated forward flexion limited to 40 degrees with pain; extension limited to 10 degrees; and the bilateral lateral flexion and rotation limited to 10 degrees with pain. There was no guarding or muscle spasm or muscle atrophy. The sensory examination was normal, however there was right lower extremity radiculopathy. The right lower extremity demonstrated moderate intermittent radicular pain, however overall the examiner found there is mild facet joint hypertrophy at the sciatica level. There was no ankylosis or other neurological abnormalities. The Veteran suffers from IVDS however, there were no episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required prescribed bedrest by a physician in the last 12 months. The Veteran denied use of an assistive device. The examiner determined there is a functional impact as it is difficult to bend over and pick things up and he experiences pain after sleeping in certain positions.

The Board has reviewed all of the lay and medical evidence of record in conjunction with the applicable laws and regulations and finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent for a lumbar spine disability is not warranted. Likewise a rating in excess of 40 percent for the right lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. 

As the Veteran is in receipt of a 20 percent rating, higher ratings are available for incapacitating episodes, ankylosis, or forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less. The evidence weighs against such manifestations. There is no evidence in the record of incapacitating episodes or ankylosis. Nor is there evidence of forward flexion limited to 30 degrees or less for this appeal period. The January 2024 VA examination reflected at worst; forward flexion limited to 40 degrees with pain. Therefore, the Board finds an increased rating for the lumbar spine is not warranted. 

Likewise, the Board finds a rating in excess of 40 percent for the right lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. In this case the January 2024 VA examiner indicated the Veteran's radiculopathy resulted in mild facet joint hypertrophy at the sciatica level. However, as previously noted, the RO increased the rating to 40 percent based on evidence that is beyond the appellate period for this decision. The 40 percent rating is more favorable as it demonstrates moderately severe, incomplete paralysis radiculopathy and the Board will not disturb that rating. There are no contrary opinions or examinations of record. Therefore, the Board finds a rating in excess of 40 percent for the right lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran takes medication for his lumbar spine disability. However, the Board has not considered any ameliorative effects in analyzing this increased rating claim. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) (holding that the ameliorative effects of medication may not be considered in assigning a disability rating where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria). In this case the Veteran has not reported that the medication he takes offers relief with her pain or symptoms. Likewise, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran's decreased range of motion is improved with medication use. Furthermore, the Veteran denied flares-ups and the estimated loss in range of motion during repeated use does not result in a limitation consistent with an increased rating.

The Board has also considered the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, and the holdings in DeLuca. However, a rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is not warranted on the basis of functional loss due to pain or weakness in this case, as the Veteran's symptoms are supported by pathology consistent with the assigned 20 percent rating, and no higher. In this regard, the Board observes that the Veteran complained of pain throughout the period, however, the effect of the pain in the Veteran's back is contemplated in the currently assigned 20 percent disability rating. The Veteran's complaints do not, when viewed in conjunction with the medical evidence, tend to establish weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination to the degree that would warrant an increased evaluation. The Court has held that pain alone does not constitute functional loss under VA regulations that evaluate disabilities based upon loss of motion. Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011).

Accordingly, a rating in excess of 20 percent for the lumbar spine disability and a rating in excess of 40 percent for the right lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted.

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jackman, Bridget

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.