Citation Nr: A25033224
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-455915
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded. 

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 6, 2023 for the grant of service connection for GERD is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1982 to July 1986. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of a claim for entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition, most recently addressed in a March 2018 rating decision. In July 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal granting service connection for GERD. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the supplemental claim decision on appeal.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran did not specifically indicate that he wished to appeal the initial rating or the effective date assigned for GERD. However, the Veteran's attorney submitted a legal brief with the VA Form 10182, indicating that the Veteran wished to appeal the initial rating and the effective date for GERD. 

Entitlement to a higher initial rating than 10 percent for GERD is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected GERD is more severe than is reflected by the currently assigned 10 percent rating. Specifically, the Veteran requests a 30 percent rating and contends that his GERD symptomatology qualifies as "severe impairment of health." See July 2024 appellate brief. 

The Veteran's GERD is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7399-7346 for hernia hiatal. Effective May 19, 2024, VA amended the schedule of ratings for the digestive system and created DC 7206 for GERD. Prior to May 19, 2024, GERD did not have its own diagnostic code, and VA often rated it by analogy to hiatal hernia under DC 7346. Because the amendment took effect after the period on appeal, the Board will consider and apply the pre-May 19, 2024, rating criteria.

Pursuant to DC 7346, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity. A 30 percent evaluation is warranted for persistently recurring epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. The maximum 60 percent evaluation is warranted for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. The classifications of "considerable" and "severe" impairment of health are not defined further in the rating schedule.

38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7346 does not explicitly contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication. Consequently, the ameliorative effects of medication may not be considered in evaluating the severity of the Veteran's GERD. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) (when a diagnostic code is silent as to the effects of medication, VA may not deny entitlement to a higher disability rating based on the relief provided by the medication).

In a VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim received on April 6, 2023, the Veteran stated that he had GERD symptoms of heartburn (pyrosis) with acid reflux, regurgitation, a sore throat with painful swallowing, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), a feeling like there is a lump in his throat, chest pain that radiates into his shoulder, upper abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, frequent coughing, nighttime choking due to regurgitation and changes in his voice with hoarseness multiple times a day, and that these symptoms are worse when he is feeling anxious or stressed. He also stated that he must use over-the-counter medications daily, including Tums, Rolaids, Pepto Bismol, and Maalox to help control his heartburn and that he also takes prescribed Prilosec and Omeprazole daily.  Additionally, he reported having chest, arm and shoulder pain when his GERD is "flaring up." He stated that because of his GERD, he can't eat certain foods, eat large meals, eat late in the day or at night. He can't lie down soon after eating, or his regurgitation becomes worse. He stated that he must sleep with the head of his bed raised in order to fall asleep, and he is unable to sleep more than 3 hours straight, due to being awakened by his GERD symptoms. He also stated that due to a lack of sleep, he has noticed that he has difficulty concentrating, daytime fatigue, trouble thinking, mood changes, low libido and sex drive, irritability, depressed mood, frequent yawing, difficulty enjoying social events and interactions, bouts of clumsiness, difficulty staying on task and concentrating, memory trouble, trouble or needing extra time to make complex decisions, difficulty controlling his emotions and actions, and difficulty handling stressful situations. He stated that he has been told by his "provider" that he has esophagitis (inflammation of the esophagus) and that he had surgery for his GERD.

In the July 2023 VA examination report for esophageal conditions, the examiner noted that the Veteran requires continuous medication for his GERD, specifically Omeprazole and Tums. The Veteran reported that he had been taking medications for his GERD for several years, and that they help on most days, but that at times, he has to take more than one pill. The Veteran reported that he was not currently having symptoms, but had coughing, trouble swallowing, mid sternal burning chest pain and nausea. The examiner found that the Veteran has persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, pyrosis, regurgitation, sleep disturbance, and nausea, but did not find that the Veteran has symptoms productive of consideration impairment of health, or symptoms combination productive of severe impairment of health, reflux or substernal, arm or shoulder pain. The examiner did not find that the Veteran has any esophageal disorders, or that he had had any surgery. The examiner found that the functional impact of the Veteran's GERD was that the Veteran missed 1 to 2 weeks of work [as a material handler] in the last months, and that the Veteran stated that due to the overall discomfort caused by the GERD, he would not be able to work. The examiner did not address the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication on his GERD. 

The discrepancies between the Veteran's description of his symptoms and their impact, and the examiner's report/assessment suggests that the examiner may have underreported the Veteran's GERD symptoms based on the ameliorative effects of his use of medications. In that regard, the Veteran stated that he was not currently having symptoms, but the examiner did not report why that might be the case, and whether it was due to the ameliorative effects of medication. Furthermore, the examiner did not find that the Veteran's GERD symptoms were productive of considerable or severe impairment of health, but did not acknowledge and address the Veteran's statements regarding how his GERD symptoms impact his life, and possibly his health. Additionally, the examiner found that the Veteran did not have substernal, arm or shoulder pain, but did not address the Veteran's statements regarding chest and shoulder pain. 

Therefore, the medical examination obtained in this case was inadequate to rely upon for adjudication, failure of which constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error necessitating a remand for correction of the error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.80; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). 

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 6, 2023 for the grant of service connection for GERD is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 6, 2023 for the grant of service connection for GERD. 

The Board finds that this issue should be deferred pending the directed development and subsequent re-adjudication of the GERD increased rating claim on appeal. See Smith (Daniel) v. Gober, 236 F. 3d 1370, 1373 (Fed, Cir, 2001) (where the facts underlying separate claims are "intimately connected," the interests of judicial economy and avoidance of piecemeal litigation require that the claims be adjudicated together); see also Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion from the VA examiner who conducted the July 2023 VA examination to assess the severity of the Veteran's GERD without considering the ameliorative effects of medications used to treat his GERD. If that examiner is unavailable, the opinion should be obtained from another VA examiner. The need for an additional VA examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. The examiner must review the entire claims file, including the body of this Remand. 

The examiner should acknowledge and address the Veteran's statements regarding his GERD symptoms and their impact in the VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim received on April 6, 2023. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his GERD symptoms and their impact and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion. 

The examiner is asked to identify all of the over-the counter and prescribed medications of record, using medical and lay evidence, that the Veteran takes for his GERD, and to opine as to whether, when not considering the ameliorative effects of medication[s], the Veteran's GERD would have been productive of:

(a.) Persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; or,

(b.) Symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptoms productive of severe impairment of health.

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Susan E. Leary

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.