Citation Nr: A25033178
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240624-451162
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

An allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment or adaptive equipment only is denied.

A certificate of eligibility for specially adapted housing (SAH) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran served on active duty from May 1991 to February 1992; he has been 100 percent disabled since January 2022.

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in the loss of use of hands or feet, permanent visual impairment, severe burns, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or ankylosis of the knees or hips.

3. The Veteran does not have a permanent and total disability due to loss of use of the lower extremities, blindness, requiring ambulatory device for locomotion, or loss of use of the upper extremities, burn injuries, or ALS.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment or adaptive equipment only have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.808, 4.63 (2024).

2. The criteria for a certificate of eligibility for SAH are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

This decision has been written under the guidelines of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In July 2023 and August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the respective claims for SAH and for and adaptive automobile. In June 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board via a Form 10182 and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Automobile Allowance

Financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only. 38 U.S.C. § 3902(a)(b). 

Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted where one of the following exists as the result of injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active service: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, meaning central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury precluding effective operation of an automobile; (5) ALS; or, (6) for adaptive equipment only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. 38 U.S.C. § 3901; 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.

The applicable regulation does not further define the phrase "loss or permanent loss of use." Under the eligibility criteria found in 38 U.S.C. § 3901 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.808, a veteran must show that he or she had anatomical loss of a foot or hand, or permanently lost the use of a foot or hand due to service-connected disability.

The Board notes that the term "loss of use" is used in several places in various statutes and regulations describing disability ratings by VA. In the context of special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(2)(i), loss of use of a hand or a foot will be held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump at the site of election below elbow or knee with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance.

A less restrictive definition is written into 38 U.S.C. § 2101 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 regarding SAH. That regulation specifies that "loss of use" was defined by the adjacent modifier, "such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair." See Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).

However, this modifier is absent from 38 U.S.C. § 3901 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.808 and had Congress or the Secretary of VA wished for such a definition to apply to the legal requirements for automobile and adaptive equipment benefits, it presumably would have been included. As such, loss of use under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808 will be taken to mean actual loss of functional use of the body part(s), with any need of assistive devices being relevant to, but not dispositive of the question of whether a veteran experiences a permanent loss of use.

After review, the Board notes that the Veteran has not argued, and the evidence does not show, that the service-connected disabilities result in the physical loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet, permanent impairment of vision in both eyes, severe burn injury, ALS, or ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. As such, the appeal cannot be granted on these bases. 

Instead, the Veteran has argued the appeal should be granted because he has loss of use of his right hand due to the service-connected residuals of right hand fifth (pinky) finger fracture with traumatic osteoarthritis. However, upon thorough review of the record, the evidence does not show that this or any service-connected disability resulted in the permanent loss of use of one or both of the hands.

In so finding, the Board recognizes that the Veteran has a significant level of functional impairment due to the service-connected residuals of right hand fifth finger fracture with traumatic osteoarthritis but it does not result in permanent loss of use. 

Importantly, the March 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran had a hard time gripping, closing his hand, and making a fist. The Veteran reported constant flare-ups precipitated by activity and relieved by nothing. On examination, he had normal range of motion involving the right index and long fingers and significant limitation of motion involving the ring and little fingers and the thumb. There was objective evidence of pain with active movement that resulted in functional loss. There was no additional loss noted after repeated use over time or during flare-ups. 

Grip strength was noted to be 0/5. There was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis; however, the examiner opined that due to the right little finger, the Veteran has lost function in the other fingers, making it impossible to grip with the right hand and he used a brace for the right hand. 

The examiner opined that due to the right-hand disability the Veteran did not have functional impairment such that no effective functions remain other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis (functions of the upper extremity were noted to include grasping, manipulation, etc.). In terms of impact on employment, the examiner opined that the disability would result in limited mobility and gripping with the right hand, inability to close the hand and make a fist, and difficulty with function tasks such as pulling or pushing objects.

A June 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported weak to no right-hand grip, limited motion in the little finger and thumb, and pain. He reported daily flare-ups which cause an inability to fully flex and extend the fingers to perform fine motor tasks. He stated that he could not open jars, was limited in cleaning himself, gripping and opening things, and could not exercise/lift weights. 

The Veteran reported acute pain and a flare-up during the examination and was unable to perform range of motion testing. Grip strength was 3/5. There was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis and he regularly used a brace. The examiner opined that there was not functional impairment of the right hand such that no effective functions remain other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis (functions of the upper extremity were noted to include grasping, manipulation, etc.).

Based on the above, while there is severely decreased grip strength and limitation of motion involving the right hand, there is not such severity of the service-connected disability so as to constitute permanent loss of use of the right hand. Importantly, the Veteran has some motion, and while he has severely limited to no grip strength at times, his report has not included impairment in driving and the medical evidence specifically does not reflect loss of use of the right hand.

As such, the medical evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the service-connected disabilities meet any of the criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808. 

SAH

SAH is available to a veteran who has a permanent and total service-connected disability due to: (1) ALS rated as 100 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows. 38 U.S.C. § 2101; 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.

SAH is also available to a veteran with a permanent and total disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to: (5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or, (7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion. 38 U.S.C. § 2101; 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.

The phrase "preclude locomotion" is defined as the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches or canes as a normal mode of locomotion, although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c).

The term "loss of use" in the context of SAH generally means "a deprivation of the ability to avail oneself of the anatomical region in question." Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66 (2017). The Veterans Court also identified four elements that must be satisfied to establish entitlement to SAH based on loss of use of the lower extremities: "That the individual must (1) have a permanent and total service-connected disability (2) due to a disorder that (3) involves both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices. Jensen, 29 Vet. App. at 66.

The Veteran has the following service-connected disabilities: posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder at 70 percent, obstructive sleep apnea from 50 percent, migraine headaches at 50 percent, residuals of right fifth finger fracture at 10 percent, chronic sinusitis at 10 percent, hypertension at 0 percent, erectile dysfunction at 0 percent, and gastroesophageal reflux disease at 0 percent.

As such, the Veteran is not service-connected for ALS, a burn injury, or an inhalation injury, nor is there any indication that the service-connected disabilities manifest with blindness in both eyes. Similarly, a service-connected disability is not shown or alleged to result in loss of use of either upper extremity that precludes use of the arms at or above the elbows. Additionally, a service-connected disability is not shown to result in loss of use of either lower extremity. As noted above, he is not service connected for any disabilities that preclude him from using either lower extremity.

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran is not shown to have a permanent and total service-connected disability due to a disorder that involves both lower extremities that causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices. Thus, SAH may not be awarded based on such loss of use, to include the combination of such loss with loss of use of an upper extremity or residuals of organic disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(b)(1, 3-4).

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements that he has loss of use of the right hand due to the service-connected right fifth finger fracture residuals. Even if this were the case, which as described above it is not, this alone is not sufficient to warrant entitlement to the benefit sought on appeal.

Accordingly, considering all pertinent criteria, there is no basis for granting entitlement to a certificate of eligibility for SAH. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809. Thus the evidence weighs persuasively against the appeal and it is denied.

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, for the Board's consideration. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Redman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.