Citation Nr: A25033141
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240926-477603
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from September 2006 to April 2007 and from May 2019 to October 2022. In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

This matter is being remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and asserts that his symptoms onset in 2019 while he was in service. VA afforded him a VA mental disorders examination in March 2024 to determine the nature of his acquired psychiatric disorder. However, this examination, despite rendering a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder, did not include a nexus opinion, despite the Veteran having given competent lay reports on examination regarding an in-service onset of his psychiatric symptoms. Rather, the AOJ noted in the June 2024 rating decision that such an opinion was not obtained because the service treatment records did not reflect psychiatric treatment during the Veteran's service. However, because the Veteran is competent to speak to matters he experienced through his senses, such as the onset of psychiatric symptoms in service, an examination with an etiological opinion should have been provided because his statement, alone, provided evidence of an in-service event and a possible nexus, in addition to the current disability having been diagnosed on VA examination in March 2024. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). This VA examination was not adequate in that no nexus opinion was rendered. The AOJ erred by not obtaining such opinion, and a remand is needed to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his acquired psychiatric disorder. The examiner should review the entire claims file, conduct all necessary tests and studies, and opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder onset in, or is related to any incident of active service, to include his reports of beginning to experience symptoms of depression during service.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms/history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question. 

 

 

David Gratz

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Davidoski, Claire

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.