Citation Nr: A25033862
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240930-478652
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

An initial rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The service-connected PTSD has been shown to be productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood due to such symptoms depressed mood; anxiety; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  

2. The Veteran was reported to be employed as a deputy sheriff on a full time basis.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from May 2002 to September 2006.  He served in Southwest Asia. 

In December 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 70-percent disability rating for that disability, effective July 10, 2023.  In September 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Initial Rating for PTSD

The Veteran asserts that an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is warranted.  He advances no specific contentions in support of his appeal. 

Disability ratings are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptoms during the relevant period with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

A 70-percent rating is warranted for PTSD where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  A 100-percent rating requires total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; a persistent danger of hurting self or others; an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  In Vazquez Claudio v. Shinseki, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas and must be considered with other evidence.  Even suicidal ideation that manifests at the lowest degrees of frequency, intensity, and duration is a symptom that VA considers exemplative of a 70 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 20.  

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The report of a December 2023 psychiatric examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran complained of "a recent history of passive suicidal ideation;" "repetitively engaging in safety checking behaviors excessively (locking, checking, double checking and re-locking doors and window and performing perimeter checks around the home);" "mood disturbance that is persistent and unremitting;" "a general lack of mental clarity and mental fatigue that compromises his thought process, quality of judgment and abstract thought;" "difficulty recalling recent events;" "suspicious of the intentions of others;" "fails to attend to the routine tasks of caring for himself and of maintaining his appearance and hygiene;" "chronic sleep disturbance that leaves him mentally and physically fatigued;" and "decreased capacity for frustration tolerance and affect regulation [resulting] in periods of unprovoked irritability [and] anger outbursts."  The Veteran noted that his psychiatric symptoms "have a negative impact upon his performance and productivity" in his work as a law enforcement officer, and "upon his marriage, family life, and relationships." On mental status examination, the Veteran exhibited a depressed mood; an anxious affect; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; normal speech; linear, logical and goal directed thought processes; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and no psychomotor agitation, delusions, and/or auditory or visual hallucinations.  The examiner concluded that the service-connected PTSD was productive of "occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood." 

The service-connected PTSD has been shown to be productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood due to such symptoms as depressed mood; anxiety; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The Veteran was reported to be working as a deputy sheriff on a full time basis.  In the absence of symptoms reflecting total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting himself or others, disorientation to time or place, or forgetting names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.C., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.