Citation Nr: A25033632
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-431324
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD is granted.

Entitlement to a rating of 50 percent for left knee osteoarthritis with patella alta (left knee osteoarthritis) is granted.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee subluxation and instability (left knee instability) is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity lumbar radiculopathy (radiculopathy) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, throughout the appeal period the Veteran's PTSD manifested with symptoms more nearly approximating occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms such as impaired impulse control; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; social isolation; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and not minding if certain people died.

2. The Veteran has pain with any movement of her left knee and pain at rest, impacting her ability to walk or exercise; thus, her symptoms more closely approximate extension limited to 45 degrees.

3. The Veteran is legally prevented from obtaining a rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee instability due to the rating assigned for left knee osteoarthritis.

4. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy results in mild incomplete paralysis and is wholly sensory.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b) (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.125, 4.130 (2024); Code 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a rating of 50 percent for left knee osteoarthritis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a; Code 5010, 5261 (2024).

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee instability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.68, 4.71a; Code 5257 (2024).

4. The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.124a; Code 8520 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2018 to April 2023.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2023 and March 2024 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

The rating decisions on appeal constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  The Veteran timely appealed these AMA rating decisions to the Board in an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, and requested Direct Review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Accordingly, the Board may only consider evidence that was before the AOJ at the time of issuance of the rating decisions on appeal as to the issues adjudicated in therein.  That is to say, regarding entitlement to increased ratings for service-connected left knee osteoarthritis, left knee instability and left lower extremity radiculopathy, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision, and regarding entitlement to an increased rating for PTSD, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. §20.301.

Increased rating.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  This practice is known as staged ratings.  Id.

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for PTSD; entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent from July 31, 2023.

The Veteran's PTSD is currently rated as 30 percent disabling prior to February 5, 2024 and as 50 percent disabling prior to that.  He seeks a higher rating.  Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating is warranted for the entire appeal period.

The Veteran's disability was rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Under that criteria, a 30 percent rating is warranted for a mental disorder that results in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Code 9411.

A 50 percent rating is warranted for a mental disorder that results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for a mental disorder that results in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted when the condition results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

Symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  A veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Additionally, while symptomatology should be the primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating, § 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused the requisite level of occupational and social impairment.  Id.

At a November 2022 VA psychological examination the Veteran reported insomnia, overthinking, and difficulty falling asleep in part due to thoughts regarding her in-service job.  She stated she sleeps 5 hours and has difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep.  She further reported sporadic nightmares, vivid dreams and awakening due to her dreams.  The Veteran reported anxiety and that she was living alone with her dog at the time.  The Veteran denied panic attacks.  She stated she has sporadic anxiety regarding her in-service job.  She reported having a depressed mood.  The VA examiner found that the Veteran experienced flashbacks and hypervigilance.  Her psychological symptoms were noted to be anxiety and suspiciousness.  The examiner noted that the Veteran arrived on time for her appointment and appeared to be a "sunny" person.  She was quiet, vigilant and collaborative during the examination.  She was alert and oriented and maintained good personal appearance and hygiene.  The examiner opined she had an overall "good mental health state."

The Veteran's VA treatment records during the period on appeal show the following: On August 16, 2023, the Veteran was noted to be positive for "ADHD/depression, anxiety, [and] unusual stress".  The Veteran was alert and oriented and her judgement and insight were noted to be fair.  On August 30, 2023, the Veteran reported she has difficulty relaxing and can often feel suddenly depressed or anxious if a memory from her previous work pops into her head.  She reported difficulty being in crowded or public environments and that she often feels compelled to evaluate her surroundings for safety or threats.  The record noted the Veteran takes Zolpidem Tartrate for sleep, has insomnia, and gets 3 to 6 hours of sleep at night.  She reported nightmares and racing mind.  She denied delusions, and her judgment and thinking were noted to be good.  She reported intrusive thoughts and often feels as though she is always on alert.  She reported that she takes care not to discuss too much detail when her family and friends ask about her in service work.  In October 2023, her psychological symptoms were noted to be anxiety, "on edge", difficulty falling asleep, nightmares, and intrusive memories of the cases she investigated as a felony investigator in service.  Her speech was spontaneous with normal rate, volume, and tone, and her thought processes were noted to be linear, logical and organized.  She denied suicidal ideations, delusions, or perceptual disturbances.  Her insight and judgment were noted to be fair.  She reported that she likes to go out to restaurants and bars with friends and family but feels on edge and is hypervigilant if the place gets too crowded.  She stated it is hard for her to form new relationships because she feels "everyone is sketchy."  She stated she cannot "shut off her mind". 

At a December 2023 VA psychological examination the Veteran reported she lives with her best friend.  She works part time as an administrative assistant.  The Veteran's psychological symptoms were noted to be anxiety; occasional nightmares; concentration difficulties; social isolation and withdrawal from others; feeling easily overwhelmed; feeling the need to watch doors and exits carefully when she is out; intrusive thoughts; difficulty falling and staying asleep; depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  The Veteran denied, or the examiner did not observe, suicidal or homicidal ideations; disorientation; delusions; hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; or neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The Veteran was casually dressed for the examination with appropriate affect.

At a February 2024 VA psychological examination the examiner stated the while the Veteran is able to superficially get along with others, she is impersonal and does not deeply engage due to her distrust.  The examiner noted she has not been involved in any serious romantic relationships since her military service.  The examiner noted the Veteran entered a bachelor's degree program in 2023 but has struggled more with school than she has in the past, and has been more "mentally drained" and less motivated.  The examiner noted the Veteran is in treatment and uses medication to treat her mental health condition.  The Veteran reported that she was arrested for public intoxication in July 2023, stating that after consuming alcohol, she was involved in an argument in public in which the police were called, and she was arrested for public intoxication after arguing with a police officer.  The Veteran reported or exhibited the following symptoms: Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories and dreams of the traumatic events she experienced in service; avoidance behaviors; persistent negative emotional state; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle response; chronic sleep impairment; depressed mood; anxiety; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  The Veteran denied, or the examiner did not observe, suicidal or homicidal ideations; disorientation; delusions; hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; or neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The Veteran was casually dressed and appropriately groomed for the examination with appropriate affect.  She was alert, oriented, cooperative, and maintained appropriate eye contact.  Her speech was within normal limits for rate, rhythm, and volume.  Her thought process was organized with no unusual content.  The examiner noted she had not been hospitalized due to her PTSD.  While the Veteran denied homicidal ideations, she stated she "wouldn't mind" if certain people died.

The Board finds the November 2022, December 2023 and February 2024 VA psychological examinations adequate for appellate review.  There is no evidence the examiners were not competent or credible, and as the reports are based on the Veteran's statements, examinations via approved telehealth video call and the examiners' observations, the Board finds them entitled to significant probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-05 (2008).

Upon review of the evidence of record the Board finds an evaluation of 70 percent, is warranted for the entire appellate period. Indeed, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms have more nearly approximated the level of severity commensurate with a 70 percent disability rating. In this regard, the Board notes that the symptoms listed in the rating criteria for psychiatric disabilities are intended to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan, supra.  In this regard, in July 2023 the Veteran was arrested for public intoxication due to getting into an argument with friends and a police officer which demonstrates impaired impulse control, a symptom contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria. Moreover, there is a showing of difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, which was shown on the December 2023 and February 2024 VA psychological examinations.  The Veteran reported difficulty with being in crowded or public environments, feeling compelled to evaluate her surroundings for safety or threats while in public, and feeling the need to watch doors and exits carefully when she is out.  The Board finds that these are "symptom[s] such as" obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  The Board further notes the February 2024 VA psychological examiner noted that while the Veteran gets along with others superficially, she is impersonal and does not deeply engage due to her distrust, demonstrated by her general lack of romantic involvement.  She further reported it is hard for her to form new relationships because she feels "everyone is sketchy."  The Board finds that this amounts to inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Finally, although the Veteran did not expressly endorse homicidal ideation, she stated that she "wouldn't mind" if certain people died; the Board finds this to be a "symptom such as" homicidal ideations.  Thus, in the aggregate, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas.  When reviewing the overall disability picture and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms have more nearly approximated a disability picture contemplated by a 70 percent disability rating throughout the appeal period. A 70 percent rating is therefore warranted and granted.

However, a 100 percent rating is not warranted.  The evidence shows the Veteran lives with and maintains a relationship with her best friend.  Although the evidence demonstrates the Veteran struggles with interpersonal relationships, she is at least able to get along with others superficially.  She further works part time as an administrative assistant.  Thus, neither her social nor occupational impairment is "total."  Moreover, no VA examiner has found that the Veteran experiences hallucinations or delusions or noted any lack of alertness or orientation or that she was inappropriately groomed.  The evidence shows no indication she has gross impairment in thought processes or communication, or grossly inappropriate behavior.  The evidence shows no indication that the Veteran is a danger to herself or others; although she did express that she would not mind if certain people died, she directly denied homicidal ideations, and there is no evidence she has ever engaged in any sort of violent behavior.  The evidence further does not show that the Veteran experiences memory loss for names of close relatives, her own occupation, or her own name.  Thus, a higher evaluation of 100 percent is not warranted.  

Finally, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that she has both PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder and that she should receive separate compensable ratings for both and the ratings for these disabilities should not be combined.  See April 2024 VA Form 10182.  However, this would amount to pyramiding which is impermissible as the Veteran may not be compensated twice for the same symptoms. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  Moreover, the February 2024 VA psychological examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder, and that the diagnosis of PTSD was a correction of that former erroneous diagnosis.  Accordingly, a separate compensable rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD is not warranted.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent left knee osteoarthritis.

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee instability.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance.  When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, there must be consideration of functional loss caused by factors that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40.  Consideration must also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45; see also DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").

Standard motion of a knee joint is from zero degrees extension to 140 degrees flexion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.  Code 5010 pertains to arthritis due to trauma.  That Code uses the criteria for degenerative arthritis, Code 5003, which provides that ratings will be provided on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate Codes for the specific joint or joints involved.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Codes 5003, 5010.  Limitation of leg motion is governed by Codes 5260 and 5261. 

Code 5260 concerns limitation of leg flexion.  A 10 percent rating is warranted where flexion is limited to 45 degrees; a 20 percent rating is warranted where flexion is limited to 30 degrees; and a 30 percent maximum rating is warranted where flexion is limited to 15 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Code 5260. 

Code 5261 pertains to limitation of leg extension.  A 10 percent rating is warranted where extension is limited to 10 degrees; a 20 percent rating is warranted where extension is limited to 15 degrees; a 30 percent rating is warranted where extension is limited to 20 degrees; a 40 percent rating is warranted where extension is limited to 30 degrees; and a maximum 50 percent rating is warranted where extension is limited to 45 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Code 5261.

Under Code 5257, a 10 percent rating is warranted for slight subluxation or lateral instability.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate subluxation or lateral instability.  A 30 percent maximum rating is warranted for severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Code 5257.

The evaluation of the same disability under several Codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; however, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one disorder is not duplicative of the symptomatology of the other disorder.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).  A claimant who has both limitation of flexion and limitation of extension of the same leg may be rated separately under Codes 5260 and 5261 to be adequately compensated for functional loss associated with injury to the leg.  VAOPGCPREC 9-2004 (2004), 69 Fed. Reg. 59,990 (Oct. 6, 2004).  Additionally, a claimant who has limitation of motion and instability of the knee may be rated separately under Codes 5260, 5261, and 5257.  However, separate ratings require separate compensable symptomatology.  VAOPGCPREC 9-98 (1998), 63 Fed. Reg. 56,704 (Oct. 22, 1998); VAOPGCPREC 23-97 (1997), 62 Fed. Reg. 63,604 (Dec. 1, 1997); see also Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).

Known as the "amputation rule," the combined rating for disabilities of an extremity shall not exceed the rating for the amputation at the elective level, were amputation to be performed. 38 C.F.R. § 4.68.  A 60 percent rating is provided for an amputation of the thigh, above the knee, at the middle or lower third.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Codes 5162, 5163, 5164.

During a November 2022 VA knee examination, the Veteran reported her knee pain is "present all the time".  The Veteran reported her pain increased after walking and that her knee joint is always stiff after immobility.  The examiner found the Veteran's walking distance is limited to one kilometer.  The Veteran further stated she has flare-ups 1 to 2 times per week that are precipitated by doing exercises or sleeping with her knee bent.  The flare-ups last for 10 to 60 minutes and are alleviated by stretching, mild movements and pain killers.  She stated that her pain reaches an 8 or 9 out of 10 during a flare-up.  During a flare-up, using stairs is very painful and difficult and her walking distance is further limited.  Active range of motion testing revealed that left knee flexion was not limited and in fact extended to 150 degrees, beyond normal movement.  Extension was limited to 10 degrees.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has been prescribed a knee brace, but the Veteran reported the brace does not help and so she does not use it.  Range of motion testing for passive range of motion, observed repetitive use and estimated repeated use over time revealed no change in the Veteran's ranges of motion.  The VA examiner did not provide an estimate as to additional range of motion loss during a flare-up.  The examiner did not find that the Veteran had ankylosis of her left knee.  Although the Veteran reported pain both on flexion and extension, the Board notes the examiner did not note the point in the ranges of motion that pain onset; generally, where pain on motion is present, the examiner must note where in the range of motion the pain sets in and whether that pain causes functional loss.  See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 169 (2016).  In addition, the Board further notes that when a Veteran is not examined during a flare-up, which the Veteran was not, a VA examiner is required to provide an estimate as to functional loss in terms of additional range of motion loss due to pain on use during flare-ups.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).  However, because here the examiner found the Veteran's pain is constant and also noted that she has pain even on non-movement or rest, indicating that pain is present throughout the range of motion, and the Board will find that the examination is Correia and Sharp compliant.  

A. Osteoarthritis of the left knee

Upon consideration of the evidence in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis results in the functional equivalent of limitation of extension at 45 degrees.  Therefore, a rating of 50 percent is warranted.  The November 2022 VA knee examination revealed the Veteran has constant knee pain and has pain even at rest with no movement.  This implies that any movement whatsoever is painful.  The Board acknowledges the evidence shows that the Veteran's actual range of motion, i.e. the movement her knee is physically capable of without consideration of other factors, is only slightly reduced (the Board notes normal range of motion is 0 to 140 degrees).  However, the physical capability of her knee to move does not take into account that all movement causes pain and that she has pain even at rest, the fact that her knee is technically capable of movement notwithstanding.  The Veteran's prescribed knee brace does not help her disability.  During a flare up, her pain is an 8 or 9 out of 10 and her ability to walk or use stairs is limited.  The Veteran is also limited as to the position in which she can sleep and how much she can exercise, as sleeping with her knee bent or exercising can cause flare-ups.  Thus, the evidence reflects that the Veteran's extension of her left knee is completely impacted.  After considering the factors outlined in 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, granting the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds her left knee osteoarthritis more nearly approximates the functional equivalent of limitation of extension of 45 degrees.  A rating of 50 percent is therefore warranted and granted.

B. Instability of the left knee

With the Veteran's left knee now being assigned both a 50 percent rating for osteoarthritis and a 20 percent rating for instability, the Veteran has reached the legally maximum allowable combined rating of 60 percent for her left knee pursuant to the amputation rule.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.68.  Thus, a rating in excess 20 percent for instability of the left knee is not legally warranted and additional ratings pursuant to other Codes cannot be considered.  Accordingly, a rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's left knee instability must be denied.

As a final note, the Board recognizes the holding of Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (2025) in which the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that where the applicable Code under which a musculoskeletal disability is rated and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation.  The Board notes that while the medical evidence regarding the Veteran's knee disability indicates the Veteran uses medication to treat her left knee disabilities, the November 2022 VA knee examination does not discuss the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication or whether they had been considered in assessing the severity of her disabilities.  However, because here the Board has granted the maximum rating available for the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis and because a higher rating is not legally available for any other left knee disability pursuant to the amputation rule, the Board finds that remand for an examination that expressly does not consider the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication is not necessary as it would not result in a greater benefit to the Veteran.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.68.  

4. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy. 

The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is rated pursuant to Code 8520, for paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  Pursuant to that Code, 10 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis; a 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis; a 40 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe incomplete paralysis; a 60 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy; a maximum rating of 80 percent is warranted for complete paralysis, with the foot dangling and dropping, no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Code 8520.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  Although the use of similar terminology by medical professionals should be considered, it is not dispositive of an issue.  Instead, all evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding a request for an increased disability rating.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

The Veteran's VA treatment records during the period on appeal do not discuss the severity of her left lower extremity radicular symptoms.

During a November 2022 VA lumbar spine examination, the VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have signs or symptoms of radiculopathy in her left lower extremity.  Muscular strength testing revealed that the Veteran's left lower extremity hip flexion, knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion, and great toe extension all showed 5 out of 5 strength.  No muscular atrophy was noted.  Reflex testing showed normal reflexes, and sensory testing revealed normal results.  

During a November 2023 VA lumbar spine examination, the VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have constant pain, but had mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in her left lower extremity.  The examiner indicated involvement of the Veteran's sciatic nerve; no involvement of any other nerve was noted.  Muscular strength testing revealed that, hip flexion, knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion, and great toe extension all showed 5 out of 5 strength.  No muscular atrophy was noted.  Reflex testing showed normal reflexes, and sensory testing revealed normal results.

The Board finds the November 2022 and November 2023 VA lumbar spine examinations adequate for appellate review.  There is no evidence the examiners were not competent or credible, and as the reports are based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examinations and the examiners' observations, the Board finds them entitled to significant probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302-05.

Upon consideration of the evidence in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that a rating in excess of the 10 percent rating currently assigned for the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted.  The evidence during the period on appeal collectively shows the Veteran has mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in her left lower extremity.  There have been no lay contentions that the Veteran's left lower extremity radicular symptoms are of greater severity or that the examinations of record do not accurately reflect the severity of her symptoms.  Thus, the evidence shows that her radiculopathy did not manifest in moderate symptoms during the period on appeal, and a rating of 20 percent is not warranted pursuant to Code 8520.  To warrant a 40 percent rating, the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy would need to result in moderately severe incomplete paralysis, and to warrant a 60 percent rating, the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy would need to result in severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy.  As the Board has found that the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy does not manifest in even moderate symptoms, it follows that her symptoms are also not "moderately severe" or "severe."  Moreover, all examinations of record during the period on appeal are in accord that the Veteran does not have muscular atrophy.  Thus, 40 and 60 percent ratings are not warranted.  Finally, to warrant a maximum 80 percent rating, the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy would need to result in complete paralysis, with the foot dangling and dropping, no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of knee weakened or lost.  No examination of record during the period on appeal indicates that the Veteran's left foot drops or dangles; on the contrary, all such examinations are in accord that movement of the muscles below the knees was possible, with ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion and great toe extension all showing 5 out of 5 strength.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's present disability picture does not more nearly approximate that contemplated by an 80 percent rating, as none of the symptomatology contemplated by an 80 percent rating is present in this case.

The Board has considered whether the Veteran could obtain a higher evaluation pursuant to a different Code.  There are no other applicable Codes related to nerves in the lower extremities that provide a higher evaluation for the severity of the Veteran's symptoms given her present disability picture.  Thus, the Veteran is appropriately rated pursuant to Code 8520.

The Board has also considered whether an additional or alternative rating is warranted under Code 8620 or 8720 for neuritis or neuralgia of the sciatic nerve.  See Banschbach v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 422, 429 (2024) (holding that a rating for incomplete paralysis of a nerve does not necessarily prohibit a separate rating for neuritis or neuralgia of the same nerve when they are raised by the evidence of record).  Neuritis, cranial or peripheral, is characterized by the loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.123.  The maximum rating which may be assigned for neuritis characterized by organic changes is the equivalent of severe incomplete paralysis of the same nerve.  Id.  Neuritis not characterized by organic changes may be rated as no more than moderate, or with sciatic nerve involvement, moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the same nerve.  Id.  Neuralgia, cranial or peripheral, is characterized by usually dull and intermittent pain, of typical distribution so as to identify the nerve.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124.  The maximum rating for neuralgia is the equivalent for moderate incomplete paralysis of the same nerve.  Id. 

In this case, the evidence shows wholly sensory involvement with intermittent pain, paresthesias or dysesthesias, and numbness.  Pain and sensory disturbance are contemplated by the rating criteria for neuritis and neuralgia.  However, these symptoms are contemplated in the rating currently assigned under Code 8520.  Any additional consideration of the same symptoms would be prohibited as duplicative pyramiding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  As such, separate ratings under Codes 8620 or 8720 are not warranted.

Therefore, a rating under Codes 8620 and 8720 is only warranted as an alternative to a rating under Code 8520, and only if it results in additional benefit to the Veteran.  The rating criteria for neuritis and neuralgia of the sciatic nerve are the same as those for incomplete paralysis, so there is no indication that consideration of the same facts under these criteria would result in a finding that the Veteran's neuritis or neuralgia was more than moderate, and therefore that it would result in the assignment of a higher rating under either Code 8620 or 8720.  Additionally, ratings for neuritis and neuralgia have maximum rating restrictions which are not required for incomplete paralysis.  Accordingly, an alternative rating under Code 8620 or 8720, rather than under Code 8520, would not result in additional benefit to the Veteran and is therefore not warranted.

For all these reasons, a rating in excess of the currently assigned 10 percent rating for the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dvorak, James T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.