Citation Nr: A25033659
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-458129
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 20 percent, but no greater, for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), left lower extremity, is granted.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), right lower extremity, is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) of left lower extremity is characterized by, at worst, moderate intermittent pain and mild numbness extending from the lower back to the anterior and posterior calf area without evidence of weakness, atrophy, or hyperactive reflexes throughout the period on appeal. 

2. The radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), right lower extremity, is characterized by, at worst, severe intermittent pain and mild numbness extending from the lower back to the anterior and posterior calf area without evidence of weakness, atrophy, or hyperactive reflexes throughout the period on appeal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating of 20 percent, but no greater, for left lower extremity radiculopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent, for right lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from October 1996 to October 2000.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Rating

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). This practice is known as staged ratings. Id.; see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007). The determination of whether an increased disability rating is warranted is to be based on a review of the entire evidence of record and the application of all pertinent regulations. See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

The Board considers not only the criteria of the currently assigned diagnostic codes, but also the criteria of other potentially applicable diagnostic codes. In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. However, the evaluation of the same "disability" or the same "manifestations" under various diagnoses is not allowed. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. A claimant may not be compensated twice for the same symptomatology as "such a result would overcompensate the claimant for the actual impairment of his earning capacity." See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; Brady v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 203, 206 (1993). This would result in pyramiding, contrary to the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. However, if a Veteran has separate and distinct manifestations attributable to the same injury, they should be compensated under different diagnostic codes. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259 (1994); Fanning v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 225, 230 (1993).

Additionally, in deciding an appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material favorable to the claimant. Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994). Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be considered by the trier of fact, while credibility is a factual determination about the probative value of the evidence. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).

If the evidence is competent, the Board must then determine if the evidence is credible, or worthy of belief. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007). After determining the competency and credibility of evidence, the Board must then weigh its probative value. In this regard, the Board may properly consider internal inconsistency, facial plausibility, and consistency with other evidence submitted on behalf of the claimant. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511-12 (1995).

Finally, where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence to the end that its decisions will be equitable and just as contemplated by the requirements of the law. 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is in approximate balance).

Entitlement to increased evaluation for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), left lower extremity in excess of 10 percent disabling 

Entitlement to increased evaluation for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), right lower extremity in excess of 20 percent 

The Veteran contends that the symptoms of his service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathies have worsened over time and are more severe than contemplated by their assigned disability ratings. He contends that he is entitled to a 20 percent rating for his left lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and a 40 percent rating for his right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy. See June 2024 Brief.

The Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is evaluated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520. Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520. (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under DCs 8620 and 8720.) Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling. Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis, with the foot dangling and dropping, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost, is rated as 80 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe." Spellers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 211, 219 (2018) ("DC 8520 does not define 'mild,' 'moderate,' 'moderately severe,' or 'severe,' or generally associate those terms with specific symptoms"). Although the Board has at times attempted to define these terms using dictionary definitions, those definitions are problematic because they "do little to explain the Board's understanding of these terms and do not 'disclos[e] what benchmark it employed to reach [its] conclusion.'" Casey v. McDonough, No. 21-7569, slip op. at 3 (Vet. App. Jan. 24, 2023) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (quoting Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 255 (2018) (discussing the Board's attempt to define the terms slight, mild, moderate, and severe in DC 8515).

Relevant to this case are VA Adjudication Manual (M21-1) provisions regarding evaluations of paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Overton v. Nicholson, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2006) (The Board is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the VA Adjudication M21-1 Manual (Manual) as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases.) The Manual describes mild, incomplete paralysis as a disability "limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a smaller area." Part V, sbpt. iii, ch. 12, sec. A.2.c. Moderate, incomplete paralysis, per the Manual, should be "reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment," where the sensory involvement covers "a larger area in the nerve distribution." Id. Examples of a moderate disability include "motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate." Id. 

Further, the Manual provides that a moderately severe evaluation (that is, a 40 percent rating) is available when there is "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability.' Id. Atrophy may, but need not, be present for a moderately severe rating. In discussing severe, incomplete paralysis, the Manual indicates, "[i]n general, expect motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases." The Manual also indicates, "[f]or the sciatic nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520) marked muscular atrophy is expected." Moreover, according to the Manual, "[e]ven though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve." Finally in this regard, the Manual states, "[n]euritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.123)."

In April 2023 the Veteran submitted a Statement in Support of Claim noting that he frequently experienced shooting pain, burning, numbness, tingling, aching and pins-and-needles sensation on the left side from his low back to his calf and the same sensations in the same location on the right side. He had flare-ups of the conditions several times a week which each lasting a few days.  He limits movements which cause the symptoms, including twisting or bending to the right or left. The pain from these conditions made it difficult for him to stand, walk or sit down without regularly adjusting his position such that long car rides, household chores, yard work, running and jogging and using stairs was limited. He also was experiencing painful shin splints when running or walking. When he compared his legs, side by side, the left calf is noticeably smaller than the right calf. 

The Veteran underwent a July 2023 VA Peripheral Nerve Conditions examination. The Veteran denied constant pain reporting intermittent severe right lower extremity and moderate left lower extremity intermittent pain and mild numbness of both lower extremities. Shooting pain and mild numbness also occurs in his bilateral shins when standing longer than 15 minutes. Upon examination, the Veteran had normal sensation, normal deep tendon reflexes, and full muscle strength without evidence of muscle atrophy on either lower extremity. He had a normal gait and no evidence of trophic changes. All but the sciatic nerve examination was normal. The examiner assessed the Veteran's incomplete paralysis of the right sciatic nerve as moderate and the left sciatic nerve as mild. 

The Veteran's experienced reduced overall productivity and efficiency in his role as an information technology analyst due to numbness in the bilateral shins when standing for more than 15 minutes and when lying flat.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy is primarily manifested by severe, intermittent pain and mild numbness extending from his lower back down to the calf, including the shins. The Board also finds that the most probative evidence of record weighs against a finding that the disability is manifested by impairment of motor function, trophic changes, severe sensory disturbance of the entire extremity, complete loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, or complete paralysis. Reconciling the Veteran's report and examiner's reports to accurately reflect the disability, the Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to moderate incomplete paralysis, a 20 percent disability rating. A higher moderately severe rating requires motor and/or reflex impairment reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability. The Board notes that while the area of the Veteran's severe intermittent pain includes the anterior shin area of his calf, he has not presented any lay evidence of impaired motor function, loss of reflexes, or persistent loss of sensation that approximates a moderately severe or worse disability picture for right lower extremity radiculopathy which would support a 40 percent or higher disability rating. 

As for the left lower extremity, the Board has considered that the breadth of the moderate intermittent left lower extremity pain with mild numbness extends from the lower back to the calf and the front of the calf. Given the breadth of the area, and the moderate pain, the Board finds that the Veteran's left leg disability symptoms exceed that of mild, incomplete paralysis limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a smaller area, and more nearly approximate the moderate level where the sensory involvement covers a larger area in the nerve distribution. As with the right lower extremity, there is insufficient lay or clinical evidence of impaired motor function, loss of reflexes or persistent loss of sensation that approximates a moderately severe disability picture for a 40 percent disability rating. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay assertions that the right lower extremity radiculopathy warrants a rating higher than 20 percent, including considerations of its impact on his everyday life. He is competent to testify to symptoms he is experiencing such as pain and numbness. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994). However, the Veteran does not have the medical background and training to offer a medically competent opinion as to the specific level of disability of this disorder according to the medical criteria outlined in the appropriate diagnostic codes. The Board therefore finds the opinions of the medical examiners more probative than the Veteran's lay statements as the opinions were offered after a competent medical examination of the Veteran, consideration of the history of the disability including the Veteran's reports of symptoms, and their understanding of the diagnostic code criteria. 

The Board has considered all other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes, but there is no evidence showing the Veteran has neurological impairment associated with any other peripheral nerves that have not already been service-connected. Therefore, a separate or higher rating under a different Diagnostic Code is not warranted.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record weighs in favor of an increased rating to 20 percent, but no greater, for the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy for the entire period on appeal.  

On the other hand, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy. As there are no doubts to be resolved, the claim for an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for the right lower extremity is denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Adams Hill, Denise

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.