Citation Nr: A25033877
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-470753
DATE:  April 11, 2025

     

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain during the period from September 5, 2022, to April 11, 2024, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy during the period from September 5, 2023, to April 11, 2024, is granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the review period, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain has been characterized by pain, limitations on bending, lifting, and prolonged sitting, standing, or walking, as well as forward flexion limited at worst and upon consideration of pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, and incoordination after repeated use over time and during a flare-up to 15 degrees, but it has not been characterized by unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

2. During the review period, the Veteran's right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy has been characterized by moderately severe incomplete paralysis but not severe incomplete paralysis. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. During the review period from September 5, 2022, to April 11, 2024, the criteria for a rating in excess of 40 percent for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

2. During the review period from September 5, 2023, to April 11, 2024, the criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 2005 to January 2014. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (hereinafter Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ)) in the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

In May 2024, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review (HLR) of the April 2024 rating decision and an informal conference. In August 2024, following the informal conference, the AOJ issued an August 2024 HLR decision in which it continued the 40 percent rating for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain and the 20 percent rating for the Veteran's right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy. In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and cited the April 2024 rating decision as the decision on appeal, not the August 2024 HLR decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings, Generally 

Disability evaluations (ratings) are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. § Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual disorders in civil occupations. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found; this practice is known as staged ratings. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 118, 126 (1999); see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain 

Due to the severity of his disability, the Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for his lumbosacral strain. See December 2023 Back Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire. In a September 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain should be assigned a 50 percent disability rating. Unfortunately, the Board concludes that a rating in excess of 40 percent for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is not warranted during the review period.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran submitted an intent to file on September 5, 2023, followed by an April 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The relevant period for review also includes a one-year lookback period for increased rating claims. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Thus, the Board will consider whether entitlement to an increased rating arose for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain any time from September 5, 2022, (one year prior to the Veteran's submission of the intent to file) up to the April 11, 2024, AOJ rating decision on appeal that marks the end of the review period.

During the review period, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237. DC 5237 is rated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. Under the General Rating Formula, in pertinent part, a 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. 

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, normal extension is zero to 30 degrees, normal left and right lateral flexion is zero to 30 degrees, and normal left and right lateral rotation is zero to 30 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237, Note 2. Ankylosis is a condition in which an entire spinal segment is immobile and fixed in position. Unfavorable ankylosis exists where the fixation is in flexion or extension and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; and/or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is considered favorable ankylosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, Note 5. 

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, might not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant, when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint." The spine, of course, has no opposite joint.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of an examination, VA examiners must obtain information from the Veteran about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares.

Considering the Veteran's contentions in light of the evidence of record and the applicable law, the orthopedic manifestations of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain do not more nearly approximate that contemplated by a rating higher than 40 percent during the period on review.

To warrant a rating in excess of 40 percent under the schedular rating criteria for a lumbar spine disability, the evidence must demonstrate unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. Here, the evidence does not support such findings. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.71a, DC 5237.

In this case, the Veteran's service treatment records and VA treatment records show his history of service-connected chronic lower back pain with complaints of radiculopathy that began during deployment to Southwest Asia. The Veteran stated during a December 2023 medical examination for his back condition that his symptoms have progressed and increased in severity over time. In an April 2024 VA treatment record, during an annual physical the Veteran was noted to have chronic back pain for which he received regular physical therapy outside VA.       

The Veteran attended a non-VA medical examination for his back condition in December 2023 and submitted the Back Condition Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) to VA along with his claim for an increased rating for lumbosacral strain. The examiner was a licensed nurse practitioner with a specialty in pain medicine and family/physical medicine and rehabilitation, and the examination report was co-signed by a medical doctor. The examiner, who did not regularly see the Veteran as a patient, reviewed the Veteran's VA claims disability documents and VA and private treatment records before conducting an in-person examination. 

The examiner noted the Veteran's reports of having back pain that impaired his ability to get dressed and tie his shoes, to exercise or mow the lawn, and to perform household chores and pick up and play with his children. The Veteran reported experiencing severe daily flare-ups marked by tightness, pinching, tingling, and numbness in his back, radiating to the lower extremities that limited his ability to bend, pick up, and stand and that required him to seek assistance from his spouse. The Veteran stated that lying down, stretching or practicing yoga, and taking Motrin would alleviate his pain during a flare-up.

Upon examination, the December 2023 examiner measured the Veteran's range of motion in his back and found that, for active and passive range of motion testing, he had forward flexion limited to 80 degrees; extension, right lateral rotation, and left lateral rotation limited to 20 degrees; and right lateral flexion and left lateral flexion limited to 25 degrees. The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced pain on forward flexion at the 40-degree endpoint and on all other ranges of motion at the 15-degree endpoint, and the pain contributed to the Veteran's limited range of motion. The examiner stated that the Veteran had visible pain with weight-bearing, non-weight-bearing, active motion, passive motion, and non-movement. The examiner further stated that the Veteran's limited range of motion caused functional loss, making standing upright, prolonged sitting, and walking difficult and painful. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. 

The examiner noted that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, and incoordination would significantly limit the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over a period of time and during a flare-up. The examiner estimated that after repeated use over time and during a flare-up the Veteran's back would be limited on forward flexion to 15 degrees and on all other measured movements to 10 degrees. The examiner stated that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain caused muscle spasms that resulted in an abnormal gait, stated that the Veteran had trouble sitting, standing, and walking for prolonged periods without frequent breaks, and stated that the Veteran reported weakened and less movement than normal affecting his mobility. The Veteran had normal muscle strength testing on the left side and normal muscle strength testing on the right side for hip flexion. However, he had reduced muscle strength testing on the right side for knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion, and great toe extension, rated as having active movement against some resistance. The Veteran did not have muscle atrophy. On the right side, he had normal knee reflexes but hypoactive ankle reflexes. Additionally, the Veteran had decreased sensation to light touch on the right side for his thigh/knee and lower leg/ankle, and he had no sensation to light touch on his right side foot/toes. The examiner stated that the Veteran had right side sciatic nerve radiculopathy secondary to his lumbosacral strain, with moderate constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness. The examiner found that the Veteran did not have ankylosis of the spine, intervertebral disc syndrome, or any other neurologic abnormalities related to his lumbosacral strain. The Veteran denied using any assistive devices but did state he occasionally uses a weight belt or Ace bandage around his waist.    

The Board finds the December 2023 medical examination adequate for appellate review. The examination was based on a review of the Veteran's treatment records, the Veteran's in-person examination and statements, and the examiner's observations and measurements, and the Board finds that it is entitled to significant probative weight. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-05 (2008).

As previously noted, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was rated at 40 percent under DC 5237 for the period on review. To warrant a higher, 50 percent rating under the General Rating Formula, the evidence would need to show unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. 

Here, the record does not show that the Veteran had unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine at any point during the period on review, including during the one-year lookback period. For VA purposes, as previously noted, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire thoracolumbar spine (or the entire cervical spine or the entire spine) is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; and/or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is considered favorable ankylosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, Note 5.   

The December 2023 examiner found that the Veteran did not have ankylosis of the spine, and the evidence does not show that the Veteran had the functional equivalent of ankylosis even during a flare-up or after repeated use over time. The examiner found that, even during severe daily flare-ups that the Veteran reported experiencing, the Veteran's back had an estimated forward flexion range of motion to 15 degrees. The examiner also noted the Veteran's reports about the functional limitations he experienced due to his back pain. The examiner took the Veteran's lay statements regarding his back pain and flare-ups into account when estimating that the additional functional loss the Veteran experienced during flare-ups due to pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, and incoordination would limit his range of motion on forward flexion to 15 degrees. According to the examiner's estimation, therefore, the Veteran still retained the ability to move his back even during severe flare-ups. There is also no evidence that the Veteran experienced one or more of the conditions noted in Note 5 that must result from ankylosis in order to constitute unfavorable ankylosis for VA purposes.   

The Board is cognizant of the recent United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims decision, Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, holding that the Board must discount the beneficial effects of medication used to treat a service-connected disability when the relevant diagnostic code does not specifically contemplate medication use. Here, the rating criteria for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain (DC 5237) do not reference the effects of medication. However, in this case, the Veteran told the December 2023 examiner that, once he started having a flare-up, he would then help alleviate pain by, among other activities, taking Motrin. The examiner's estimates of the Veteran's functional loss and limited range of motion during a flare-up were based on the Veteran's own reports of what his flare-ups were like before taking Motrin or engaging in other activities such as lying down or yoga to help alleviate the pain. Hence, it is not necessary to remand this case for a new medical opinion that discounts the beneficial effects of medication because the Board already has the Veteran's account of his condition during a flare-up before he treats flare-up pain with any medication. Additionally, other than the Veteran's statement in the December 2023 examination about taking Motrin following a flare-up, the record does not contain evidence that the Veteran takes medication for his lumbosacral strain. In the March 2024 VA treatment record, the Veteran was prescribed a topical gel for knee pain. The provider noted the Veteran participated in regular physical therapy for his back outside of the VA but did not prescribe or note any non-VA medication for the Veteran's back.       

Even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, such as pain and an inability to engage in lifting, exercise, or prolonged sitting or standing, the degree of additional limitation due to increased pain and limited range of motion with repeated use over time and during flare-ups would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

Unfortunately, under the rating criteria that the Board must apply, a rating in excess of 40 percent is therefore not warranted for the period on review.

During the review period, the Veteran was already separately assigned a 20 percent rating under DC 8520 for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy associated with his back disability, and the Veteran's increased rating claim for his radiculopathy is discussed separately below. The record during the review period does not show any other neurologic abnormality associated with his back disability that would warrant a separate rating.

In sum, the evidence does not support a rating in excess of 40 percent for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain during the period from September 2022 to April 2024, and the claim must be denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy

In a September 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran should be assigned an initial 40 percent disability rating for his service-connected right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy (hereinafter "RLE radiculopathy"). The Board concludes that a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's RLE radiculopathy is warranted during the review period.

The review period for the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's RLE radiculopathy is from the effective date of the initial grant of service connection for RLE radiculopathy, September 5, 2023, to the April 11, 2024, rating decision on appeal.  

As discussed above, under the General Formula, associated objective neurologic abnormalities are rated separately under their respective diagnostic codes. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Note (1). During the review period, the Veteran's RLE radiculopathy associated with his back disability was rated as 20 percent disabling under DC 8520 for moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

Under DC 8520, which rates impairment of the sciatic nerve, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis. Incomplete paralysis warrants higher ratings when the impairment is moderate (20 percent), moderately severe (40 percent), or severe with marked muscular atrophy (60 percent). An 80 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, where the foot dangles and drops, there is no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520. The schedule of ratings notes that when the nerve involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.

The words "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the rating schedule. Although the use of similar terminology by medical professionals should be considered, it is not dispositive of the issue of severity. Instead, all evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding a request for an increased disability rating. 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6. In addition, the M21-1 VA Adjudication Procedures Manual, while not binding on the Board, offers benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. In pertinent part, it indicates that the moderate level is noted to be appropriate when sensory symptoms are continuous and assigned a higher medical grade reflecting greater impairment and/or affecting a larger area in the nerve distribution. The moderately severe level is noted to be appropriate when there is motor and/or reflex impairment (such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability, with atrophy possibly present. The severe level is noted to be appropriate when there is motor and/or reflex impairment (such as atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability, with marked muscular atrophy, as well as possible trophic changes seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases. See M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A - Neurological Conditions and Convulsive Disorders.

In this case, the December 2023 examiner diagnosed RLE radiculopathy. The examiner stated that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain caused muscle spasms that resulted in an abnormal gait, stated that the Veteran had trouble sitting, standing, and walking for prolonged periods without frequent breaks, and stated that the Veteran reported weakened and less movement than normal affecting his mobility. The Veteran had reduced muscle strength testing on the right side for knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion, and great toe extension, rated as having active movement against some resistance. The Veteran did not have muscle atrophy. On the right side, he had hypoactive ankle reflexes. Additionally, the Veteran had decreased sensation to light touch on the right side for his thigh/knee and lower leg/ankle, and he had no sensation at all to light touch on his right side foot/toes. The examiner stated that the Veteran had right side sciatic nerve radiculopathy secondary to his lumbosacral strain, with moderate constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness.

The results of the December 2023 examination support that, during the review period, the Veteran's RLE radiculopathy manifested as "moderately severe," which is assigned a 40 percent disability rating. The Veteran's sciatic nerve involvement was not wholly sensory. Rather, he was noted to have muscle spasms as well as reduced muscle strength on his right side in his knee, ankle, and toe. Although the Veteran did not have muscle atrophy, he had hypoactive ankle reflexes, decreased sensation on his right side thigh/knee and lower leg/ankle, and no sensation to light touch on his right side foot/toes.  

 Using the relevant guidance from the M-21-1 to aid in applying the terms "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe," and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right lower extremity constant/intermittent pain, numbness, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias that the December 2023 examiner characterized as "moderate" are in alignment with a "moderately severe" level of severity. Although atrophy was not present, the examiner found that the Veteran had motor and reflex impairment including weakness and diminished right ankle reflexes at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability.  

Using the guidance from the M-21-1, a higher 60 percent rating for severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve with marked muscular atrophy is not warranted in this case. The Veteran was not found to have any muscular atrophy during the December 2023 examination. 

In sum, entitlement to a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's RLE radiculopathy is warranted, and the claim is granted.  

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Eisenstatt, R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.