Citation Nr: A25033728
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-475519
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative evidence of record did not demonstrate that the Veteran had an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD.

2. The probative evidence of record did not demonstrate that the Veteran's back disability manifested in forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; nor, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from March 2013 to July 2016.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the Veteran filed a new claim for his back disability the day following his Notice of Disagreement that appealed the August 2023 decision as to the issues of entitlement to service connection for PTSD and an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability. As a result, VA obtained new evidence in its development of that claim and subsequently issued a November 2024 rating decision that, in pertinent part, denied a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's back disability. As the evidence was not obtained prior to the issuance of the August 2023 decision on appeal, the Board is unable to consider that evidence. Moreover, the appeal as to the issue of entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability remains properly before the Board because a Board appeal was filed prior to the new claim and not withdrawn. In this regard, that Board notes that, in September 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement as to the August 2023 decision and listed only the issue of service connection for PTSD and again elected the Direct Review docket. Although the filing of a Notice of Disagreement within 60 days of an initial Notice of Disagreement may modify the initial Notice of Disagreement, modifications are limited to selecting a different evidentiary record option. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c). Furthermore, in October 2024, the Veteran's representative submitted an appellate brief listing the issues of entitlement to service connection for PTSD and an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability. As such, the Board concludes that both issues of entitlement to service connection for PTSD and an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability. 

Additionally, as shown above, the Board has recharacterized the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD to a claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009) (holding that the scope of a disability claim includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD 

The Veteran contends that he developed an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as PTSD, due to his service. See January 2023 VA 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim. The Veteran asserted his PTSD is due to his service in Afghanistan, including witnessing an Afghan national get run over by a vehicle and die. See February 2023 VA examination. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Further, establishing service connection for PTSD specifically requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that a claimed in-service stressor occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

Upon consideration of the evidence, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted because the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of PTSD, or any other acquired psychiatric disorder. See Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393, 401 (2020), aff'd sub nom. Martinez-Bodon v. McDonough, 28 F.4th 1241 (Fed. Cir. 2022) (holding that for psychiatric disability claims, there must be a diagnosis that conforms to the DSM-5 for service connection to be awarded). 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records reveals no noted acquired psychiatric disorders. Although the Veteran's service treatment records include the results of a February 2016 questionnaire that reflected the Veteran was experiencing mental health symptoms related to his back pain in service, such as "minimal symptoms of anxiety and depression," a provider assessed the results of the questionnaire as "unlikely to impact his ability to cope effectively with pain." In addition, although a January 2016 behavioral health screening reflect that the Veteran endorsed that he had 6 or more drinks on one occasion monthly in the prior year, a provider assessed the Veteran's survey and provided him with alcohol education but did assess the Veteran's reported behavior as an indication of a mental health disorder. Finally, the Board notes that the Veteran indicated he did not experience mental health symptoms or undergo mental health treatment on his July 2016 report of medical history for his separation from active service. 

In support of his claim, in January 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement, in which he reported that he and his family believed he had PTSD because he was having difficulty with everyday activities and his family noticed a big change in him since he went overseas to a combat zone in service. He reported difficulty focusing, difficulty communicating with his family, and drinking a lot of alcohol because he felt depressed. He also reported thinking about the things he had seen and dealt with in combat. He also reported trouble sleeping and sleeping more than "the regular hours." He also reported he was told that he yelled and screamed at his family when he was in the emergency room but that he did not recall the incident and others speculated that he was having a flashback of being in a combat zone. He reported feeling "very depressed" and his desire to get his life together. He further reported his family and friends have encouraged him to get help and his mother  dropped him off at the VA hospital several times but he had not followed through to obtain treatment. 

Thereafter, in February 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. The examiner indicated he reviewed the Veteran's VA e-folder and conducted an examination via approved video telehealth. The examination report reflects the opinion of the examiner that the Veteran did not have any mental disorder, to include PTSD, which conforms to the DSM-5 criteria. The examiner noted that the Veteran denied seeking mental health treatment during his service or thereafter. The Veteran reported an in-service stressor involving witnessing someone run over by a vehicle and seeing the deceased's body flattened on the ground. As to this, the examiner noted that during his military service, "the Veteran reported periodically experiencing intrusive thoughts of seeing an Afghani national killed after being hit by a vehicle. Other than occasional thoughts about this incident, the veteran denied presenting with any other trauma related stress symptoms." After the Veteran's service, the Veteran reported "intrusive thoughts of witnessing an Afghani national killed by a vehicle 'about once every two months.'" The examiner also noted that the Veteran "denied any history of problems managing depression, anxiety, or any other behavioral health issues." In addition, the Veteran also reported that he was arrested for murder in 2016, and was incarcerated for seven months, but the charge was dismissed in 2022. The Veteran also denied any history of problems managing his use of drugs or alcohol. The examiner's noted behavioral observations were generally positive or otherwise unremarkable. Noting his consideration of the evidence, the examiner determined that the occasional intrusive thoughts the Veteran reported did not seem severe or persistent enough to meet criteria for a DSM-5 disorder. The Board notes the examiner wrote that the Veteran's reported in-service stress did not meet criterion A of the PTSD diagnostic criteria. However, upon review of the examination report, it appears that examiner indicated that the Veteran's reported in-service stressor met criterion A but that other criteria were not met. 

Although there is relevant evidence of record in the written statements submitted in January and March 2023, the Board finds that evidence not credible due to inconsistency and implausibility, and therefore not probative. See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995) (finding that in weighing credibility, VA may consider inconsistent statements, internal inconsistency, and consistency with other evidence of record); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (the Board can consider bias in lay evidence, the significant time delay between the affiants' observations and the date on which the statements were written, and conflicting statements of the veteran in weighting credibility). In this regard, a March 2023 statement in support of claim reflects various reports about the Veteran's social and occupational history that conflict with the Veteran's reports during his February 2023 examination. Specifically, during his examination, the Veteran reported having positive relationships with his parents, siblings, and girlfriend, and reported his employment was going well. However, in the March 2023 statement, the Veteran appears to report contradictory information, including difficulty in his relationships with his family, friends, and girlfriend; being fired; and excessive alcohol consumption. In addition, it appears the Veteran's mother also included a statement in the submission, which reflects her concern for her son and her report that he "drinks a lot" and seems to be depressed. Upon consideration of the short time period between the Veteran's initial claim, the February 2024 examination, and the subsequent submission of the March 2023 written statement, as well as the contradictions between the reports therein, it is not likely that the Veteran experienced such a turnabout twice in the span of less than two months. It is more likely that the Veteran's mother has intervened in some manner with the written statements. This conclusion is supported by the March 2023 written statement in which the Veteran appeared to have discussed his mother's experience of calling VA and being told that the Veteran had to call himself. As the Veteran, himself, was speaking to the examiner during the February 2024 examination and did not represent the reports in the January 2024 statement in support of claim, the Board may only reliably rely on the Veteran's reports during his examination.

In addition, the Veteran's VA treatment records include a March 2023 Veteran Appointment Request (VAR), which reflected "mental issues." However, a subsequent record dated August 28, 2023 shows that the Veteran contacted VA and reported that while he experienced depression and anxiety before, he had since worked things out and did not feel he needed mental health services. The Board also notes that a VA record reflects that the Veteran's mother also called VA on August 28, 2023 to obtain information about an inpatient alcohol treatment program for her the Veteran. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's mother's concern for the Veteran's well-being but finds her report to VA not competent for the purpose of establishing that the Veteran has a diagnosis, particularly in light of the Veteran's contradictory report on the same day. 

Furthermore, there are no relevant private treatment records of record showing a diagnosis for any acquired psychiatric disorder. Although the Board notes that there was a report of emergency treatment during which the Veteran may have experienced mental health symptoms, there is no information that would allow VA to locate them. In addition, although it appears that the Veteran's mother has reported her belief that the Veteran engaged in excessive drinking and that he may have been depressed, she is not competent to report the Veteran's experiences nor is there evidence that she or the Veteran are competent to provide a diagnosis. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1376 (2007). 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran and his mother's reports regarding their experiences and belief that the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disability. However, the Board must rely on the competent and adequate opinion of the examiner who considered the Veteran's subjective reports and other evidence of record to conclude that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD. Absent competent evidence that the Veteran has a diagnosed condition, entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability must be denied. 

2. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial disability rating 10 percent for his back disability due to the severity of his pain. See October 2024 appellate brief. The Veteran's back disability is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Other applicable, general policy considerations are: interpreting reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability, 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; resolving any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability in favor of the claimant, 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; where there is a question as to which of two evaluations apply, assigning a higher of the two where the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating, 38 C.F.R. § 4.7; and, evaluating functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness, and the effects of the disability upon the person's ordinary activity, 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. 

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a , General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5242.

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id. at Note (1).

Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching." Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis. Id. at Note (5).

Additionally, if there is evidence of IVDS, Diagnostic Code 5243 provides it is to be rated either under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine or under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher rating when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 (VA's Combined Ratings Table).

The Formula for Rating intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months. A 20 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months. A 40 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. A 60 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.

Note (1) to Diagnostic Code 5243 explains that, for purposes of ratings under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.

Turning to the evidence, the Board notes that VA obtained an examination for the Veteran's claim in August 2023. The completed Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) for the examination reflects a diagnosis of degenerative disc disease other than IVDS. The DBQ further reflects that the Veteran endorsed pain but denied treatment post military service, denied use of pain medication, denied hospitalizations or emergency room visits for his back disability in the prior year. The Veteran also reported daily flare-ups that last for hours resulting in pain due to overuse and alleviated by rest. The associated functional impairments due to the Veteran's flare-up symptoms were noted as limited walking and standing.

Initial range of motion (ROM) testing revealed forward flexion of 90 degrees; extension of 30 degrees; right and left lateral flexion of 30 degrees; and right and left lateral rotation of 30 degrees. The examiner noted that passive range of motion ROM was not tested due to "pain in all planes, additional testing could cause further pain." The examiner indicated that there was evidence of pain in weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, active motion, and on rest/non-movement. However, there was no evidence of crepitus, or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions and there was no change in ROM after repetitive testing. The examiner indicated that there was no evidence suggestive of impairment that significantly limited functional ability after repetitive use over time and/or during a flare up. The Veteran had no localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm. There were no additional contributing factors of disability. Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory testing was normal. There was no ankylosis of the spine. There were no other neurological abnormalities. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have IVDS. The Veteran did not use any assistive device as a normal mode of locomotion. 

A review of the evidence of record reveals no VA or private treatment records that are relevant and probative to determine the severity of the Veteran's back disability. Moreover, the Veteran has not identified any records that could be obtained with VA assistance. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran indicated that he served from 2016 to 2021 after his separation from active duty. However, the Veteran's VA DoD Identity Repository (VADIR) profile did not reflect any active service subsequent to his 2016 separation from active service. Moreover, the Veteran's claim reflects his report that he last underwent treatment for his back in 2016. See January 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

After careful consideration of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's back disability is not warranted. To that end, the evidence is against finding that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability manifested as forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine less than 60 degrees, combined ROM of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees, or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. Rather the August 2023 examination revealed forward flexion of 90 degrees and a combined ROM of the thoracolumbar spine of 240 degrees. The Board notes that the Veteran's ROM was not tested in passive motion but finds the examiner's explanation reasonable as the Veteran demonstrated pain on active motion such that it would not be appropriate for the examiner to exert external pressure to determine ROM on passive motion. 

Moreover, in addition to the schedular criteria, the Board has considered functional loss due to flare-ups of pain, weakness, fatiguability, and lack of endurance. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). Although the examiner noted the examination was not conducted during a flare-up and the Veteran reported daily flare-ups, the Board notes that the examiner elicited relevant information from the Veteran's flare-ups, including the precipitating factor of overuse. As such, the Board finds it would not be reasonable for VA to predict when a flare-up would occur, and it would depend on the Veteran's own actions. Moreover, the Board notes the examination had been rescheduled following the Veteran's absence from the previously scheduled May 2023 examination. The Board finds the examination adequate as the examiner elicited information from the Veteran about his flare-ups, including the functional impairment. In this regard, the Board finds reasonable the examiner's opinion that there was no evidence suggestive of pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups. In this regard, while the Veteran reported pain during flare-ups, it was characterized as mild, and the Veteran reported that the pain limited his ability to walk and stand, which indicates pain on weight-bearing, rather than limited ROM. 

As for incapacitating episodes due to IVDS, the medical evidence establishes that the Veteran has not suffered from IVDS resulting in any incapacitating episodes. There is no evidence of record that a physician has prescribed any period of bed rest to treat the Veteran's IVDS or any other aspect of her low back disability. The Veteran has not contended otherwise. Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran's back disability has not been manifested as incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks but less than six weeks during the past 12 months to warrant a higher disability rating under the criteria for IVDS.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Consequently, the Board finds that for the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's back disability did not manifest in forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees, or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. Accordingly, entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's back disability must be denied.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Shorafa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.