Citation Nr: A25033124
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230902-375347
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability (hereinafter "neck disability") is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence received following the May 2023 rating decision that denied entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is new and relevant.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability are met. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156, 3.2501.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The appellant had active duty service in the United States Marine Corps from November 2008 to June 2009 and in October 2018, with additional periods of service in the Marine Corps Reserves.

Procedural History

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which declined to reopen the claim of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability.  The appellant's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), was received by VA in September 2023.  The appellant elected the Direct Review docket. 

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023). 

Readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is granted.

In order to readjudicate a previously disallowed claim, new and relevant evidence must be received. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

VA regulations provide that a claimant who disagrees with a prior VA decision may file a supplemental claim any time after the issuance of a notice of a decision, regardless of whether the claim is pending or has become finally adjudicated.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidenced is presented or secured.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d).  New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators.  Relevant evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (a)(1). 

The appellant previously sought service connection for a neck disability in January 2023, which was denied in a May 2023 rating decision.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, January 15, 2023; Rating Decision, May 5, 2023.  The May 2023 rating decision denied the appellant's neck disability claim on the grounds that an in-service event disease or injury had not been shown and that no nexus between the appellant's injury and military service had been shown.  See Rating Decision, May 5, 2023.

Since the May 2023 rating decision, new evidence includes a private medical opinion from T.M. AGNP-C regarding the appellant's neck disability and its relationship to two in-service injuries: a rough parachute landing and a motor vehicle accident.  See Private Nexus Letter of T.M. AGNP-C, June 20, 2023.  

The private medical opinion is new as it was not previously part of the record and is relevant as it tends to prove the matter of a nexus between the appellant's current disability and an in-service injury.  As such, new and relevant evidence has been submitted and readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is granted.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

An appellant's claims must be remanded to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including when the AOJ fails to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records, relevant federal or private treatment records; fails to obtain a VA examination; or provides an inadequate VA examination or opinion.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).  Here, the appellant's claims must be remanded to confirm dates of service and to provide an adequate VA medical examination and opinion.  

Dates of service 

The appellant's service consisted of active duty and reserve duty service.  Reserve service generally means Active Duty for Training (ACDUTRA) and Inactive Duty for Training (INACDUTRA). 

In this matter, it is not clear that the record contains a complete and accurate determination regarding the appellant's ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA service.

The July2023 rating decision determined that a nexus between the in-service injury and military service had not been established.  See Rating Decision, July 13, 2023.  The July 2023 rating decision inexplicably found that the evidence does not show an event, disease or injury in-service and that a qualifying event injury or disease had its onset during service.  See Id.  Further, the July 2023 rating decision noted that no line of duty determination, with respect to the appellant's neck injury, is present in his file.  Id.  

The appellant's service treatment records (STR's) contain emergency room treatment records from January 2020 where in the appellant complains that he injured his neck due to parachute jumps while on reserve duty.  See Chronological Record of Medical Care, January 11, 2020; Emergency Room Treatment records, January 11, 2020; Health Record Receipt, undated but filed with the January 11, 2020 emergency room records.  

A January 2023 service record information report indicates that between October 2019 and September 2020, the appellant attended 28 drill days; however, the report does not show the specific dates the drill days occurred.  See Information Report, January 23, 2023.  

The appellant's file does not contain an annual retirement credit statement for 2020.  As such it is unclear whether the appellant was on ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA or some other type of service when he claims he was injured in January 2020.  It is further unclear as to whether all of the appellant's records, especially with respect to any of the 28 drill days listed on the January 2023 information report, have been associated with the appellant's file.  

On remand, the AOJ must compile a complete and accurate account of the appellant's ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA service, especially with respect to any service in January 2020.  

VA examination and opinion

The appellant was afforded a VA examination for his neck disability in March 2023.  That examination and the accompanying medical opinion are inadequate, as such remand is required.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (Where VA provides a veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate.)

The March 2023 VA examination diagnosed the appellant with a cervical strain and noted that the appellant stated his symptoms began in 2018 after a rollover accident and that he re-injured his neck after a 2020 whiplash injury.  See Neck Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, March 8, 2023.  

The accompanying medical opinion found "[t]he claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness" and concluded "[i]t is [l]ess than likely due to absence of a back condition has incurred or cost by the rollover accident during service."  See Medical Opinion DBQ, March 19, 2023.  As the conclusion relates to a back condition, the March 2023 medical opinion does not appear to address whether the appellant's neck disability is likely related to the in-service rollover accident or hard landing while parachuting.  A medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

Further the March 2023 medical opinion relies on the absence of in-service treatment as a basis for the negative nexus opinion.  See Medical Opinion DBQ, March 19, 2023.  The appellant has submitted a statement detailing his treatment to include the use of ice, over the counter medications and stretching.  See Statement in Support of Claim, January 15, 2023.  An examination which ignores the appellant's lay assertions is inadequate.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) ("it appears that the medical examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions"); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) ("The examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion").  As such remand is required for a new examination and opinion which address the appellant's lay statements and opine as to whether the appellant's neck disability is likely related to service.  

It is acknowledged that the appellant submitted a private medical nexus opinion with his supplemental claim.  See Private Nexus Letter of T.M. AGNP-C, June 20, 2023.  However, that opinion is insufficient to grant entitlement to service connection at the present time as it is general in nature and does not provide an adequate rationale.  See generally, Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (concluding that medical opinion is not entitled to any weight "if it contains only data and conclusions"); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124(2007) (an adequate medical examination must provide a rationale and explanation for its conclusions).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Verify all periods of active duty, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA, through all appropriate sources.  A retirement points summary is not enough, the specific dates must be verified, and records obtained.  If any requested records are not available, or the search for any such records otherwise yields negative results, that fact must clearly be documented in the claims file.  Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile.  The non-existence or unavailability of such records must be verified, and this should be documented for the record.  If available, obtain any line of duty determination for the claimed January 2020 parachute injury.  Required notice must be provided to the appellant.

2. Obtain all the appellant's service treatment records for all periods of active duty, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA.  If available, obtain any line of duty determination for the claimed January 2020 parachute injury.  If any requested records are not available, or the search for any such records otherwise yields negative results, that fact must clearly be documented in the claims file.  Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile.  The non-existence or unavailability of such records must be verified, and this should be documented for the record.  Required notice must be provided to the appellant and his representative.

3. Once the foregoing development has been accomplished, schedule the appellant for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his neck disability.  The clinician must review the claims file and a complete copy of this remand in conjunction with rendering any opinion.  This review should be noted in the examination report.  The clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Please state any diagnoses associated with the appellant's neck.

For each diagnosed disability, the clinician is requested to state whether it is likely (an approximate balance of negative and positive evidence) that the condition had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to the appellant's service. 

In providing the requested opinion, consider the appellant's description of his in-service symptoms as well as his post-service symptoms.    

The clinician is advised that the appellant is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered.  If the clinician rejects the appellant's reports, the clinician must provide a reason for doing so.  The Board does not make any credibility determinations at this time with respect to the appellant's lay statements.

Following direction from the?United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the proper standard of review for service connection claims is whether the factors of the case are in an "approximate balance."? Lynch?held that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in an approximate balance - i.e., nearly equal - and does not require the evidence to be in exact equipoise.? See Id.?

The mere absence of evidence of contemporaneous treatment in the service treatment records cannot, standing alone, serve as the sole basis for an unfavorable opinion.  However, it is permissible to consider this as one factor in the determination regarding the origins of the claimed disability, providing there is also sufficient explanation as to why it is reasonable to have expectation of treatment in the circumstance presented.  

All opinions must be supported by a clear rationale.  The clinician is asked to explain in detail the underlying reasoning for his or her opinion, to include citing to relevant evidence, supporting factual data, prior medical opinions, and medical literature, as appropriate.

If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the clinician must explain why a more definitive response is not possible or feasible. In other words, merely saying he or she cannot respond will not suffice.

4. Thereafter, readjudicate the claim

 

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jennifer Sullivan-Brief, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.