Citation Nr: A25033823
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 241223-502251
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service for connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service from February 1986 to May 1986, with additional periods of service in the National Guard and in the Reserves.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision regarding PTSD and the left knee and a March 2024 rating decision regarding migraines, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a February 2024 decision.  In February 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal regarding PTSD and the left knee, and in March 2024, issued the HLR rating decision regarding migraines. These HLR rating decisions considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior February 2024 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding all the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection - Migraines

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for migraines as secondary to the service-connected tinnitus. 

At the VA examination in December 2023, the Veteran reported that his headaches began about five years ago. The examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches were not secondary to his tinnitus, explaining that migraines are an episodic disorder, and a complex headache type, that has no known etiology.  Without a known etiology, tinnitus could not be the cause of migraines. Further, there was no report that the headaches specifically were associated with an escalation of tinnitus symptoms.  

The Board finds that the December 2023 VA examiner's opinion to be inadequate. The examiner reported that migraines have no known etiology, but also reported that with no known etiology, tinnitus could not be the cause of the migraines. This is illogical because it rules out one cause while also stating that the cause could not be determined. The AOJ's reliance on the inadequate opinion to be a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Left Knee Condition

VA must provide a medical examination or opinion when the following elements are established: 1) competent evidence of a current disability or recurrent or persistent symptom of a disability; 2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; 3) an indication that the claimed condition may be associated with the Veteran's service or a current service-connected disability; and 4) insufficient medical evidence to decide the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Here, the Veteran's September 2023 lay statement noted that during his time in the Infantry, he ran several miles a day, and his knees are now always in pain.  He noted that his pain started in boot camp and has gotten drastically worse. Additionally, November 2023 post-service treatment records show a complaint for left knee pain and weakness.  

The Board acknowledges that the record does not show a formally diagnosed knee condition. However, the clinical evidence of record has provided an indication that he may have a disability, due to left knee pain and weakness. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Given such, the Board finds that VA's duty to provide a VA examination has been triggered.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81. The AOJ's decision not to conduct a VA examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD. 

In a November 2023 written statement, the Veteran reported that during basic training at Fort Benning, he witnessed a horrible assault in which an individual was hit in the head with a guidon, resulting in this person twitching on the ground and bleeding from his ears, nose, mouth, and eyes. He indicated that he was reminded of this event anytime someone asked about service.  He contended that witnessing this event resulted in bipolar disorder, severe depression, anxiety, and PTSD.

Based on the Veteran's service connection claim for PTSD, a Records Research Response was obtained in December 2023.  A professional researcher from the Veterans Benefits Administration, Office of Field Operations, Military Records Research Center completed comprehensive research on the Veteran's claimed stressor event, and noted that records from the National Archives and Records Administration, the custodian of the Army unit records for 1986, was unable to locate the 1986 unit history or daily journals for the Veteran's unit or the unit's higher headquarters. Given such, there was no evidence to support documentation of the claimed incident.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's stressor event has not been able to be verified.  However, post-service treatment records show a diagnosis for major depressive disorder in December 2020 and a diagnosis for depression in January 2021. This, coupled with the Veteran's reports of an inservice incident, leads the Board to find that the "low" threshold contemplated by McLendon regarding the duty to assist by providing a VA examination has been reached. The AOJ's decision not to conduct a VA examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's migraines.  The examiner should provide the following opinions.

a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraines are related to his military service?  Why or why not?

b) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraines was caused by the service-connected tinnitus?  Why or why not?

c) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraine headache condition was aggravated (worsened to any degree) by the service-connected tinnitus?  Why or why not?

If aggravation is found, the examiner should identify the baseline level of severity of the migraines by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of the migraines.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA Knee and Lower Leg examination. A complete physical examination should be conducted according to the appropriate Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). For any knee condition diagnosed, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left knee condition is related to his military service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's assertion that as a member of the Infantry, he ran several miles a day, that his knees are now always in pain, and that his knee pain started in boot camp and has gotten drastically worse.  

The examiner is reminded that relevant case law provides that pain, by itself, can constitute a disability if it results in functional impairment of earning capacity, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d at 1364-65.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for mental health disorders. Telehealth examination is acceptable if so deemed by the examiner. After completion of the VA Mental Disorders and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder DBQs, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder is related to his military service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should consider and discuss the details of the Veteran's reported traumatic event during service in the context of any diagnosis and opinion offered.

 

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fu, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.