Citation Nr: A25033239
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 201019-114311
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

For the initial rating period on appeal from February 13, 2013, a higher initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with alcohol use disorder (psychiatric disability) is granted.

REMANDED

A total disability rating for compensation purposes based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

For the initial rating period on appeal from February 13, 2013, the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptomatology from the service-connected psychiatric disability most nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; it did not more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, for the initial rating period on appeal from February 13, 2013, the criteria for a higher initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with alcohol use disorder (psychiatric disability) have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, who is the appellant, had active service from October 1973 to February 1975. 

The instant case is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board).  A rating decision was issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) under the legacy system in March 2014, which denied service connection for a psychiatric disability.  The Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement with the denial.  

After additional development, a September 2017 VA RO rating decision granted service connection for a psychiatric disability, effective February 13, 2013, and established a 50 percent initial disability rating.  The Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement with the initial rating percentage assigned. 

In March 2020, the VA RO issued a statement of the case continuing the assigned 50 percent disability rating.  The Veteran opted the claim into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), by submitting an October 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, identifying the March 2020; therefore, the March 2020 SOC is the decision on appeal.  

A March 2024 Board decision denied the appeal and continued the assigned 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected psychiatric disability.  The Veteran appealed the denial to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court or CAVC).  In December 2024, the Court granted a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR).  The parties to the December 2024 JMR agreed that the Board should have discussed specific symptoms that may have merited a 70 percent disability rating (at a minimum) for the service-connected psychiatric disability.  The instant decision is a response to the JMR. 

In resolving this appeal, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2020 SOC.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the VA RO issued the March 2020 SOC, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. From February 13, 2013, a Higher Initial Disability Rating of 70 Percent, but no Higher, for the Psychiatric Disability is Granted.

The Veteran appeals for a higher initial disability rating of at least 70 percent for the service-connected psychiatric disability.  See March 2025 Brief.  The Veteran specifically contends that the lay and medical evidence demonstrates deficiencies in judgment and thinking, spatial disorientation, impaired impulse control, inability to establish and maintain effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and persistent delusions and hallucinations.  The contention is that this combination of symptoms, among others, demonstrate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (that meets the 70 percent rating criteria).  See id.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

Where there is a question as to which of two disability ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Secretary of VA, acting within the authority to adopt and apply a schedule of ratings, chose to create one general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 U.S.C. §§ 501, 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  By establishing one general formula to be used in rating more than 30 psychiatric disorders, there can be no doubt that the Secretary of VA anticipated that any list of symptoms justifying a particular rating would in many situations be either under- or over-inclusive.  The Secretary's use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms, particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (1992).

The evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code.  Instead, the rating specialist is to consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  If the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned.  The schedular rating criteria rate by analogy psychiatric symptoms that are "like or similar to" those explicitly listed in the schedular rating criteria.  See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.  The Federal Circuit has embraced the Mauerhan interpretation of the criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities.  Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Federal Circuit held that VA "intended the General Rating Formula to provide a regulatory framework for placing veterans on a disability spectrum based upon their objectively observable symptoms."  The Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  See id.  It was further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  See id.

Under Diagnostic Code 9411, a 0 percent (noncompensable) rating will be assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 10 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  Id.

A 30 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal) due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, panic attacks more than once a week, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks), impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbance of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting), and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent schedular rating contemplates total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

After a review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the criteria for a higher initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, have been more nearly approximated for the entire initial rating period on appeal from February 13, 2013.  For this initial rating period, the lay and medical evidence shows that the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the service-connected psychiatric disability most nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, as contemplated by a 70 percent disability rating.  During this period, the service-connected psychiatric disability did not more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment as contemplated by a 100 percent disability rating.

Pertinent to the period on appeal from February 13, 2013, the Veteran was discharged from a substance abuse treatment program for polysubstance dependence and was followed by mental health providers in December 2012, although he had received significant amounts of treatment since service separation.

In October 2013, a VA provider wrote that the Veteran was oriented, had a calm mood, had congruent and euthymic affect, had good hygiene and was depressed appropriately, displayed positive engagement with the provider, and was cooperative.  His speech was of a normal volume, his thoughts were logical and goal-directed, he had no hallucinations, delusions, suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, and displayed good insight and good judgment.  Given the Veteran's specific concerns, a consultation was placed for another substance abuse treatment program. 

In a November 2013 lay statement, the Veteran wrote that he had insomnia, nightmares, anxiety, and mood swings (like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood).  He wrote that it was impossible to remain in crowds at times and would refuse to go where crowds of people could be found, such as stores.  He also found that his symptoms had a negative impact on relationships, including an inability to manage outbursts of anger (like or similar to impaired impulse control).  

The Veteran participated in a substance abuse treatment program from November 2013 to January 2014.  In January 2014, he reported that he had an "on again, off again" relationship with his second ex-wife and that the ex-wife seemed to want to rekindle the relationship.  The Veteran believed she was manipulative and might have financial motivations.  When discussing the situation during the appointment, the Veteran was neatly and appropriately dressed, had posture and actions and manner of speaking within normal limits, had attention that was easily gained and held, and had an open and accessible attitude.  The Veteran was oriented in all spheres, had good concentration and judgment, adequate memory and retention, logical and well-organized thoughts, and demonstrated no evidence of hallucinations, delusions, or flight of ideas.  The assigned diagnoses were PTSD and an unspecified psychotic disorder. 

In May 2016, the Veteran reported that he had started two psychiatric medications while participating in a substance abuse treatment program in September 2015 and stated that he found the medications helpful to calm anxiety and assist with sleep initially but was helping less as of the appointment.  The Veteran reported distressing and recurrent dreams (like or similar to chronic sleep impairment), sleep disturbance, anxiety surrounding being in places and situations where escape might be difficult and/or help might be unavailable (like or similar to anxiety), had fear of being outside home alone, and had a fear of being in crowds that led to him staying home (like or similar to an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships).  

In May 2016, the Veteran reported that he would get angry too fast (like or similar to impaired impulse control), that his temper would go off a little too quickly (like or similar to impaired impulse control), that he could not stand being in a store by himself, that he would have panic attacks, that he could not stand when people walk behind him, that his nerves were bad (like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood), and that nightmares were very real and distressing.  At this appointment, the Veteran was cooperative, dressed appropriately, had no psychomotor retardation/agitation, had no involuntary movements, had a euthymic mood with restricted affect, demonstrated speech that was spontaneous and normal in volume and rate, had goal-directed and coherent thought process, and had no evidence of hallucinations, paranoia, or suicidal or homicidal ideation.  

At a June 2017 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed PTSD and assessed there was occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which is contemplated by a 50 percent disability rating. 

Socially, the Veteran reported deficiencies in family relations and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  He reported that he was married in 1971, divorced in 1975 because he was physically abusing his wife (like or similar to impaired impulse control), remarried in 1998, and separated from the second wife because of his temper, although there was no physical abuse with the second relationship.  The Veteran demonstrated social withdrawal, as he had few friends and difficulty getting along with others.  He also had anxiety and irritability in social situations. 

Occupationally, the Veteran reported an employment history consistent with that given in the VA treatment records, namely attempting college but not being able to be around so many people or concentrate and performing odd jobs until he became too disabled to continue.  

The Veteran reported to the June 2017 VA examiner that he had problems with memory, concentration (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking), intrusive thoughts (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking), irritability (like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood), anxiety, insomnia, nightmares, inappropriate guilt, reactivity to trauma reminders, avoidance behaviors, hypervigilance, panic attacks, and substance abuse issues.  

The June 2017 VA examiner indicated anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances.  The Veteran was casually dressed and well-groomed, oriented, had a neutral mood and congruent affect, and was friendly and cooperative.  

In August 2017, the Veteran was hospitalized for five days due to the psychiatric disability.  There were some episodes of hallucinations and suspected psychosis that was due to PSTD.  

As of a January 2018 appointment, the Veteran reported that he had been hospitalized again in September 2017 for one week because he was stressed out.  He reported that he thought he had been doing okay since that hospitalization and had a stable mood and good sleep.  As of the January 2018 appointment, the Veteran had no hallucinations or paranoia, no suicidal or homicidal ideation, adequate hygiene, cooperative and reasonable behavior, a euthymic mood with congruent affect, and speech that was normal in rate and volume.  Thought processes were goal-directed and coherent, he had intact memory, was alert and attentive, was oriented, and demonstrated fair insight (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking) and fair judgment (like or similar to deficiencies in judgment). 

In an August 2018 neuropsychological evaluation, the Veteran reported that he was concerned about memory loss, had panic attacks, and used substances to socialize.  The Veteran reported that he had word-finding challenges, had verbal comprehension problems (he reported it was like he was "in a different world"), was distractible, and had short-term memory problems.  The examiner reported that the Veteran may be experiencing spatial disorientation, as he would get lost heading to familiar places because of being distracted by his thoughts.  There was slowed information processing (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking), possible deficiencies with decision-making (like or similar to deficiencies in judgment), and desire to isolate. 

At the August 2018 assessment, the Veteran reported that it was hard for him to communicate when he loses his temper (like or similar to impaired impulse control), had a hard time controlling when he was angry, although he usually managed (like or similar to impaired impulse control), had appetite disturbances (like or similar to depression), and had sleep disturbance.   

Socially, he would not hang out with friends but was close to some family members.  He was stressed out in crowds and did not like people to walk behind him (like or similar to suspiciousness).  His first wife divorced him because of anger issues (like or similar to impaired impulse control), but he still talked to a daughter from that relationship.  The Veteran lived alone, but his second ex-wife and son were concerned about him living alone.  The Veteran still supported the second ex-wife, but the anger would cause a rift.  He had a good relationship with two stepsons.  He had not kept up with friends from service and had not made any new friends, although he had connected with some old friends.  See August 2018 VA Treatment Record.  

Occupationally, the Veteran reported that he tried working outside of service but could not concentrate and lost that job.  He tried to go to college, but did not want anyone sitting behind him (like or similar to suspiciousness) and could not concentrate on his studies (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking).  He managed with odd jobs for some time.  See August 2018 VA Treatment Record.  

At the August 2018 examination, the Veteran was neatly dressed, well-groomed, and was alert and oriented.  His affect was limited in range and mood was anxious. He disclosed having panic attacks in the past but denied any during interview and did not report suicidal or homicidal ideation.  His thought processes and speech content were logical and goal-directed and his thought pattern was relevant, but responses were brief and sometimes vague.  His speech was soft and slow.

In a September 2018 VA appointment, the Veteran reported that he had been feeling more depressed over the past month and had been drinking alcohol to cope with flashbacks.  He reported problems with memory, but no panic attacks, obsessions, compulsions, feelings of hopelessness or helplessness, hallucinations or delusions, or suicidal or homicidal ideation.  His antidepressant dosage was increased.

After psychometric testing, in October 2018, the Veteran demonstrated severely impaired to low average verbal memory, mildly impaired to low average visual recall, mixed executive functioning (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking), severe depression, moderate anxiety, flashbacks, and possibly dissociation (like or similar to spatial disorientation).  His memory of functional living activities was borderline, but his money, calculation, and communication skills were all average or better. 

In January 2019, there were no mental status examination concerns; however, by February 2019, the Veteran was found to have fair insight (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking) and fair judgment (like or similar to deficiencies in judgment).  In February 2019, the Veteran had anxiety attacks, flashbacks, difficulties in concentration (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking), struggled to be around other people (like or similar to inability to establish and maintain effective relationships), and would feel paranoid in crowds (like or similar to suspiciousness). 

At a VA appointment in September 2019, there were no mental status examination concerns other than fair insight and poor judgment.  

At a January 2020 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed PTSD and alcohol use disorder, mild, in partial remission.  The VA examiner wrote that all symptoms were attributable to the PTSD diagnosis and that the alcohol use disorder was secondary to the PTSD diagnosis.  The VA examiner assessed occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, as contemplated by a 50 percent disability rating. 

Socially, the Veteran continued to live alone and reported that he enjoyed it.  He still supported his second ex-wife and would talk to his three children sometimes.  He would go to church but had to sit in the back (like or similar to suspiciousness).  He reported that he got irritable around people (like or similar to impaired impulse control) and could not concentrate on what they were saying (like or similar to deficiencies in thinking).  Occupationally, he had retired but could not remember exactly when.  See January 2020 VA Examination.  

The Veteran reported an October 2018 hospitalization for flashbacks and hallucinations/confusion.  He reported that he was in the hospital for five days.  He reported taking medication, participating in therapy groups, and participating in a drug treatment program several times.  See January 2020 VA Examination.  

The January 2020 VA examiner indicated depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and a decreased appetite.  The Veteran was cooperative and polite during the examination and had a depressed affect. 

Viewed holistically, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence supports a finding that the symptoms approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, to warrant a 70 percent disability rating, but no higher for the initial rating period on appeal from February 13, 2013.  Although the VA examiners' assessments indicate a lower disability rating of 50 percent was warranted, the assessment of a psychiatric disability for rating purposes is not limited to the findings of the VA examiners; rather, the Board has considered all evidence, including lay reports of symptoms by the Veteran, as well as histories reported during treatment and findings noted during treatment.  Many of the symptoms and documented impairment by the Veteran, both in lay statements and to the VA treatment providers demonstrate deficiencies in most areas.  

Socially, the Veteran was divorced for all or nearly all the period on appeal from February 13, 2013, but did maintain contact with his second ex-wife and his children.  The Veteran had limited to no friends and could not handle being in social situations, like church or college.  Occupationally, the Veteran was unemployed for the entire period on appeal and had been unable to tolerate prior jobs and college.  

The evidence shows a range of symptoms related to a higher level of disability, to include deficiencies in judgment, deficiencies in thinking, impaired impulse control, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and spatial disorientation, all of which are contemplated by a 70 percent disability rating for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran had hallucinations at times during the period on appeal, leading to brief hospitalizations, but finds that the hallucinations were not "persistent" as contemplated by a 100 percent disability rating; rather, they occurred a few times.  Although the severity, frequency, and duration of the hallucinations does not match the level of disability contemplated by a 100 percent disability rating, the Board finds that the hallucinations support the next higher 70 percent disability rating than the VA examiners' assessed 50 percent level of impairment. 

A psychiatric disability rating is based on the holistic picture, not isolated symptoms, and rated according to the impact on social and occupational functioning.  The severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms include a significant degree of impairment in occupational and social functioning, namely that the Veteran had no occupational activities, but did maintain a relationship with his second ex-wife and children.  There was not total occupational and social impairment, as contemplated by the next higher 100 percent (total) disability rating. 

The Board has considered whether a temporary total rating based on a service-connected disability that required hospital treatment is appropriate.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.29.  A temporary total rating under this provision requires hospitalization for a period in excess of 21 days.  The contentions and evidence in this case does not show that the Veteran was hospitalized for a period in excess of 21 days.  The representative only urges to Board to consider whether a temporary total rating is warranted, but does not point to any evidence of such extended period of hospitalization.  For this reason, a temporary total rating cannot is not warranted for the limited periods in which he was hospitalized.

Given the above findings, the Board will grant the appeal for a higher initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the initial rating period on appeal from February 13, 2013, for the service-connected psychiatric disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. A TDIU is Remanded.

In the March 2025 brief, the representative asserted that a TDIU had attached to the psychiatric rating issue pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  In this case, the assertion of TDIU attached to the appeal for a higher initial disability rating.  

Preliminarily, with the increase in the psychiatric disability rating, the service-connected disabilities meet the combined rating percentage requirements for TDIU eligibility under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) from February 13, 2013, which is the entire period on appeal.  

At this time, there is not sufficient evidence to analyze whether a TDIU is warranted on the merits.  Namely, the evidence does not include significant information related to the Veteran's prior employment history and skills.  The Board acknowledges the representative's argument that the combination of the service-connected psychiatric disability and the service-connected back disability render the Veteran unemployable, but specific evidence is needed to substantiate the broadly asserted and attached TDIU claim.  

At this time, the claims file does not contain a completed VA Form 21-8940 (TDIU Claim Form).  Obtaining a complete TDIU Claim Form would help to develop specific information necessary to decide the TDIU issue as this particular form requests specific relevant information about education and training, income, employment history and nature of past work, and calls for specific supporting details that will help the Veteran substantiate a claim for TDIU.  Most of the requested information is in the Veteran's possession or knowledge so is needed to substantiate the claim or determine whether further assistance is needed to substantiate the TDIU claim.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Board finds that the VA RO was aware of the potential application of a TDIU prior to the SOC that constitutes the decision on appeal.  The VA treatment records and examination document that the Veteran was unemployed during the period on appeal, and, in some cases, the Veteran has asserted that the unemployment was due to disability.  These records are sufficient to put the VA RO on notice that a potential TDIU claim was raised and to require further development.  

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran a VA Form 21-8940 (TDIU Claim Form) with instructions for submission.  The Veteran is to complete all information requested by the form, and is cautioned that failure to provide all requested information could result in denial of the claim for TDIU.  The VA RO should conduct any additional development that it deems necessary after submission of the TDIU Claim Form.   

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.