Citation Nr: A25033490
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240812-464026
DATE:  April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for a right lateral collateral ligament sprain (hereinafter "right ankle disability"), is granted.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for a right labral tear, including SLAP (superior labral anterior-posterior lesion) (hereinafter "right shoulder disability"), is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during active service.

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's right ankle disability manifested through painful motion of the ankle, but has not been shown to have marked limitation of motion, with dorsiflexion limited to less than 5 degrees, or plantar flexion limited to less than 10 degrees.

3. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's right shoulder disability manifested through painful motion of the arm, but has not been shown to have motion limited to midway between the side and shoulder level to include flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2024). 

2. The criteria for entitlement to an increased initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for a right ankle disability, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271 (2024).

3. The criteria for entitlement to an increased initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for a right shoulder disability, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the U.S. Marine Corps from May 2017 to May 2022. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the December 2023 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ found new and relevant evidence had not been received sufficient to warrant readjudication of the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus. However, the AOJ did not make any specific findings regarding new and relevant evidence within the rating decision and reviewed the claim on a de novo basis. Therefore, the Board finds the AOJ implicitly found new and relevant evidence had been received. The Board is bound by the AOJ's implicit finding that new and relevant evidence has been submitted and need not address the issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Service Connection - Tinnitus

The Veteran asserts her tinnitus had its onset during active service. Specifically, the Veteran stated she performed maintenance on loud machinery and helicopters during service and had ringing in her ears. 

In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ conceded in-service hazardous noise exposure based on the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of aircraft maintenance. This is a favorable finding by which the Board is bound. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

As to current disability and in-service event, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) contain an August 2018 audiogram, which noted an early warning for a decrease in hearing, and an August 2020 audiogram, which noted tinnitus. In the Veteran's March 2022 separation report of medical history, she marked ear, nose, or throat trouble, which she described as ear problems, ear infections, and ruptured ear drums. 

The Board finds this evidence supports the Veteran's statements that her tinnitus onset during active service and has continued since. Moreover, the Board finds the Veteran competent to report when her symptoms began, and that she is credible in that regard. Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991).

In August 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA tinnitus examination. The Veteran reported she the onset of her tinnitus had been random, and she did not know the exact date of onset. The Veteran reported intermittent tinnitus with both sides affected, right more than left. She described the duration as two times a week in the right ear lasting about 2 minutes at a time. The Veteran reported that her tinnitus had become more frequent in the right ear since onset. The examiner noted the Veteran reported recurrent tinnitus, but opined the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure. As rationale, the examiner opined there was no evidence of positive shifts and/or temporary shifts in hearing to support tinnitus being related to noise injuries. Further, the examiner found the Veteran's description of tinnitus was not compatible with the chronic tinnitus criteria, which was defined as occurring more than once per week and lasting five minutes or more. The examiner found the Veteran reported transient ear noise that occurred in the general population, and as transient ear noise was not consistent with noise-induced tinnitus, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus was caused by or the result of military noise exposure. 

The Board finds the August 2023 VA examination and medical opinion are inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, the examiner failed to address the decrease in hearing noted in the Veteran's August 2018 audiogram, or the notation of tinnitus in the Veteran's August 2020 audiogram. Further, the examiner's rationale lacked sufficient detail to support the finding that the Veteran's symptoms did not warrant a clinical diagnosis of tinnitus. As the examination and medical opinion are inadequate for adjudication purposes, they cannot serve as the basis of a denial of entitlement to service connection.

The Board notes that lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). In this case, as noted above, the Veteran is competent to report when her symptoms started and that they have continued since that time and the Board has found her credible in that regard. Further, the probative medical evidence of record supports the Veteran's statements that she has a current diagnosis of tinnitus that began during active service and has continued since. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively for the claim. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Increased Rating - Right Ankle Disability 

The Veteran asserts that her right ankle symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. The Veteran's right ankle disability is currently rated at 0 percent pursuant 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271.

Under Diagnostic Code 5271, moderate limitation of motion (less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion) warrants a 10 percent rating. Marked limitation of motion (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion) warrants a 20 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271. Normal range of motion of the ankle is from 0 to 20 degrees in dorsiflexion and from 0 to 45 degrees in plantar flexion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. Functional loss may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior in undertaking the motion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 (discussing facial expressions such as wincing, muscle spasm, crepitation, etc.). Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. Excess fatigability and incoordination should be taken into account in addition to more movement than normal, less movement than normal, and weakened movement. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45.

The intent of the schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. It is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. Although the first sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 refers only to arthritis, the regulation applies to joint conditions other than arthritis. Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 3-5 (2011).

In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, it is necessary to consider, along with the schedular criteria, functional loss due to flare-ups of pain, fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, and weakness. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). 

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's STRs note complaints of left foot pain and treatment for tendonitis, and a report of right ankle pain on the Veteran's March 2022 separation report of medical history, but are otherwise silent for complaints of or treatment for right ankle pain or conditions.

In October 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA ankle examination. The Veteran reported she began experiencing right ankle pain during service, and described her current symptoms as ongoing swelling that caused radiating pain to her calf, laxity, and instability. The Veteran reported moderate to severe flare-ups 4 times a week that lasted around 2 days. She reported flare-ups were precipitated by activities, and alleviated by elevating her foot and topical pain ointment. The Veteran did not report any functional loss or impairment due to her right ankle disability, and denied a history of instability. On physical examination, the Veteran's active and passive range of motion were normal with no evidence of pain. There was no objective evidence of crepitus, but there was localized tenderness or pain on palpation, which the examiner described as mild, lateral pain. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing, and there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. The examiner noted the Veteran was not being examined after repeated use over time, and found there was no evidence to suggest pain, fatiguability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner noted the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up, but found that pain would cause functional loss during flare-ups. However, the examiner found the Veteran's estimated range of motion during flare-ups would be normal. There were no additional factors noted that contributed to the disability, and there was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or suspected joint instability. The examiner diagnosed right lateral collateral ligament sprain, and found that the condition would not have a functional impact on the Veteran's ability to perform any occupational tasks. 

Based on the foregoing and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the Veteran is entitled to an increased initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for her right ankle disability. In this regard, while the evidence of record reflects the Veteran does not experience limitation of motion even with consideration of repetitive use over time and during flare-ups, the evidence does reflect the Veteran experiences painful motion during flare-ups. 

As to a rating in excess of 10 percent, there is no indication from the evidence of record that the Veteran had limitation of motion that was worse than moderate in severity. In this regard, the Veteran's range of motion was normal with both active and passive range of motion testing, and while she reported painful motion during flare-ups, the October 2023 examiner found these flare-ups would not result in any limitation of motion. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing and any limitation she experienced due to pain, weakness, incoordination, fatigability, or lack of endurance during flare-ups or following repeated use over a period of time was accounted for by the VA examiner when determining the Veteran's range of motion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, 4.45 (2019). There is no other evidence showing that she experiences limitation of motion greater than that noted at her VA examination. With consideration of all pertinent disability factors, there is no appropriate basis for assigning a rating in excess of 10 percent. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton, 25 Vet. App. 1; and 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted higher schedular ratings than those assigned. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence for and against the claim is in approximate balance. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, and entitlement to an increased initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's right ankle disability, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Increased Rating - Right Shoulder Disability 

The Veteran asserts that her right shoulder symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. The Veteran's right shoulder disability is currently rated at 0 percent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

The criteria in Diagnostic Code 5201 provide for different ratings for the minor arm and the major arm. The medical records show that the Veteran is right-handed. As such, the right shoulder disability is considered part of her dominant upper extremity and rated accordingly. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.69. Under Diagnostic Code 5201, a 20 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees). A 30 percent rating of the major (dominant) arm requires limitation of motion midway between the shoulder and side (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees), and a 40 percent rating of the major arm requires limitation of flexion and/or abduction to 25 degrees from side. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

Normal motion of the shoulder is 180 degrees of forward elevation and 180 degrees of abduction, both measured with 0 degrees being the position of the straight arm at the side with fingers pointing to the floor and with 180 degrees being the position of a straight arm overhead with fingers pointing to the ceiling. Normal external rotation is from a position with the upper arm bent at the elbow and starting at a position parallel to the floor, defined as 0 degrees, and rotated upward to a position perpendicular to the floor, defined as 90 degrees. Normal internal rotation is from that same starting position but rotated downward to a position perpendicular to the floor, also defined as 90 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate I.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's STRs reflect she reported and was treated for right shoulder pain in May 2020. On physical examination, she was noted as having full active and passive range of motion. She was diagnosed with right shoulder pain consistent with acromioclavicular joint pain. In the Veteran's March 2022 separation report of medical history, she reported right shoulder pain, which started in 2020.

In October 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder and arm conditions examination. The Veteran reported her right shoulder disability had its onset during active service, and she described her current symptoms as infrequent sharp gripping pain. The Veteran reported she experienced moderate, monthly flare-ups of her shoulder pain that lasted up to a week. She reported her flare-ups were precipitated by random activities and alleviated by rest. She described the functional loss and impairment due to her right shoulder condition as not having full rotation in her right shoulder, and not being able to extend her right arm or shoulder back. She further reported that due to her shoulder condition, she had to stop going to the gym and instead, had started Pilates. On physical examination, the Veteran's active and passive range of motion were normal with no evidence of pain. There was objective evidence of crepitus, but no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing, and there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. The examiner noted the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, and found that the procured evidence did not suggest pain, fatiguability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner noted the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up, but found that pain would cause functional loss during flare-ups. However, the examiner found the Veteran's estimated range of motion during flare-ups would be normal. 

There were no additional factors noted that contributed to the disability, and there was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis. A rotator cuff condition was not suspected. The Crank apprehension and relocation test was positive, and the examiner noted there was shoulder instability, dislocation, or labral pathology. The examiner found the Veteran had mechanical symptoms, but found there were no current residuals of recurrent dislocation (subluxation) of the glenohumeral (scapulohumeral) joint. The examiner further noted there were no joint conditions suspected. The examiner diagnosed right labral tear, including SLAP (superior labral anterior-posterior lesion), and found the condition would not have a functional impact on the Veteran's ability to perform any occupational tasks.

Based on the foregoing and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the Veteran is entitled to an increased initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for her right shoulder disability. In this regard, the record is clear that the Veteran has experienced painful motion in her right shoulder throughout the appeal. As noted above, it is the intention of the regulations to recognize actually painful joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the "minimum compensable rating for the joint." 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. In Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 472 (2016), the Court held that 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is limited by the specific diagnostic code most applicable to the disability. Although the Court did not specifically hold that the minimum compensable rating must be assigned under the applicable diagnostic code for the disability involved, the holding influenced subsequent VA policy that the minimum compensable rating under the specific diagnostic code must be assigned when painful motion is demonstrated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. This policy affects painful motion of the shoulder evaluated under Diagnostic Code 5201, in which painful motion of the shoulder warrants assignment of a 20 percent rating, the minimum compensable rating. As such, the appropriate rating for the Veteran's right shoulder disability is 20 percent. See Burton, 25 Vet. App. at 5.

As to a rating in excess of 20 percent, the Veteran has not demonstrated limitation of the right arm to midway between side and shoulder level to warrant a higher evaluation, to include flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees as stated under Diagnostic Code 5201. Further, the Board finds that the rating currently assigned considers the pain on movement that the Veteran experiences in her shoulder that affects her functional ability, to include any increased functional impairment during flare-ups or following repeated use over time.

The Board has considered a higher rating for the Veteran's right shoulder disability under other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes. However, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran's right shoulder disability is productive of ankylosis, and there is no indication that the Veteran has impairment of the humerus, clavicle, or scapula under the appropriate Diagnostic Codes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5200, 5202, 5203.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted higher schedular ratings than those assigned. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence for and against the claim is in approximate balance. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, and entitlement to an increased initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's right shoulder disability, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.J. Woodward, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.