Citation Nr: A25033367
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-444859
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

From November 6, 2020, an initial 70 percent disability rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder with posttraumatic stress disorder, is granted.

From November 6, 2020, a total disability rating based on individual unemployability as a result of service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder symptoms include difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting, most consistent with a 70 percent disability rating.

2. The evidence of record makes it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder was of sufficient severity to preclude her from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. From November 6, 2020, the criteria have been met to establish an initial 70 percent disability rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. From November 6, 2020, the criteria for TDIU are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19, 4.25.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from May 2009 to August 2018.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; by law, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The Veteran filed her initial service connection claim on November 9, 2020, which was granted by a December 2020 rating decision. In November 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the December 2020 rating decision. Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In April 2022, the AOJ issued a HLR rating decision.

In July 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the April 2022 HLR rating decision. In August 2022, the AOJ determined that there had been a duty to assist error. In November 2022, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim rating decision.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the November 2022 supplemental claim rating decision. In January 2024, the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal, which also found that new and relevant evidence had not been received. 

In a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 AOJ supplemental claim rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the November 2022 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence it this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board recognizes that, initially, the Veteran appealed the effective date for the assigment of an increased disability rating of 70 percent for her acquired psychiatric disorder. However, the issue has been recharacterized as an increased initial disability rating claim as indicated on the title page. Such recharacterization encompasses the earlier effective date claim and better reflects the scope of the appeal.

Increased Rating

Legal Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as, for example: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas (such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood), due to such symptoms as for example: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as, for example: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of living; disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, occupation, or own name.

When rating a mental disorder, VA must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of a veteran's psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency must assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency must consider the extent of social impairment but cannot assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

Furthermore, the specified factors for each incremental rating are examples, rather than requirements, for a particular rating. The Board will not limit its analysis solely to whether the Veteran exhibited the symptoms listed in the rating criteria. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Indeed, the symptoms listed under § 4.130 are not intended to serve as an exhaustive list of the symptoms that VA may consider but as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or the effects, that would warrant a particular rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442 (2002). The veteran's actual symptoms, and resulting social and occupational impairment, will be the primary focus when assigning a disability rating for a mental disorder, and the Veteran may qualify for a particular rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Factual Background

The Veteran was granted service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder by a December 2020 rating decision. The AOJ assigned an initial 50 percent disability rating effective November 9, 2020, the date the Veteran's service connection claim was received by VA. The January 2024 rating decision assigned an increased rating of 70 percent effective July 26, 2022. The Veteran asserted that she was entitled to a higher initial disability rating.

In December 2020, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. She reported that she lived with her husband and two children. She reported having a very supportive relationship with her husband. She reported that she was unemployed because she left her job due to difficulty coping with occupational stressors. The examiner reported that the Veteran had difficulty coping with and adjusting to stressors. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, impairment of short and long term memory, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

In September 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. She reported that she lived with her husband, two children, and one stepchild. She reported that she was a fulltime homemaker. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting. The examiner reported that the Veteran had problems coping with stressful situations. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

In July 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. She reported that she lived with her husband and three children. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

Analysis

After a complete review of the entire record, the claims file documented that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in symptoms consistent with a 70 percent rating since November 6, 2020, as she had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting. In addition, she later reported obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently.

The December 2020 VA examiner noted that the Veteran left her job due to difficulty coping with occupational stressors. The September 2021 VA examiner, which was within one year of her claim for benefits, indicated that the Veteran had difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting and reported that the Veteran had problems coping with stressful situations. The July 2022 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

The VA examiners indicated findings consistent with 70 percent rating. The VA examiners conducted examinations, reviewed the Veteran's claims file, and explained their findings. As such, the findings of the December 2020, September 2021, and July 2022 VA examiners are given great probative weight.

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder symptoms have been consistent with a 70 percent rating since November 6, 202, the date she filed her service connection claim. However, the record does not show that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in total occupational and social impairment. For example, she remained married, reported having very supportive relationship, and lived with her husband and children. The claims file does not document gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. As such, a 100 percent rating for her acquired psychiatric disorder is not warranted.

Accordingly, from November 6, 2020, the criteria are met for an initial 70 percent disability rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, and the claim is granted.

TDIU

Legal Criteria

TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the Board, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. If there is only one such disability, this shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent disability or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment. Moreover, the existence or degree of nonservice-connected disabilities or previous unemployability status will be disregarded where the percentages referred to in this paragraph for the service-connected disability or disabilities are met and in the judgment of the rating agency the service-connected disabilities render the veteran unemployable.

Factual Background and Analysis

In November 2020, the Veteran filed her service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder, which was granted. However, the Veteran appealed the initial rating assigned. During the period on appeal, the Veteran filed a TDIU claim on July 19, 2020, and asserted she was unable to work due to her service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder. Pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), a claim for a TDIU either expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability and is part of the claim for an increased rating. As such, the claim for a TDIU is before the Board.

A March 2024 rating decision granted a TDIU effective July 26, 2022, the date the Veteran met the schedular requirements for a TDIU. After a complete review of the entire record, the Board finds that the Veteran was entitled to a TDIU from November 9, 2020.

The Veteran now meets the schedular requirements for a TDIU beginning November 6, 2020, because her acquired psychiatric disorder is rated as 70 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.

In the July 2021 Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (VA Form 21-8940), the Veteran reported that she became too disabled to work in November 2020 due to her acquired psychiatric disorder.

As discussed more fully above, at all the VA examinations, the Veteran's symptoms included difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. She reported that she left her job due to an inability to difficulty coping with occupational stressors.

Based on the findings of the VA examiners, the AOJ granted a TDIU due to the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder.

Based on a complete review of the entire record, the evidence of record is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran was entitled to a TDIU beginning November 6, 2020. Given this conclusion, the Board will resolve any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's behalf and find that a TDIU is warranted. 

Finally, the Board has considered VA's duty to maximize a veteran's benefits, including possible entitlement to SMC in addition to a total disability rating. See Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118 (1991). SMC at the housebound rate is payable where a veteran has a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent and has an additional, service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, that are separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems. 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i). TDIU based on a single disability meets the statutory requirement of a total disability rating for the SMC (housebound) analysis. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).

Here, the Veteran was granted a TDIU based on her acquired psychiatric disorder. While this would satisfy the requirement of a single, 100 percent rating for SMC purposes, the Veteran is not service connected for any other condition. Accordingly, the Veteran does not meet the criteria for SMC at the housebound rate.

Accordingly, from November 6, 2020, the criteria to establish a TDIU are met.

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Berryman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.