Citation Nr: A25033346
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452012
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The issue of entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

In June 2024, the Board received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), requesting review of the service connection claim for left ear hearing loss as adjudicated in a June 2022 rating decision.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The Veteran's June 2024 Notice of Disagreement was not timely or responsive to an appealable rating decision, and, therefore, an appeal of the issue of entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss has not been properly initiated. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7105, 7105A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.402.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches (also claimed as migraines), to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for anxiety disorder (also claimed as sleep disturbances), to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on the Army Reserve from February 2007 to September 2008. The Agency of Jurisdiction (AOJ) determined in a January 2024 deferred rating decision that the Veteran's service in the Army Reserve from February 28, 2007 to September 14, 2008 was considered active service based on the grants of service connection for right ear hearing loss and tinnitus that was incurred during that period of service. Therefore, his qualifying as a "Veteran," with active military, naval, air, or space service for disability benefits for a disability resulting from injury or disease incurred during service from February 2007 to September 2008.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by the AOJ. 

In the June 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected to appeal the issues listed above and requested a direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. § 20.303. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the remaining claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the January 2024 rating decision did not adjudicate the claim for left ear hearing loss. Prior to the June 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the service connection claim for left ear hearing loss was only adjudicated by the AOJ in a June 2022 rating decision, which was two years before the March June 2024 Notice of Disagreement.

Dismissal

1. Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss.

As background, the Veteran submitted a service connection claim for left ear hearing loss in March 2022, which was denied in a June 2022 rating decision. Two year later, the Veteran submitted a June 2024 Notice of Disagreement, listing left ear hearing loss as one of the issues to be appealed and the June 2022 rating decision as one of the rating decisions on appeal.

Although the Board may not dismiss an appeal for lack of jurisdiction due to an untimely VA Form 10182, it may dismiss an appeal due to non-jurisdictional reasons, such as a procedural defect, where the claimant did not substantially comply with proper claims processing rules. See Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262, 266 (2024) (stating VA can require a claimant to fill out a particular form and can dismiss nonconforming or untimely filings but a failure to follow claims processing rules does not affect the Board's jurisdiction). 

In the present case, the Veteran did not comply with the claims processing rules. He received notification of the June 2022 rating decision denying service connection for left ear hearing loss, which included additional instructions if he desired review or appeal of the claim. The Board acknowledges the Veteran was sent a Board docketing letter in July 2024. However, the July 2024 docketing letter was for the remaining issues on appeal. This letter also noted that although the appeal had been docketed, it is possible that a more detailed review may establish that the appeal request did not meet the necessary procedural requirements, to include timely submitting the appeal. 

Further, the June 2022 notification letter of the June 2022 rating decision explained that an appeal to the Board must be made within one year of the date of the decision notice letter in order to seek review. The Veteran did not submit a VA Notice of Disagreement or any other request for review or appeal within one year of the June 2022 rating decision despite receiving instructions regarding such. Moreover, the Veteran did not submit any motion for an extension to file a timely Notice of Disagreement, nor was any good cause given at the time of filing the VA Notice of Disagreement to explain the untimeliness of the filing. As good cause has not been shown and the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement was untimely, a dismissal of the appeal based on the Veteran's failure to substantially comply with the claims processing rules is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.402. 

Accordingly, the Veteran's appeal of the service connection claim left ear hearing loss is dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for headaches.

The Veteran asserts that he has constant headaches related to his service-connected tinnitus. See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

One of the effects of the modernized appeal system is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board may remand appeals to the AOJ. The Board must remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error, or for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2023. A VA examiner reported the Veteran had never been diagnosed with a headache condition. The VA examiner noted that a treatment record dated September 2019 "reveal an isolated incident of a lower occipital headache lasting over a week." The VA examiner also noted that the Veteran's claims file is "silent for diagnosis or treatment of chronic migraine." The VA examiner concluded that she is "[u]nable to establish a current/chronic diagnosis on objective exam today or with current available claims file."

As noted above, the Veteran has reported that he "ha[s] constant migraines from the ringing in [his] ears." See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. A February 2021 private treatment record shows occasional headaches.

The Board finds that the December 2023 VA examination is inadequate. The VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's report of "constant migraines." In this regard, the Veteran is competent to report his observable symptoms. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). The VA examiner also failed to address the February 2021 private treatment record showing occasional headaches.

Once VA undertakes providing a veteran with an examination, it has a duty to ensure it is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Failure to obtain an adequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As such, remand for a new VA examination is required.

The Board notes that the AOJ obtained a July 2023 memorandum concluding that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service. However, the basis of this conclusion is not proper, and the findings contained within the memorandum are self-contradictory.

Essentially, the July 2023 Memorandum did not list a basis for its finding that the Veteran participated in a TERA. As the result, it is unclear whether a TERA specific opinion is warranted in this case. On remand, the AOJ is requested to review the errors contained in the July 2023 memorandum and issue a new memorandum with respect to whether the Veteran participated in a TERA. If TERA is found, all such qualifying service, including dates thereof should be included in a new memorandum. In the event the Veteran is found to have participated in a TERA, provide a TERA specific addendum opinion.

3. Entitlement to service connection for anxiety disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his psychiatric disorder is related to his service-connected tinnitus. See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

As noted above, once VA undertakes providing a veteran with an examination, it has a duty to ensure it is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2023. A VA examiner diagnosed unspecified anxiety disorder. The VA examiner opined that "[w]hile it is plausible that the [V]eteran's service-connected [t]innitus condition negatively impacts his anxiety, there is no definitive evidence identifying that his currently diagnosed anxiety disorder, unspecified condition is at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of [t]innitus."

The Board finds that a remand is warranted as the December 2023 medical opinion is inadequate. The December 2023 VA examiner stated that there is no "definitive evidence" that anxiety disorder is a result of tinnitus which is a higher legal standard than "at least as likely as not." The opinion also failed to discuss whether the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus could have aggravated the Veteran's anxiety disorder. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 138 (2013) (indicating an opinion regarding secondary service connection is inadequate if it does not address both causation and aggravation of the nonservice-connected condition). As such, the Board finds this opinion to be inadequate.

The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error which requires remand. Therefore, the AOJ should obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing entitlement to service connection for anxiety disorder, to include as secondary to his service-connected tinnitus, to include an aggravation opinion. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; see also El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Review and correct the July 2023 TERA memo. A new memorandum with respect to TERA should be issued.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of the Veteran's claimed headache condition. The Veteran's claims folder must be made available to the examiner. All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the examiner should be accomplished.

If no such disability or disorder is identified in response to the foregoing, the examiner must also opine whether the Veteran's subjective reports of constant headaches result in functional impairment that affects his earning capacity. If so, his reports should be considered a disability for the purposes of this opinion.

The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran's claimed headache condition was (A) caused or (B) aggravated beyond its normal progression by the service-connected tinnitus.

The examiner should specifically comment on the Veteran's report of constant headaches.

Aggravation means an increase in disability - any additional impairment of earning capacity - of the nonservice-connected disability. Aggravation also includes situations where the claimed disability would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected disability because the service-connected disability results in the inability to treat the claimed disability. 

If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the service-connected disability.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance.

3. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's anxiety disorder was (A) caused or (B) aggravated beyond its normal progression by the service-connected tinnitus.

Aggravation means an increase in disability - any additional impairment of earning capacity - of the nonservice-connected disability. Aggravation also includes situations where the claimed disability would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected disability because the service-connected disability results in the inability to treat the claimed disability. 

If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the service-connected disability.

(Continued on the next page.)

?

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Oquendo, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.