Citation Nr: A25033516
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240209-415189
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the right lower extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability or due to exposure to herbicide agents, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for melanomas, due to exposure to herbicide agents, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of prostate cancer due to herbicide agent exposure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to prostate cancer, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's neuropathy of the right lower extremity disability began during active service or is otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

2. The Veteran is not service connected for type II diabetes mellitus; therefore, his neuropathy of the right lower extremity is not caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

3. The weight of the evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has a current melanoma.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a neuropathy of the right lower extremity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.306, 3.307, 3.309 3.310, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

2. The criteria for service connection for melanomas have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7833.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1970 to April 1974, including service in Thailand.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2023 rating decision, the RO found that the Veteran has current diagnoses of peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity and erectile dysfunction.  Additionally, the RO found that toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded based on the Veteran's service in Thailand and that his military occupational specialty (MOS) exposed him to industrial toxins, and that his claimed disability of prostate cancer is a condition that has been presumptively linked to herbicide exposure.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings, absent clear and convincing evidence to the contrary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The appellant filed a claim for neuropathy of bilateral lower extremities on May 16, 2023.  The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) did not adjudicate the issue of neuropathy of the left lower extremity included in that May 2023 claim.  Therefore, the Board cannot adjudicate that issue.  The appellant may resubmit the claim to the AOJ or notify the AOJ that the issue is still pending.

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of residuals of prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.03.  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in-service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In order to establish direct service connection for the claimed disability, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see also Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In the alternative, establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b).  Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted).  Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability.  Id. at 1364.  For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id.

Additionally, service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for certain diseases associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents, even though there is no record of such disease during service in a veteran who had active military, naval, air, or space service, during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, in the Republic of Vietnam, including the waters offshore, and other locations if the conditions of service involved duty or visitation in Vietnam. 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(e), 3.313. This presumption may be rebutted by affirmative evidence to the contrary. 38 U.S.C. § 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, was enacted on August 10, 2022. See PACT Act, Pub. L. No. 117-168 § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  Section 403 of the PACT Act expands the presumption of in-service herbicide agent exposure to additional territories and countries, including any U.S. or Royal Thai military base in Thailand from January 9, 1962, through June 30, 1976, without regard to where on the base the veteran was located or the military occupational specialty the veteran performed. Id. at § 403 (codified as amended at 38 U.S.C. § 1116).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

The Board is charged with the duty to assess the credibility and weight given to evidence. Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 523 U.S. 1046 (1998); Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 362, 367 (2001).  In Jefferson v. Principi, 271 F.3d 1072 (Fed. Cir. 2001), the Federal Circuit Court, citing its decision in Madden, recognized that the Board had inherent fact-finding ability. Id. at 1076; see also 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a).  Further, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to weigh and assess the evidence. Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) ("[I]f the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.").

1. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the right lower extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability or due to exposure to herbicide agents.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for neuropathy of the right lower extremity.

As previously discussed, the AOJ found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of neuropathy of the right lower extremity, and that he participated in a TERA, namely exposure to herbicide agents and industrial toxins.  

First, regarding service connection on a direct basis, the Board finds there is no evidence of an in-service occurrence of an injury, disease, or illness, which caused his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  The Veteran's service treatment records are silent as to any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy during service.  Furthermore, the Veteran does not assert that his peripheral neuropathy was directly a result of his active-duty service, but rather he generally asserts that it was as a result of his exposure to herbicide agents.  As such, the Board finds service connection on a direct basis is not warranted.

Second, turning to service connection on a presumptive basis, VA has determined that a positive association exists between exposure to herbicides and the subsequent development of the following conditions: Hypertension; monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS); Parkinson's disease; bladder cancer; hypothyroidism; AL amyloidosis; chloracne or other acneform disease consistent with chloracne; type 2 diabetes (also known as type II diabetes mellitus or adult-onset diabetes); Hodgkin's disease; ischemic heart disease (including, but not limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease, including coronary spasm, and coronary bypass surgery, and stable, unstable and Prinzmetal's angina); all chronic B-cell leukemias (including but not limited to, hairy-cell leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia); multiple myeloma; non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; Parkinson's disease; early-onset peripheral neuropathy; porphyria cutanea tarda(PCT); prostate cancer; respiratory cancers (cancer of the lung, bronchus, larynx, or trachea); and soft-tissue sarcoma (other than osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, or mesothelioma). See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(e), 3.313.  

However, PCT, chloracne, and early-onset peripheral neuropathy conditions are required to become manifest to a compensable degree within one year from last exposure, all others can manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more at any time after service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(6)(ii).  The Board notes that here the Veteran's claimed neuropathy of the right lower extremity condition is not a disease that is subject to presumptive service connection since it did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of his last herbicide exposure. As such, the Board finds service connection on a presumptive basis is not warranted.

Third, the Board turns to the Veteran's contention that he is entitled to service connection for his neuropathy condition on a secondary basis.  The Board notes the Veteran is service-connected for tinnitus, left ear hearing loss, and residuals of a left ankle fracture.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2023, which assessed bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  The Veteran reported an onset of about 2007 or 2008, when he felt a shocking sensation.  He stated he sought medical treatment at that time and the symptoms have remained the same.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has difficulty standing, walking, driving, and sitting for long periods of time due to pain, weakness, numbness, tingling, and parasthesia of both lower extremities, requiring frequent repositioning and shifting of his weight.  The examiner noted these symptoms decrease productivity and efficiency.  

The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that they were caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran and it was less likely than not that his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was proximately due to or the result of a service-connected condition.  The examiner reasoned that there are reasons outside of military service that outweigh the factors identified in the TERA.  The examiner noted that the record does not reflect treatment until 2023, which is 49 years after service, and that the Veteran suffers from type II diabetes mellitus which is known to cause neuropathy.  Additionally, the examiner found that the lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is not medically related to his service-connected residuals of status post left ankle fracture or to his claimed, but nonservice-connected, prostate cancer.

VA treatment records reflect complaints of severe bilateral neuropathy that extends into the thighs, and the physician referred the Veteran to podiatry for treatment. See June 2023 VA Treatment Records.  The physician further noted that his type II diabetes mellitus was well-controlled at that time.  In a subsequent appointment, the physician noted that the Veteran has diabetic polyneuropathy. See June 2023 VA Treatment Records.  During the podiatry consult, the Veteran reported severe neuropathy bilaterally, and that he had a stroke, which caused weakness to his left side. See August 2023 VA Treatment Records.  The podiatrist found gross sensation is diminished bilaterally.  The podiatrist noted diagnoses for neuropathy and type II diabetes mellitus, ordered diabetic shoes and inserts, and provided diabetic health education.

Considering the above, the Board finds that service connection for the claimed neuropathy condition is not warranted under the theory of secondary service connection.  

Last, the Board also notes that the Veteran claimed his type II diabetes mellitus in his May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, but the AOJ did not adjudicate it since the condition had previously been denied in a prior September 2010 rating decision.  See May 4, 2023 VA Form 21-526 EZ; September 6, 2010 Rating Decision. The Veteran did not appeal the September 2010 decision.  

The record reflects that type II diabetes mellitus is a disease that is subject to presumptive service connection due to exposure to herbicide agents, and the medical evidence connects his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy condition to his diagnosed type II diabetes mellitus.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(6)(ii).  Therefore, the Veteran is encouraged to file a supplemental claim for service connection for type II diabetes mellitus and submit any competent evidence to support his claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.904; VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim.  

As explained in this decision, the medical evidence supports that the primary disability related to the Veteran's neuropathy is type II diabetes mellitus, and the Veteran is not service connected for the primary disability of type II diabetes mellitus.  Additionally, the examiner found that his service-connected residuals of status post left ankle fracture is not medically related to his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  Thus, there is no legal basis upon which to award service connection for a secondary disability due to a primary disability that is not service connected.  As such, service connection for a lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, as secondary to nonservice-connected type II diabetes mellitus or service-connected residuals of status post left ankle fracture, is not warranted.

Because the evidence is persuasively against the claim, there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-782.  Accordingly, the claim must therefore be denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for melanomas, due to exposure to herbicide agents. 

The Veteran is seeking service connection for melanomas, to include as due to exposure to herbicide agents.

Here, the record does not reflect complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis for a melanoma condition during the period on appeal.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2023, at which the examiner found that the Veteran did not have a current skin condition.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with melanoma to the left upper extremity, which was excised in 1988.  The Veteran reported that he had noticed an irregular mole on his left arm, which was subsequently diagnosed as melanoma and excised.  The Veteran further reported that he has not had any other occurrences of melanomas since the 1988 diagnosis and excision.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's melanoma was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis or a condition that can be related to the claimed toxic exposure.

VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran was diagnosed with melanoma to the left upper extremity, which was excised in 1988. See e.g., June 2023 and July 2023 VA Treatment Records.  Additionally, July 2023 VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran had a scheduled appointment with dermatology for a skin exam, but it does not appear from the record that it occurred prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.

If the Veteran attended the scheduled dermatology appointment as noted in the July 2023 VA treatment records and the skin examination resulted in a current diagnosis for a melanoma, he is encouraged to file a supplemental claim for service connection for a melanoma and submit any competent evidence to support his claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.904.  "Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim." Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); see also Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143-44 (1992); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007) (recognizing the disability could arise at any time during the claim); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013) (recognizing disabilities that occur immediately prior to filing of a claim).  In addition, while the Board considered the holding of Saunders as discussed above, here, there are simply no symptoms that can be considered a disability reported during the appropriate evidentiary window.

Given the absence of currently diagnosed melanoma disability or symptoms resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity, the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, and it therefore must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-782

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of prostate cancer due to herbicide agent exposure.

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, due to herbicide agent exposure.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2023, which assessed erectile dysfunction and voiding dysfunction.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2017.  The examiner noted the Veteran was a poor historian as he was unsure if he had a biopsy but did indicate that he underwent radiation treatment (although he was not currently being treated).  The examiner noted current urinalysis was normal.  Upon review of the Veteran's medical history, the examiner noted that June 2023 records indicate that he underwent radiation therapy at Ogden Regional Hospital in 2017.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness; it was less likely than not that they were caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran; and it was less likely than not that his erectile dysfunction was proximately due to or the result of the veteran's service connected condition of prostate cancer.  The examiner reasoned that "[t]here is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis" of prostate cancer.

VA treatment records reflect a history of prostate cancer with urinary frequency and urgency issues as well as some episodes of incontinence since he had radiation therapy. See June 2023 and July 2023 VA Treatment Records.  The physician noted that the current urinalysis was normal.  The physician placed an internal request to obtain records from Ogden Regional Hospital for colonoscopy and pathology report from within the past few years.

February 2010 private treatment records from one of the Veteran's prior primary care physicians noted a new diagnosis of benign prostate hypertrophy that the physician intended to run further testing to address. See August 2010 Medical Treatment Records - Non-Government Facility.

It does not appear that the AOJ sought information from the Veteran regarding where he received his initial diagnosis with a biopsy and radiation treatment for his claimed prostate cancer, nor did they seek a release to obtain records from Ogden Regional Hospital as noted in the Veteran's VA treatment records and by the August 2023 VA examiner.  Under these circumstances, the Board finds there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and that remand is necessary for further development of the record, with the assistance of the Veteran, and because the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination and opinion after any new records are obtained.  Accordingly, remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The Board finds that the remaining issue of erectile dysfunction is inextricably intertwined with the resolution of the remanded prostate cancer disability claim because the Veteran claimed erectile dysfunction as a condition secondary to prostate cancer. See e.g., May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation.  The appropriate remedy where a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with a claim currently on appeal is to defer the claim on appeal pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).  Accordingly, these issues are remanded for readjudication following evidentiary development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO must contact the Veteran and request that he identify the names, addresses, and approximate dates of treatment for all the non-VA healthcare providers who treated the Veteran for his claimed prostate cancer and residuals thereof, including the physicians identified in this remand, and request that he sign the appropriate release(s).

After securing appropriate release(s) from the Veteran, make two attempts to obtain any identified outstanding private treatment records which are not already associated with the file or make a formal finding that a second request for such records would be futile.

The Veteran must be notified of the results of the record requests.  If records are not received from any source, follow the notification procedures of 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. If any new treatment records are obtained, request the completion of an addendum medical opinion from a qualified clinician.  If the examiner determines that a new examination is necessary to provide the requested opinions, such examination should be scheduled.

3. All relevant medical and other records must be made available to the examiner for review.  After review of the claims file, including this remand, the examiner should provide a well-reasoned response to each of the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction either had its onset during or was otherwise related to the Veteran's military service.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed prostate cancer and erectile dysfunction was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, to include his in-service exposure to herbicide agents, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(c.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction disability was proximately caused by, or the result of his prostate cancer.

4. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report history and symptoms and that his reports must be considered in formulating any requested opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide a rationale for doing so.

5. Any opinions offered should be accompanied by a clear rationale consistent with the evidence of record.  If the examiner finds it impossible to provide any part of the requested opinions without resort to pure speculation, he or she should so indicate and provide a rationale as to why such a finding is made.

(Continued on the next page)

?

6. Thereafter, readjudicate the Veteran's claims and allow the Veteran and his representative the opportunity to respond.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Birley, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.