Citation Nr: A25033704
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 210707-170626
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1999 to September 1999, April 2008 to July 2008, September 2009 to January 2010, and from February 2012 to May 2012.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2021 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 AOJ decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider that evidence in this decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability.

The Veteran contends that a right shoulder disability was caused by an event, injury, or exposure in service.  Specifically, the Veteran attributed a right shoulder disability to years of continuous lifting of heavy parts, materials, equipment, and tools while performing routing duties as a jet engine mechanic, resulting in a tear of the bicep tendon into the superior aspect of the labrum, consistent with a slap tear in the right shoulder.

The AOJ made several favorable findings in the rating decision on appeal, including that that the Veteran is diagnosed with a right shoulder disability.  December 30, 2019, VA imagining confirmed right shoulder arthritis and private records showed a biceps tendon tear on February 19, 2020.  The arthritis disability is a chronic disease for which presumptive service connection may be established.  Arthritis, if manifested to a compensable degree within a year of active duty discharge, is presumed to be the result of active duty service.  The Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection.  The Board is bound by the favorable findings.

In a March 2018 private treatment record, the Veteran complained that both shoulders had constant dull pain.  The Veteran stated that it hurt to lift the arms above the shoulders.  The Veteran's arms went numb at night while sleeping.  The Veteran stated that the symptoms began more than one year ago.

In an August 2018 private treatment record, the Veteran stated that the injections helped for one month, but now the shoulders had the same symptoms as before, with the right shoulder hurting worse than the left.  A right shoulder MRI showed a large slap tear and extended to the posterior inferior labrum.

In a November 2018 service medical record, the Veteran reported shoulder pain.

In a February 2020 private treatment record, the Veteran stated he was ready to proceed to surgery for the right shoulder.

In a June 2020 private treatment record, the Veteran underwent right shoulder surgery in the form of right shoulder labral repair with subpectoral bicep tenodesis.  The Veteran was advised he could return to work in September 2020.

In an October 2020 service medical record, the Veteran brought in private treatment records to document the right shoulder surgery.

In a March 2021 service medical record, right shoulder pain was documented.

In July 2021 correspondence, the Veteran contended that because he was employed full-time in a Title 32 civil service capacity with his National Guard unit, in which he wore his uniform to work every day, direct service connection for a right shoulder disability is warranted.  The Veteran also stated that he has been a member of the Iowa Air National Guard since February 1995.

The Veteran's appeal turns on whether or not the Veteran's current right shoulder disability occurred due to injury during a period of active duty or active duty for training, or was in injury incurred during inactive duty training.  

The Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not requesting the necessary service personnel records to verify the Veteran's reserve service, to include periods of active duty for training, inactive duty for training, and to investigate whether the Veteran's status as a Title 32 civil service employee, in which capacity the Veteran has stated he wore his uniform, qualified as a period of active duty for the purpose of establishing entitlement to VA disability compensation.  Without that information, the Board is unable to reach a determination on the appealed issue.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC) and/or the appropriate service entity to clarify the dates the Veteran was on active duty, active duty for training (ACDUTRA), and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA), to include with the Air National Guard. Specifically, it should be determined if the Veteran had any active duty service periods from 2018 through 2021. All available service medical records associated with that duty should be forwarded for incorporation into the record.  A copy of any requests sent to the appropriate entity, and any reply, to include any negative reply, should be associated with the claims file.  If the service is not verified, an official determination so indicating should be entered into the record.

2. For the entire period of 2018 through 2021, the AOJ must determine what dates the Veteran had any periods of active duty, active duty for training (ACDUTRA), or inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA) with his National Guard unit.  After making a determination, in writing, of the dates in which the Veteran had service, the AOJ must determine if the Veteran's complaints, diagnosis, and treatment for a right shoulder disability occurred during those dates such that any right shoulder injury would qualify as an event in service for direct service connection.

3. The AOJ must investigate the Veteran's claim that Title 32 civil service status with the National Guard qualifies as a period of active duty for VA purposes.  Investigate and make a determination, in writing, as to whether the Veteran's Title 32 civil service status constitutes active duty for the purpose of entitlement to direct service connection for a right shoulder disability.  If so, determine the dates of that service.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to diagnose and determine the nature and etiology of any shoulder disability.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand, and should indicate review of the file in the report.  The examiner should address any lay statements regarding the claimed disability and its etiology.  The examiner should diagnose all shoulder disabilities found or shown in the record during the pendency of the claim.  Pain or other factors causing functional limitation can constitute a disability.  The examiner should explicitly state if the Veteran has a current shoulder diagnosis.  For each shoulder disability diagnosed or shown during the pendency of the claim, to include any pain resulting in functional loss that constitutes a disability, the examiner must opine whether it is as likely as not that any shoulder disability is etiologically related to active service or any event, injury, or disease during service, including whether any shoulder disability (1) began during active duty, ACDUTRA, or INACDUTRA service or is related to any incident during service, (2) manifested as arthritis within one year after separation from a period of active duty service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service, (4) is due to, the result of, or caused by the service-connected disabilities or treatment for the service-connected disabilities, or (5) has been aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected disabilities or treatment for the service-connected disabilities.  Please cite to any evidence to support a finding of arthritis within one year following separation from a period of active duty service.  The examiner is specifically asked to opine whether it is as likely as not that the physical nature of active duty service contributed to or caused the claimed disabilities due to activities such as lifting of parts and equipment during routine duties as a jet engine mechanic, and other physical requirements.  A clearly stated rationale for each opinion must be provided and cannot be based on the lack of a record in service of the claimed disability.  In writing the report, the examiner should refer to any service medical records indicating treatment in service for shoulder complaints, to specifically include a 2018 and 2020 private treatment records showing complaints of rights shoulder pain and right shoulder surgery and 2020 service medical records showing the same.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gernand, Timothy A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.