Citation Nr: A25033195
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-451671
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND 

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 1972 to June 1992. VA has conceded the Veteran's presumed participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on his service at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, from August 25,1987 to December 31, 1987. See Rating Decision (May 2024) (Camp Lejeune Water Contamination presumed exposure to Perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, benzene).

The rating decision on appeal was issued on May 6, 2024, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the July 1, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 11, 2024. A hearing transcript is associated with the claims file. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or the Veteran's representative, at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his prostate cancer is due to his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and/or herbicide agent exposure in Okinawa while working on equipment that was used in Vietnam. See VA 21-4138 (March 2023); VA 21-526EZ (October 2022). The Veteran also contends that his prostate cancer had in-service onset, evidence of which was urinary frequency; is due to exposure to radio waves and radar when his living quarters were very close to emitters; and/or is due to toxic exposure from burn pits while at Cherry Point. Hearing Transcript (December 2024).

VA has conceded the Veteran's exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. See Other (September 2023). Further, VA has found that the Veteran is diagnosed with prostate cancer; and that prostate cancer is a condition that may be presumptively linked to herbicide exposure; these are favorable findings by the AOJ. Rating Decision - Narrative (May 2024). 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The issue of entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

The Board notes that VA does not universally recognize the use and/or storage of tactical herbicides in Okinawa, Japan. But VA has not yet investigated whether this specific Veteran, on a facts-found basis, was exposed to Agent Orange while stationed in Okinawa, Japan, due to his duties. In essence, if a veteran alleges exposure and did not serve in a location associated with a presumption of herbicide exposure, actual exposure to herbicide agents must be verified through appropriate service department or other sources in order for the presumption of service connection for herbicide-related disease to be applicable. Once exposure to herbicide agents has been established by the facts of the case, the presumption of service connection for herbicide-related diseases is applicable.

Here, service personnel records (SPRs) confirm that the Veteran was in Okinawa until from August 1973 to May 1974. At that time, prior to his medical evacuation from Okinawa in May 1974, the Veteran's SPRs clearly identify his primary duties and assigned unit. MPR (February 2025). The Veteran was serving as a Radio Platoon Commander with an additional duty as a Safety Officer. Id. The Veteran has also submitted information about his unit's service in Vietnam until 1972. See Correspondence (February 2025). VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides guidance on how to develop claims when a Veteran alleges herbicide exposure and did not serve in a location associated with presumed exposure. M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart i, 1.A.6.a. The manual instructs that VA should send a request to the VA Military Records Research Center (MRRC) for verification of exposure. See id. If the claim and available records do not provide sufficient details of the Veteran's service to permit a search by MRRC, the Veteran should receive a letter notifying him. See id. See also Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018) (the Board is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases).

Here, there is no indication in the record that the AOJ sent a request to the MRRC for verification of the Veteran's alleged exposure to herbicides nor determined that there was not sufficient information to complete an MRRC request prior to issuing the decision on appeal.

As such, the Board finds that the claim must be remanded to attempt to verify the Veteran's asserted in-service exposure to herbicide agents.

Lastly, the Board observes that the Veteran's attorney obtained a March 2025 medical opinion from a nurse practitioner, M. Meulstee, who describes herself also as a "Certified Disability Examiner VA Compensation and Pensions."  It reflects that the Veteran's prostate cancer is at least as likely as not a result of his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility (March 2025).  In support of the conclusion, the nurse describes the Veteran's residuals of prostate cancer; provides general information as to the Veteran's assertion of Agent Orange exposure in Okinawa, and the conceded exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune; and references the ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry). She also provided a hyperlink to content that is not otherwise part of the record on appeal, which the Board did not accessed and is not considered as part of the record before the Board. See Bowey v. West, 11 Vet. App. 106, 108-09 (1998) (holding that the mere reference to non VA documents is insufficient to incorporate them into the record). She reasons that, based on the conceded exposure to toxins at Camp Lejeune and "the above recent scientific medical evidence, it is a high probability that the Veteran's prostate cancer is due to Camp Lejeune." 

The Board finds the medical opinion of nurse practitioner Meulstee is bereft of any reasoned medical explanation connecting the Veteran's prostate cancer to his presumed exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22Vet. App.295, 301 (2008) (A "medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two."). Her opinion consists largely of generic information none of which is discussed vis-à-vis facts specific to this Veteran. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) (reliance on the absence of medical literature supporting nexus without discussing the specific facts of the case renders an opinion inadequate). Further, her opinion does not address that this Veteran's risk factors for prostate cancer include a family history of prostate cancer. Indeed, non-VA treatment records provided by the Veteran reflect that he reported during evaluation of his prostate cancer, in June 2015, that his father and brother have had prostate cancer. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility (March 2025) (June 2023). The absence of mention or discussion of this evidence in the rationale does not show awareness of seemingly relevant facts and therefore further casts doubt on the foundation of the opinion. Therefore, the opinion is inadequate to afford the Veteran the benefit sought.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Attempt to verify the Veteran's asserted in-service exposure to herbicide agents. If more details are needed, contact the Veteran to request the information. If there is still insufficient information to verify exposure to herbicide agents, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran of VA's inability to verify the in-service herbicide agent exposure.

 

C.A. SKOW

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Duncan-Gould, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.