Citation Nr: A25033688
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-467360
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1984 to September 1987.

Before turning to the merits of this case, a review of the procedural history is instructive.  The Veteran first sought service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to his service-connected disabilities, in November 2020.  A Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea in a November 2020 rating decision.  

On November 24, 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, requesting higher-level review (HLR) of the November 2020 rating decision.  While processing that request, the RO identified a duty to assist (DTA) error in the prior decision.  In a February 2021 rating decision, the RO explained there was a failure to get an examination and/or a medical opinion.  As a result, the RO developed the claim for a medical opinion, and processed the claim as a supplemental claim.  In an April 2021 rating decision, the RO confirmed the previous denial of the claim.

The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) observes that the Veteran did not continuously pursue the claim by timely and properly filing an administrative review option (i.e., a supplemental claim, request for HLR, or an appeal to the Board within one year of the rating decision).  

Nevertheless, on November 22, 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, supplemental claim application, seeking readjudication of the issue of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to service-connected disabilities.  In a February 2023 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran submitted new and relevant evidence with his application, then continued the denial of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on the merits.

On July 14, 2023, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0995, supplemental claim application, seeking readjudication of the issue of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to service-connected disabilities.  Once again, in a September 2023 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran submitted new and relevant evidence with his application, but confirmed and continued the denial of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on the merits.  

This matter is before the Board on appeal of the September 2023 rating decision.  Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system, known by the Board as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision (i.e., agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision) on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider may be considered on readjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities

The Veteran generally contends that he has obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to his service-connected disabilities.  See November 2022 (First) Veteran Statement.  More specifically, the Veteran reports his service-connected major depressive disorder (MDD), and use of psychotropic medication (i.e., Bupropion), result in insomnia.  See November 2022 (Second) Veteran Statement.  In addition, he indicates that his mental health condition has led him to make poor food choices and eat high calorie foods.  See July 2023 Veteran Statement.  With regard to his service-connected left knee disabilities, the Veteran reports his knee pain makes it difficult to fall or stay asleep, and prevents him from being able to sleep on his side.  See November 2022 (Second) Veteran Statement.  He also states his left knee pain keeps him from exercising, and the decrease in his activity has led to weight gain an obesity.  See July 2023 Veteran Statement.    

At the outset, the Board observes that the Veteran argues he is entitled to service connection for sleep apnea on a secondary basis only, and another theory of entitlement to service connection is not reasonably raised by the record.  See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (2008).  His service treatment records (STR) do not reflect complaints, treatment, or diagnoses associated with sleep apnea or difficulties sleeping.

Turning to the secondary service connection framework, in the September 2023 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran is diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  See also July 2019 Sleep Center Polysomnography Report.  In addition, the RO found the Veteran is service connected for MDD with panic attacks and his left knee.  The Board notes the Veteran is service connected for left knee osteoarthritis, associated with status post medial cruciate ligament and anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears of the left knee.  He is also service connected for limitation of extension of the left knee.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first and second criteria for secondary service connection, a current disability (not already service connected) and a primary service-connected disability, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by, or aggravated by, his service-connected disabilities.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

To this point, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations for sleep apnea in November 2020, December 2022, and September 2023.  All three VA examiners have determined it is less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to, or the result of, his service-connected disabilities.  As rationale, the November 2020 VA examiner stated there is no medical cause-and-effect relationship between depression and obstructive sleep apnea.  Then in an April 2021 addendum opinion, the November 2020 VA examiner indicated obesity and/or weight gain due to the Veteran's left knee disabilities is primarily influenced by diet and genetics, and that the inability to exercise plays a minority role in being overweight and/or having obesity, which are two of the biggest risk factors of sleep apnea.  The examiner acknowledged that the higher the weight and/or BMI (body mass index), the more likely it is to develop and/or worsen sleep apnea.  Yet, the examiner offered a negative nexus opinion because he concluded it was less likely than not that the Veteran's obesity and/or weight gain is due to his service-connected disability.    

The December 2022 VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's medical records show weight gain since his discharge from active duty, and that this is a major contributory factor in his obstructive sleep apnea.  Nevertheless, the December 2022 VA examiner reasoned that although the Veteran's service related conditions may contribute to his obesity, obesity is a complex multifactorial condition involving many factors such as eating patterns, physical activity levels, sleep routines, and social determinants of health (e.g., conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live, and age, as well as economic policies and systems).  As a result, the examiner offered a negative nexus opinion.  

As for the September 2023 VA examiner's rationale, she stated the Veteran's risk factors were as likely as not causing his obstructive sleep apnea.  The factors included elevated BMI and use of propanolol for tremors (that are not service connected), which cause fatigue.  The September 2023 VA examiner noted the only medication the Veteran was taking during and/or around the time of his diagnosis of sleep apnea in 2019 was propanolol, and he had an elevated BMI at the time.  Yet, the examiner offered a negative nexus opinion because depression does not cause the pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea, and the Veteran was not on medication treatment for depression at the time obstructive sleep apnea was diagnosed.  

The aforementioned opinions are inadequate for two reasons.  First, the VA examiners' opinions are inadequate because the incorrect standard for causation is applied.  In March 2023, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) invalidated the requirement of "proximate cause."  In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection.  The Federal Circuit explained that "but-for causation" is a broader standard than proximate causation and can include multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  Pursuant to Spicer, secondary service connection is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe "but for" a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.  

The VA examiners' opinions are also inadequate because the nexus discussion is limited to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by his service-connected disabilities and/or aggravation based on the theory of obesity as an intermediate step.  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  The VA examiners did not address whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, without taking into consideration obesity.  Therefore, the opinions are inadequate because they do not address both the "caused by" and "aggravation" avenues of secondary service connection associated with the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

In the September 2023 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiencies above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Board acknowledges that, in November 2020 and November 2022, private positive nexus opinions were submitted by the Veteran, in which providers concluded his service-connected depression and left knee disabilities likely caused his obesity, and thus, contributed to the development and worsening of his obstructive sleep apnea.  Both examiners, PA-C P.D. and Dr. Z.M., generally indicated their opinions were based on a review of the Veteran's medical records and medical literature; and in their rationales, the cited medical literature was discussed in detail.  The November 2022 private examiner, Dr. Z.M., also indicated lay statements were considered.  However, the Board notes that the opinions of both private examiners are conclusory and not supported with a reasoned explanation based on specific facts of the Veteran's case.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 125 (2007) (holding that a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to the doctor's opinion).  Accordingly, the opinions of PA-C P.D. and Dr. Z.M. cannot support a grant of service connection. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner as to the questions below.  If the reviewing examiner determines that it is not possible to offer an opinion without first examining the Veteran, then schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination.  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.  

MDD

(A)	Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected MDD, to include the use of psychotropic medication (i.e., Bupropion).

(B)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected MDD, to include the use of psychotropic medication (i.e., Bupropion).  

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities.

Left Knee Disabilities (left knee osteoarthritis, associated with status post medial cruciate ligament and ACL tears of the left knee, and limitation of extension of the left knee)

(C)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected left knee disabilities.

(D)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected left knee disabilities.  

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities.

Obesity

(E)	The examiner is to state:

a.	Whether a service-connected disability (or any combination of service-connected disabilities) caused the Veteran to become obese.

b.	Whether a service-connected disability (or any combination of service-connected disabilities) aggravated his obesity.

c.	If the answer to (a) or (b) is yes, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity (whether obesity was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities) was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea?

d.	If the answer to (a) or (b) is yes, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the Veteran's obesity?

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. 

The examiner is instructed that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination. 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Neal, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.