Citation Nr: A25033587
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452637
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating for acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from July 1985 to December 1992 and September 2001 to May 2007, with additional service in the Reserve and National Guard.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a compensable rating for AML, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for AML

The Veteran has a noncompensable rating for AML effective March 30, 2012.  She contends that the RO erred in not considering the periods of time she had active AML in assigning her rating.  June 2024 Notice of Disagreement.

The Veteran contends that her leukemia "relapsed" in June 2009, and that she has had a bone marrow transplant, surgery, and radiation.  She also contends that she has residuals to include neuropathy, parathyroid gland cancer (twice), pancreatitis, hemochromatosis, right ear hearing loss, hair loss, and dry mouth due to her AML.  February 2019 Correspondence.

The Veteran underwent a VA mental disorders examination in October 2023, and she has a separate disability rating for her mental health condition. 

The Veteran's AML is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.117, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7703 for leukemia.  Under DC 7703, a 100 percent rating is assigned when there is active disease or during a treatment phase.  Otherwise, the condition should be rated on the residuals under the appropriate diagnostic codes.  Note (1) of DC 7703 requires a 100 percent evaluation to continue beyond the cessation of any surgical therapy, radiation therapy, antineoplastic chemotherapy, or other therapeutic procedures.  Six months after discontinuance of such treatment the appropriate disability rating shall be determined by mandatory VA examination.  If there has been no recurrence, the disability should be rated on the residuals.

The Veteran underwent a private examination by Dr. B.S. in May 2012.  At that examination, Dr. B.S. found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with AML in July 2008 and had undergone a bone marrow transplant in September 2009.  Dr. B.S. found that the Veteran's AML was currently in remission.  Dr. B.S. found that the Veteran had iron overload and was on phlebotomy to remove the iron.

An April 2014 Operative Note signed by Dr. R.S. shows that the Veteran underwent a right partial superficial parotidectomy at that time.

A May 2015 Discharge Summary signed by C.M. shows that the Veteran underwent a complete mastoidectomy and parotid gland removal at that time.

An October 2017 Radiation Oncology Follow-Up Note shows that the Veteran underwent radiotherapy which was completed on July 2, 2015.  At the time of the October 2017 note, there was no evidence of disease.  The Veteran reported that she felt her hearing was getting worse.

The Veteran underwent a VA scar examination in July 2023.  At that examination, the Veteran was noted to have a scar on her anterior neck due to cancer of the parathyroid gland removal.  

The Veteran underwent a VA hematologic and lymphatic conditions examination in July 2023.  At that examination, the examiner found that the Veteran was diagnosed with AML in July 2008.  The Veteran's AML was found to be in remission with an annual blood test from her oncologist.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had treatment in 2014 and 2015.  The examiner described the treatments as "chemo, radiation, and surgical removal of the cancers."  The Veteran also reported developing pancreatitis, anxiety, and "chemo brain" due to her chemotherapy.  

In September 2023, an addendum opinion was provided for the July 2023 VA hematologic and lymphatic conditions examination.  The July 2023 VA examiner was asked if the parathyroid gland cancer was a metastasis from the service-connected AML and to provide the current status of the Veteran's leukemia.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's "skin cancer" is not secondary to leukemia and that both conditions are related to high exposure to toxins on active duty.  The examiner found that the Veteran had high exposure to toxins that caused her to develop leukemia and "skin cancer."  The examiner also found that the current status of the Veteran's AML is "watchful waiting."

VA must provide an examination that is adequate for VA rating purposes.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The Board finds that the July 2023 and September 2023 VA opinions are inadequate for rating purposes. They do not sufficiently address whether the Veteran's parathyroid gland cancer is related to the AML Additionally, neither examiner addressed the other medical conditions that the Veteran contends are related to her AML. The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, remand is required to obtain an adequate opinion addressing which, if any, medical conditions that were present since 2012 were caused or aggravated by the Veteran's AML and/or treatments for AML.

 The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from the July 2023 VA hematologic and lymphatic examiner, if possible.  If the clinician determines that an examination is warranted, then one should be scheduled.  A copy of this Remand and the claims file should be provided to the examiner, and the report must reflect that the claims file was reviewed.  The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Identify all residual conditions related to the Veteran's service-connected AML since the date of claim in March 2012.

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any neuropathy was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

(c) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any hemochromatosis was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

(d) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any right ear hearing loss was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

(g) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any hair loss was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

(h) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any dry mouth was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

(i) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any parathyroid gland cancer, to include any residuals such as scarring, was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

(j) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that any pancreatitis was caused or aggravated by her history of AML and/or treatments for AML? Please explain why or why not.

The examiner's attention is directed to the following:

"	May 2012 private examination of Dr. B.S. which describes the Veteran's iron overload as a residual condition of her service-connected AML (Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility received March 27, 2013)

"	April 2014 and May 2015 private treatment records detailing right parotid gland removals (Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility received February 24, 2017)

"	October 2017 private treatment record discussing radiation therapy which was completed in July 2015 (Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility received February 28, 2019).

A complete rationale for any opinion is required.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Bush, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.