Citation Nr: A25033488
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230611-353440
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for insomnia is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for an eating disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastritis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peptic ulcer disease (hiatal hernia, gastroesophageal reflux disease) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent and credible evidence is in approximate balance to show that insomnia was incurred coincident with service.

2. The Veteran has not had an asthma condition nor any chronic asthma symptoms at any time close to the date of claim, or during the pendency of the appeal. 

3. The Veteran has not had an eating disorder at any time close to the date of claim, or during the pendency of the appeal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for insomnia have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a).

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for asthma have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an eating disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 4.125.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2016 to September 2016. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from July 2022 and June 2023 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, for the claims of entitlement to service connection for asthma, eating disorder and peptic ulcer disease, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the claims of entitlement to service connection for gastritis and insomnia, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for peptic ulcer disease and gastritis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).  Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a link between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013).  Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. §3.303(d).

Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability. In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The requirement of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed, or recent to or during the pendency of that claim. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007); Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. 289. The Veteran's claim for service connection for asthma was received on November 6, 2021. Therefore, any current disabilities must have been present close to November 6, 2021 or during the pendency of the appeal which ended with the July 2022 decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for insomnia is granted.

The Veteran contends that dealing with the stressors of basic training, anxiety, and uncomfortable bedding caused her insomnia.

The June 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran is diagnosed with a disability. Specifically, the AOJ found that a review of the private treatment records notes treatment for insomnia.

On her November 2015 enlistment examination, no sleep-related problems were reported. 

Service treatment records and her personnel records show involuntary separation in September 2016 due to asthma.

A September 9, 2017, treatment record notes that she was diagnosed with insomnia and prescribed medication for insomnia as needed.

In April 2023, the Veteran's mother reported that the Veteran never had problems sleeping until she joined the military.

In this case, the proximity of the initial diagnosis of insomnia in September 2017 is so close to the Veteran's September 2016 separation from service that the Board concluded the condition was incurred coincident with service. 

The competent and credible evidence is in approximate balance to show the Veteran's insomnia was "incurred coincident with service." 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Based on the available evidence, the Board finds a service connection for insomnia is warranted based on diagnosis in close proximity to separation from service.

Accordingly, resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection insomnia is warranted. The claim is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

2. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is denied.

The Veteran seeks service connection for asthma.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has had asthma at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

Service treatment records reveal that in August 2016, the Veteran reported dyspnea and wheezing during exercise.  The August 2016 provider notes that wheezing occurs only with exercise.  

A July 2016 Entrance Physical Standard Board Proceeding, date stamped August 19, 2016, reveals that the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified asthma in July 2016 and recommended to be medically discharged. She was medically discharged from service as a result of this episode of shortness of breath and wheezing in September 2016. 

Thereafter, post-separation treatment records do not reveal any treatment or report of recurrent symptoms for asthma.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA respiratory condition examination in November 2021. The examiner notes the Veteran's report of experiencing shortness of breath and wheezing during basic training. The Veteran reported that while she was previously prescribed a pro-air inhaler and Singulair, she is not on current medication. A pulmonary functioning test (PFT) was performed, and the examiner noted the Veteran's FEV1 is predicted at 105%.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's pre-bronchodilator results were normal. The examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. The examiner provided the rationale that the Veteran has no chronic diagnosis of asthma, her objective examination is normal, and her symptoms are subjective only.

Without the presence of a current asthma disability close to November 2021, when the VA compensation was filed, or at any time during the pendency of the claim, the Veteran's claim must be denied. McClain; Romanowsky.

To the extent the Veteran believes she suffers from asthma that is related to service, as a lay person, she has not shown she has the specialized training sufficient to render such an opinion. In this regard, the diagnosis of asthma is medically complex and requires medical training and diagnostic instruments. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Thus, the Board finds the medical evidence of record to be of greater probative value as to the presence of an asthma disability than the Veteran's lay assertions.

In sum, as the weight of the competent and probative evidence is against the claim, service connection for asthma is denied.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for an eating disorder is denied.

The Veteran seeks service connection for an eating disorder. She contends an eating disorder is due to all the fast eating and running directly after eating in service.  Alternatively, she contends an eating disorder is secondary to peptic ulcer disease.

Service treatment records are silent for any complaint or treatment relating to an eating disorder.

In April 2023, the Veteran's mother reported that the Veteran struggles to eat and keep food down.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in March 2022. The examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder and notes in part that the "Veteran does not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD, and any eating disorder diagnosis or any other anxiety disorder diagnosis." 

To the extent the Veteran and her mother believe she suffers from an eating disorder that is related to service, as laypersons, they have not shown they have the specialized training sufficient to render such an opinion. In this regard, the diagnosis of mental conditions are matters that require medical training and expertise to determine. They have not asserted that they have such expertise. VA also requires a diagnosis that conforms to The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), to compensate for a psychiatric disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.125; Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393, 401 (2020). Consequently, the Veteran's and her mother's opinions as to the diagnosis of her mental condition, to include her eating habits, is not competent medical evidence, and does not discuss any DSM-5 diagnostic criteria. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77. Thus, the Board finds the competent medical evidence of record to be of greater probative value as to the presence of an eating disorder than the Veteran's lay assertions.

Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability. In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer, 3 Vet. App. 223. Accordingly, without the presence of a current eating disorder close to November 2021 or at any time during the pendency of the claim, the Veteran's claim must be denied. McClain; Romanowsky.

In sum, as the weight of the competent and probative evidence is against the claim, service connection for an eating disorder is denied. In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for gastritis is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for peptic ulcer disease (hiatal hernia, gastroesophageal reflux disease) is remanded.

The Veteran contends gastritis and peptic ulcer diseases are related to service. 

The Board finds that the duty to assist was triggered at the time of the rating decision on appeal, and a VA examination was needed for this claim. Consistent with the VA's duty to assist, under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006), a VA medical examination must be provided when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the claimed disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms may be associated with the established event, injury or disease in service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i).

The July 2022 rating decision found favorably that the Veteran was diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease, hiatal hernia, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. The June 2023 rating decision found favorably that the Veteran was diagnosed with gastritis. These favorable findings are binding on the Board and establish the first McLendon element.

In November 2021, the Veteran reported that "all the fast eating and running directly after has caused me ulcers and an eating disorder". In April 2023, she reported that aggressive physical training from service put stress on her body, having to only take over-the-counter pain relievers for most of her pain, along with eating so much so fast, ruined her stomach lining. 

No VA examination has been provided for these claims.  She is diagnosed with gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, hiatal hernia, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. The Veteran has reported that taking over-the-counter painkillers in service ruined her stomach lining. It is common knowledge that some painkillers, such as NSAIDs, can affect stomach lining.

The third McLendon element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be an association between the current disabilities or symptoms and the in-service injury, including equivocal or non-specific medical evidence or credible lay evidence. The Board finds that the low threshold is met here, and VA's duty to provide a VA examination was triggered prior to the July 2022 and June 2023 rating decisions on appeal. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 85-86.  Failure to obtain an opinion addressing whether the Veteran has gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, hiatal hernia, and gastroesophageal reflux disease, which is caused by service, is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring a remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of her gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, hiatal hernia, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. An in-person examination for this opinion is not necessary unless deemed so by the clinician.  The examiner must answer the following questions: 

(a.) Is the Veteran's gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, hiatal hernia, and gastroesophageal reflux disease at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including the effects of over-the-counter pain medications?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for each opinion offered. If any requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, i.e., no one could respond given the medical science and the known facts, or by a deficiency in the records or the examiner, i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training.

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asare, Ama K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.