Citation Nr: A25033893
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250304-522128
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder from June 12, 2019 is granted, subject to the laws and regulations controlling the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to an increased disability rating higher than 60 percent for coronary artery disease (CAD) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is granted from March 19, 2020, subject to the laws and regulations controlling the award of monetary benefits.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  From June 12, 2019, the Veteran's unspecified trauma and stressor disorder symptoms and overall impairment more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  However, his symptoms and overall impairment have not more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas at any point during the appeal period.

2.  The Veteran's CAD symptoms have not more nearly approximated workload of 3.0 METs or less that resulted in heart failure symptoms at any point during the appeal period.

3.  The Veteran's service-connected disabilities rendered him unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation from March 19, 2020, the day after his last day of full-time employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  From June 12, 2019, the criteria for an initial disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440.

2.  The criteria for an increased disability rating higher than 60 percent for CAD are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.104, DC 7006.

3.  The criteria for a TDIU are met from March 19, 2020.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1964 to March 1967, to include service in Vietnam. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating?decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that, after the Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim in October 2023, continued the Veteran's evaluation of 30 percent for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder and the evaluation of 60 percent for CAD.? While the March 2024?rating?decision did not specifically state whether?new?and?relevant?evidence was received to warrant readjudicating the claims, it readjudicated the merits of all of the?claims?on appeal.  Thus, to the extent that new and relevant evidence was required, there were implicit favorable findings by which the Board is bound of?new?and?relevant evidence by the RO,?and?the Board will address the merits of the?claims.? 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(c), 3.2501.? 

The Veteran timely appealed the March 2024?rating?decision in a March 2025 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) (VA Form 10182) and selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). ?38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b)(1).? Accordingly, the Board will?review?the?evidence?of record as of the date of the March 2024 rating decision.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.? The Board will not consider evidence added to the record after the date of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.? If evidence was added during any ineligible period, the Board did not consider it.? If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, he may at any time file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim. ?38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).? If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the?grant?of the benefit sought.? 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2)(B);?38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).? 

The Board notes that the Veteran indicated in his March 2025 VA Form 10182 that the AOJ did not adjudicate in a February 2025 rating decision the higher disability rating claims for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder and CAD that he had submitted in a Supplemental Claim in October 2024.  However, given that the February 2025 rating decision did not adjudicate the higher evaluation claims and a March 2024 rating decision did, the Board finds that the Veteran timely appealed the March 2024 rating decision that denied higher evaluations for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder and CAD as that is the most recent decision denying those claims.  Moreover, even though the Veteran indicated in his March 2025 VA Form 10182 that he disagreed with the effective dates assigned for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder and CAD, the Board finds that the Veteran is appealing only the evaluations assigned for those disabilities and not any effective dates as he has consistently indicated in Supplemental Claims and Higher-Level Review Requests that he submitted throughout the appeal period for the claims on appeal that he was only appealing the disability ratings assigned for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder and CAD.  See VA Claims and Appeals Modernization, 84 Fed. Reg. 138, 152 (Jan. 18, 2019) ("§?20.202 notes that '[t]he Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal.'  This language protects the rights of a veteran who, for example, incorrectly identifies the date of the AOJ but does provide enough information that VA is able to identify the issue and decision on appeal).

Entitlement to a TDIU has been raised as part and parcel of the higher disability rating claim for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder.  Phillips v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 394, 400 (2024) ("VA must consider whether a TDIU award is warranted 'whenever a veteran submits evidence of a medical disability and makes a claim for the highest rating possible, and additionally submits evidence of unemployability'" (quoting Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 2001)).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board generally may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting a docket switch under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) has elapsed.? However, the Board interprets the Veteran's statements in these matters as reflecting an intent to have them reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds is a request for the Board to issue its decision as soon as possible without waiting until the period to request to switch dockets elapses.? See Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) (allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new NOD within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives an NOD, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony).? 

Disability ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where an award of service connection for a disability has been granted and the assignment of an initial evaluation for that disability is disputed, separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the evaluations may be staged.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  While the Veteran's entire history is reviewed when assigning a disability rating, 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, where service connection has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Entitlement to an increased disability rating for CAD

The Veteran's CAD is evaluated at 60 percent from May 1, 2018 under DC 7006.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104.   The Veteran submitted a formal TDIU application in June 2022 that was interpreted as, among other things, a claim for an increased disability rating for CAD.

VA amended the Schedule for Rating Disabilities of the Cardiovascular System, to include DC 7006, effective November 14, 2021. 

Under the amended version of DC 7006, myocardial infraction is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart.  Under the General Rating Formula, a 60 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.1 to 5.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms.  A 100 percent rating is warranted where workload of 3.0 METs or less results in heart failure symptoms.  

Under Note (2) of 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, one MET is defined as the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 milliliters per kilogram of body weight per minute.  When the level of METs at which dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope may be used.

Under Note (3) of 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope.

For the following reasons, entitlement to an increased disability rating higher than 60 percent for CAD is not warranted.

In July 2022 and December 2023, VA examiners confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses of CAD and myocardial infarction.  During the examination, the Veteran reported dyspnea on exertion, low energy, and fatigue.  The Veteran did not have cardiac arrhythmia or heart valve condition.  There was no cardiac hypertrophy or cardiac dilatation.  An interview-based METs test was completed with results of greater than 3 to 5 METs with breathlessness and fatigue.  The Veteran's cardiac disability impacted his ability to work in that he experienced difficulty with prolonged standing, walking, and heavy lifting.

The evidence of record as noted above does not reflect that the Veteran's CAD warrants an increased disability rating higher than 60 percent.  Specifically, the Veteran's CAD symptoms did not more nearly approximate workload of 3.0 METs or less resulting in heart failure symptoms.

For the above reasons, an increased disability rating higher than 60 percent is not warranted for CAD.  The evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a 100 percent rating is warranted at any point during the appeal period.  Rather, the evidence at this time weighs persuasively against the criteria required for a higher disability rating, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). Moreover, there is no evidence of record or argument showing that it was factually ascertainable that the Veteran's CAD had worsened within a year prior to the June 2022 claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3) ("The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability occurred, if application is received within one year from such date"); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2) (awarding an increased evaluation for disability compensation as of the "[e]arliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record that an increase in disability had occurred").

Entitlement to a higher initial disability rating for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder

The schedular criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities incorporate the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5).  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125, 4.130.  The Veteran's unspecified trauma and stressor disorder is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, and is rated 30 percent from June 12, 2019, the date of claim and grant of service connection, and 50 percent from December 4, 2024, the date of a formal TDIU application.  As discussed further below, the Veteran is entitled to a uniform initial disability rating of 50 percent from June 12, 2019 as he has continuously pursued this claim in the AMA since that date.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 30 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily), with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal, due to such symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent disability rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  On the other hand, if the evidence shows that the veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In June 2019, the Veteran underwent a VA examination during which he reported that he was married and had good relationships with his children and his wife's four children.  He indicated that he retired in 2013 and was delivering pizza one day a week.  The Veteran reported a mostly good work record, although he would quit jobs sometimes because of interpersonal difficulties.  He experienced hypervigilance, nightmares, decreased memory and concentration, recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic events, and a history of anger.  The examiner also found that the Veteran endorsed symptoms of anxiety and chronic sleep impairment with occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  The Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, and there was no evidence of hallucinations/delusions.

During a June 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his wife had recently passed and that he spent his spare time in leisure pursuits such as woodworking.  The examiner found that the Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety and chronic sleep impairment with occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  

During a December 2023 VA examination, the examiner found that the Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, and chronic sleep impairment with occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  The Veteran denied suicidal ideation.

For the following reasons, the symptoms and impairment of the Veteran's unspecified trauma and stressor disorder more nearly approximated the criteria for an initial disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, from June 12, 2019.

Throughout the entire appeal period, the Veteran endorsed symptoms of hypervigilance, nightmares, decreased memory and concentration, recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic events, anger, depressed mood, anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, and chronic sleep impairment.  In addition, the evidence of record shows that, throughout the entire appeal period, the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity as the Veteran experienced difficulty concentrating and mild memory loss.

Based on the evidence of record, including the lay and medical evidence of record, the Veteran's symptoms and impairment throughout the appeal period more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity as required for an initial disability rating of 50 percent.

The Veteran is not, however, entitled to a higher 70 percent disability rating at any time during the period on appeal.  The evidence of record reflects that the Veteran did not experience symptoms such as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, or near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively.  Further, the Veteran did not exhibit impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, or neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  In addition, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran had been married before his wife passed, maintained positive relationships with his children and his wife's children, and was able to manage his financial affairs.  This evidence shows that the Veteran had neither an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships nor deficiencies in areas such as family relations and judgment, and, thus, the symptoms and impairment did not more nearly approximate the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating.

In reaching the above conclusions, the Board is mindful that the symptoms listed in the rating schedule are essentially examples of the type and degree of symptoms indicative of the level of impairment required for each such rating, and that the Veteran need not demonstrate those exact symptoms to warrant a higher disability rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  As explained above, the Board has found that that the evidence of record shows that the Veteran has manifested sufficient symptoms of the type and extent, frequency, or severity to result in the occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity required for a disability rating of 50 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  However, as discussed above, he did not show symptoms of the type and extent, frequency, or severity to result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

For the above reasons, the evidence of record reflects that throughout the appeal period, the Veteran exhibited symptoms of such type, severity, and frequency as to more closely approximate an initial disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder from June 12, 2019.  The evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial disability rating higher than 50 percent is warranted at any point during the appeal period.  Rather, the evidence at this time weighs persuasively against approximation of the symptoms required for a higher disability rating, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.

The Board has considered the Veteran's claims and decided entitlement based on the evidence.  The Veteran and his attorney have not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, other than entitlement to a TDIU as discussed below, with respect to his claims, to include entitlement to an extraschedular disability rating, entitlement to a separate disability rating, or service connection secondary to disability.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

Entitlement to a TDIU

As discussed in the introduction, the issue of entitlement to a?TDIU?came to the Board as part and parcel?of?the claim for a higher initial disability rating for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder.  Thus, the date?of?claim for entitlement to a TDIU begins June 12, 2019, the date?of claim and?the award?of?service connection for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder. 

VA will grant a TDIU when the evidence shows that a veteran is precluded, by reason of his service-connected disabilities, from securing and following "substantially gainful employment" consistent with his education and occupational experience.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  The central inquiry is, "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  The Board must evaluate whether there are circumstances in a veteran's case, apart from any non-service-connected condition and advancing age, which would justify a total rating based on individual unemployability due solely to the service-connected conditions.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

The regulations provide that if there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, at least one disability must be rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability must bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The Veteran is currently in receipt of service connection for unspecified trauma and stressor disorder, now evaluated at 50 percent from June 12, 2019; CAD, evaluated at 60 percent from May 1, 2018; tinnitus, evaluated at 10 percent from June 20, 2018, and noncompensable bilateral hearing loss.  The Veteran's combined schedular rating is 80 percent, with one disability rated 40 percent, from June 12, 2019.  He therefore meets the schedular criteria for entitlement to a TDIU from June 12, 2019 under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The relevant question is then whether the Veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities preclude gainful employment for which his education and occupational experience may otherwise qualify him.

The term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" is defined as having two components: one economic and one non-economic.  The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  The non-economic component includes consideration of: the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).

For the following reasons, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded gainful employment for which his education and occupational experience might have otherwise qualified him.

In his June 2022 formal application for TDIU, the Veteran indicated that he last worked on March 18, 2020 as an auto body mechanic and pizza delivery driver.  He reported that he could no longer work as a delivery driver because of the chronic exhaustion caused by his heart condition and the need to complete many tasks at the job in a short amount of time.  Further, the Veteran alleged that his service-connected disabilities, to include CAD and unspecified trauma and stressor disorder, prevented him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation.  In addition, a June 2019 VA examination noted that the Veteran received a GED.

The above evidence of record, to include the VA examinations considered in the above sections discussing the higher disability rating claims, reflects that the Veteran received a GED and last worked on March 18, 2020 as an auto mechanic and pizza delivery driver.  Overall, he experienced symptoms associated with his service-connected disabilities that resulted in functional impairments that would significantly interfere with his ability to secure and follow any substantially gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational experience.  For instance, the evidence of record reflects symptoms and impairments associated with his service-connected disabilities (including, but not limited to, hypervigilance, nightmares, decreased memory and concentration, recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic events, anger, depressed mood, anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, chronic sleep impairment, dyspnea on exertion, low energy, fatigue, and difficulty with prolonged standing, walking, and heavy lifting) that would prevent him from performing any type of substantially gainful employment (physical or non-physical) consistent with his education and occupational experience.  Moreover, the Veteran's statement that he could no longer work in pizza delivery because of chronic exhaustion from his heart condition is competent and credible.  In this regard, whether a veteran could perform the physical and mental acts required by employment at a given time is an issue about which a lay person may provide competent evidence.  Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013) ("neither the statute nor the relevant regulations require the combined effect [of disabilities] to be assessed by a medical expert").

For the above reasons, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded any substantially gainful employment consistent with his educational and occupational experience, and entitlement to a TDIU due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities is warranted from March 19, 2020, the day after he last worked full-time. 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Styer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.