Citation Nr: A25033433
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241021-484090
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from September 1973 to July 1975, and United States Army from August 3, 1978, to December 6, 1978.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for sleep apnea any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran is pursuing secondary service connection for sleep apnea.  The Veteran contends that his sleep apnea is due to weight gain caused by the inability to exercise due to his service-connected total right knee arthoplasty (right knee disability).  

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).  

Further, the Board must also consider whether obesity may serve as an "intermediate step" in the secondary service connection framework.  Obesity can be considered "an intermediate step" for service-connection if the evidence shows that a service-connected disability "caused the veteran to become obese" and the obesity caused by the service-connected disability "was a substantial factor in causing" the current disability, and that the current disability "would not have occurred but for" the obesity caused by the service-connected disability."  

To that end, the Veteran submitted the June 2023 private medical opinion that found that the Veteran's sleep apnea is due to obesity due to weight gain caused by the Veteran's service-connected right disability.  The private examiner provided a comprehensive literature review of the connection between sleep apnea and obesity, however, the private examiner failed to adequately address how the Veteran's right knee disability caused the Veteran to be obese with specificity.  

The Veteran was afforded an August 2023 VA examination to determine the etiology of his sleep apnea.  The VA examiner found the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability.  The VA examiner highlighted that while the Veteran is obese there is no indication that the Veteran is unable to participate in a modified diet and weight loss program.  The VA examiner, however, acknowledged that the Veteran's obesity is a risk factor for his development of sleep apnea.  As such, the Board finds that additional medical guidance is needed to ascertain whether the Veteran's right knee caused the Veteran's obesity, which is an intermediate step/substantial factor in causing sleep apnea.  

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As discussed above, the etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea has not been fully developed.  Therefore, the Board finds that further development is needed prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim of service connection for sleep apnea.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an etiological opinion as to whether the Veteran's obesity served as an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability and sleep apnea, from a VA examiner that has not previously provided an opinion in this matter. Whether an examination is needed prior to rendering this opinion is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state:

(a) Whether the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability caused the Veteran to become obese.

(b) Whether the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability aggravated his obesity.  

(c) If the answer to (a) or (b) is yes, is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's obesity (whether obesity was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities) was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating the Veteran's sleep apnea?  

(d) If the answer to (a) or (b) is yes, is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the Veteran's obesity?

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Higgins, Jeffery

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.