Citation Nr: A25033911
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-447105
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a torn lateral meniscus of the left knee is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record establishes a nexus between the Veteran's conceded stressor and the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1987 to December 1987 and from June 1988 to April 2000.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 4, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 17, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his attorney at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a torn lateral meniscus of the left knee and entitlement to service connection for a back condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c) (2019). 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2) (2012).

Service Connection

In seeking VA disability compensation, a Veteran generally seeks to establish that a current disability results from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. "Service connection" basically means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces, or if preexisting such service, was aggravated therein. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381, F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD, is granted.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD. Following a thorough review of the Veteran's medical records, the Board finds that he is entitled to an award of service connection.

The February 2024 rating decision on appeal made a favorable finding that a stressor is conceded, based on the verification of T.A.D.'s death. The Board is bound by this favorable finding, establishing the second element of service connection.

On March 6, 2025, the Veteran submitted a private examination and opinion from Dr. A. H., a Licensed psychologist. Dr. A. H. diagnosed major depressive disorder, unspecified anxiety disorder, and alcohol use disorder in sustained remission. Dr. A. H. notes the Veteran's report that his last 6 years of service was an immeasurable amount of stress. It was the highest rate of suicide in the army for army recruiters. Easy things became difficult. He fought it for years and then started drinking and using drugs. He lost his marriage and his soul. He became a different person. His two sons would not speak to him. He tested positive for drugs on a random test. They did not want anyone to know since he was a top recruiter. He was forced out and not offered any treatment. He was told to sign a paper, or they would court-martial him.  After T.A.D. died, they were in a hurry to fix things and did not want the press to find out.  He was sent out the back door. He was left broken. He had lost his wife and kids and could not hold a job. Dr. A. H. opined that major depressive disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder are at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by his in-service stressor-related events, to include substance abuse in remission.  Dr. A. H. provided the rationale that the Veteran's symptoms began in the military while working as a recruiter. He stayed in that military occupational specialty for much longer, and it took a heavy toll on him.  His fellow recruiter committed suicide.  They had started using drugs and abusing alcohol to cope.  He tested positive and was pushed out with no offer of treatment to help after working extremely hard. He was awarded Recruiter of the Year in 1999.  Dr. A. H. explained that the Veteran's depression and related anxiety have persisted since that time. He has not been able to hold a job. He avoided mental health treatment for years until he hit bottom a few years ago, was suicidal, and called the hotline.

The Board finds Dr. A. H.'s opinion to be probative, as it provided a clear conclusion with supporting data, and reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Accordingly, the Board places great probative value on this nexus opinion. There is no nexus evidence to the contrary.

The competent and credible evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD, is warranted. The claim is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a torn lateral meniscus of the left knee is remanded. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.

The Veteran testified that in 1989, he stepped in a hole and twisted his left knee.  He was given a knee brace. He contends his back condition is secondary to his service-connected right ankle.

A May 2023 VA treatment record reflects that an X-ray of the bilateral knee and ankle was requested. The provider notes that Community Care Consult Medical records are scanned into Vista Display for review in its entirety.

In May 2015, the AOJ made a formal finding that the Veteran's service treatment records could not be located and that any further attempts to obtain the records would be unsuccessful.

When service treatment records are missing, VA has a heightened duty to assist. See O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365 (1991).  Furthermore, the heightened duty also includes providing a medical examination if a review of the evidence of record determines that such examination is necessary to decide the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4).  

The Board notes that the Veteran failed to attend his scheduled VA back examination in December 2023.  An August 2023 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran was contacted by the Homeless Program regarding assistance with housing. As this is an indication that the Veteran was having housing-related issues, the Board finds that under the heightened duty to assist the AOJ should have made an additional attempt to reschedule the missed examination.  Failure to make further attempts to reschedule the VA examination was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring remand.

Regarding the left knee, the fact that the Vista Display records from Community Care Consult Medical Records for the bilateral knees were not associated with the claims file was a failure of the heightened duty-to-assist.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Retrieve documents from Community Care Consult Medical which were reportedly scanned into Vista Imaging. Copies of these documents should be associated with the claims file to enable Board review. If for any reason, they are not available in a format viewable by the Board, contact the Veteran to obtain consent and authorization to release this medical information from Community Care Consult Medical and obtain the relevant medical records. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his back.  The examiner must answer the following question:

(a.) Is the Veteran's back condition at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by and/or aggravated by service-connected right ankle, to include altered gait?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for each opinion offered. If any requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, i.e., no one could respond given the medical science and the known facts, or by a deficiency in the records or the examiner, i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training.

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asare, Ama K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.