Citation Nr: A25033569
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230206-320991
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to secondary service connection for stroke residuals as due to service-connected coronary artery disease (CAD) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 60 percent from December 1, 2009, (with a 100 percent rating from August 25, 2009, to November 31, 2009), for coronary artery disease is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent prior to August 25, 2009, for coronary artery disease is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than March 6, 2007, for the award of retroactive accrued benefits for coronary artery disease is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU), to include on an extraschedular basis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record weighs persuasively in favor of findings that the Veteran's service-connected CAD disability caused his claimed for stroke residuals. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for stroke residuals as secondary to service-connected CAD are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active-duty service from September 1969 to April 1971. The Veteran passed away in September 2011, and the Appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a January 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Procedurally, the Board denied the Veteran's claims in March 2023. Thereafter, the Veteran appealed the denials to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims ("CAVC"), and the parties agreed to a September 2024 Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) for reasons detailed at greater length below. 

Service Connection

1. Entitlement to secondary service connection for stroke residuals as due to service-connected coronary artery disease (CAD)

Per the parties' JMR, the Board erred by not considering the Veteran's stroke residuals in relation to his service-connected CAD disability, specifically as to whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection on either a presumptive or secondary basis for the disability. The first inquiry the Board has been requested to address is whether the Veteran's stroke residuals were within the scope of the claim for presumptive service connection for ischemic heart disease under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) in that "the stroke was apparently a result of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease." Id. The Board finds that it was. See, e.g. August 2007 Statement in Support of Claim (wherein the Veteran related the claimed for conditions to the stroke he suffered); See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (the scope of a claim pursued by a claimant includes any diagnosis that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record). 

Accordingly, as the Veteran's March 6, 2007, encompassed the Veteran's stroke residuals, the Board's inquiry turns to that of service connection. As to presumptive service connection, effective August 31, 2010, ischemic heart disease (including, but not limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction; atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease (including coronary spasm) and coronary bypass surgery; and stable, unstable and Prinzmetal's angina), is included as a disease associated with herbicide exposure under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). However, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e), the term ischemic heart disease does not include hypertension or peripheral manifestations of arteriosclerosis such as peripheral vascular disease or stroke, or any other condition that does not qualify within the generally accepted medical definition of ischemic heart disease. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) (Note 3). Thus, the Board finds that presumptive service connection is explicitly precluded as a matter of law for stroke residuals a result of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 

Nonetheless, the evidence of record does reveal causation as it pertains to a theory of secondary service connection. To point, the Veteran's medical records reveal that the Veteran suffered a stroke as a result of critical stenosis of the right internal carotid artery, and complete occlusion of the left. See July 2004 Private Treatment Record (Discharge Summary); see also August 2007 Statement in Support of Claim (Veteran describing his residuals following the stroke). Thus, as the Veteran was service-connected for CAD, and as the evidence weighs persuasively in favor of finding that said disability caused him to suffer a stroke, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim meets all elements for secondary service connection and the claim is granted for its residuals. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 60 percent from December 1, 2009, (with a 100 percent rating from August 25, 2009, to November 31, 2009), for coronary artery disease is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent prior to August 25, 2009, for coronary artery disease is remanded.

3. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than March 6, 2007, for the award of retroactive accrued benefits for coronary artery disease  is remanded.

4. Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU), to include on an extraschedular basis is remanded.

The Appellant's attorney argues that the March 2010 VA examination is inadequate to the extent that the examiner estimated that the Veteran's ADLs would result in heart failure as a MET of 5 to 7, but where no supporting data or rationale was provided in support of that conclusion, as the VA examiner merely stated, "see ADLs." Here, the attorney pointed out that the Veteran and Appellant had stated that, at the time, he was unable to perform activities of daily living like vacuuming, cooking, or regular housework due to his heart disability. The Board agrees that said estimate was not accompanied by a well-reasoned rationale and therefore the Board finds a remand appropriate prior to deciding the increased rating claim before it. Lastly, the Board finds that the Veteran's increased rating claim also encompasses a TDIU claim, and therefore the Board will remand the issue, so that it may be decided after the intertwined claims are, to include the claim for an earlier effective date, pending resolution of the additional development ordered herein and as detailed below. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009); Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Acquire an addendum medical opinion to address the March 2010 VA examination report of which estimated activity level (in METs) to be more than 5 up to 7, but where the VA examiner did not provide a well-reasoned rationale, and where the lay testimony of record indicates that the Veteran was unable to exercise or do sports, could not tolerate walking on a treadmill, could barely take his own bath, could not vacuum or do anything that required physical motion. See VBMS, document titled "Hearing Transcript," receipt dated March 27, 2019 ("He, he could barely take his own bath. And he could cook a little bit but he could not vacuum ordo anything that required physical motion"); document titled "VA examination," receipt dated March 23, 2010. 

Specifically, the examiner is asked to provide an estimate of METs based on the lay statements of record.

If an estimate cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, it must be clear whether this is due to a lack of knowledge among the medical community at large or insufficient knowledge of the specific examiner.

The VA examiner is advised that in providing a rationale for the requested opinion above, he or she may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record. However, the VA examiner's opinion must not contain any determinations regarding the credibility of any statements made by the Veteran or Appellant (surviving spouse).

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S.R. Fey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.