Citation Nr: A25033057
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240405-432486
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1997 to August 1998. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran's file also contains a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) regarding the issue of service connection for flat feet, received on April 4, 2024.  However, the Veteran failed to specify which docket option he wanted.  In response, on April 24, 2024, the Board send an NOD clarification letter directing the Veteran to submit a VA Form 10182 identifying the review option for this issue, yet the Veteran failed to provide the requested clarification for the issue of service connection for flat feet. The issue of flat feet is therefore not before the Board at this time.

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus is remanded

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in January 2024.  Regarding the pure threshold testing results, the VA examiner indicated that the audiometric results were not valid for rating purposes because he found the thresholds for the ears "unreliable," while noting that the Veteran may have "non-organic hearing loss" based on the evaluation.   

The Maryland CNC word list was also noted as CNT ("could not test"). The examiner wrote, "The use of the speech recognition score is not appropriate for this Veteran because of language difficulties, cognitive problems, inconsistent speech recognition scores, etc., that make combined use of puretone average and speech recognition scores inappropriate." 

The AOJ failed to procure an addendum to clarify this discrepancy. 

Considering the above, the Board cannot make an informed decision regarding this appeal, and it was the AOJ's pre-decisional duty to assist error to not seek clarification regarding both issues.  Accordingly, a remand for a new VA examination and opinion are required. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination to address the claimed bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. The clinician must review the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records and VA treatment records.

(A)	The clinician must determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of hearing loss at any time during the review period. In making this determination, the clinician must address the previous VA examiner's determination of CNT (could not test) for all puretone thresholds. 

(B)	The clinician must then opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the hearing loss diagnosis, if any, is due to his service.

(C)	VA has conceded that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus. The clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's tinnitus is due to his service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

S. Kim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. West

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.