Citation Nr: A25033671
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240630-451732
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a low back condition is denied.

Service connection for bradycardia (claimed as a heart condition) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's low back condition either began in or was otherwise caused by a period of active service.

2. The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bradycardia either began in or was otherwise caused by a period of active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a low back condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for service connection for bradycardia have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from August 2015 to January 2016 with periods of reserve service until January 2022. 

This matter stems from an April 2024 rating decision that denied service connection for a low back condition and a heart condition.

The Veteran timely appealed the April 2024 rating decision by filing a VA Form 10182, wherein he selected the direct review docket within the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act (AMA) review system.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision.  By operation of law, the Board is precluded from considering evidence submitted during a period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, in conjunction with the adjudication of this appeal. 38?C.F.R. §?20.303. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any additional evidence in conjunction with his appeal, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38?C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

At the outset, the Board notes that the only period of active service the Veteran has, is from August 2015 to January 2016. The rest of the Veteran's reserve service could either be considered active duty for training (ACDUTRA) or inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).

There is a clear distinction between individuals who serve on active duty and those who only serve on ACDUTRA.  An individual seeking VA disability compensation based only on ACDUTRA must establish a service-connected disability in order to achieve veteran status and be entitled to disability compensation benefits.  In Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 171-75 (2010), the Court stated that the placement of the burden of proof on the Veteran was consistent with the distinction made in § 101(24) between an ACDUTRA claimant and an active-duty claimant.

Active military, naval, or air service includes any period of ACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled from disease or injury incurred in the line of duty.  38 U.S.C.A. § 101(22), (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a), (c).  Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated while performing active duty or ACDUTRA, or from injury (but not disease) incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA.  Id.; see also 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 106, 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). The court has emphasized that the primary difference in requirements between ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA is that ACDUTRA allows for consideration of a disease or injury, while INACDUTRA is limited to an injury only. It was further highlighted that the disease or injury must occur during the period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.

ACDUTRA includes full time duty performed by members of the Armed Forces Reserves or the National Guard of any state.  38 C.F.R. § 3.6(c).  To establish status as a "Veteran" based upon a period of ACDUTRA, a claimant must establish that he was disabled from disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during that period of ACDUTRA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(a), (d); Harris v. West, 13 Vet. App. 509, 511 (2000); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466, 470 (1995).  Further, the burden to establish "Veteran" status for a claim based on a period of ACDUTRA is on the appellant.  Paulson; Smith v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 40, 44 (2010); Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 171-75 (2010). 

The fact that a claimant has established status as a veteran for other periods of service does not obviate the need to establish that she is also a veteran for purposes of the period of ACDUTRA where the claim for benefits is based on that period of ACDUTRA. Mercado-Martinez v. West, 11 Vet. App. 415, 419 (1998).

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during service (nexus). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a).

Low Back

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not show any complaints of or treatment for a low back condition. Reserve treatment notes from October 2018 showed the Veteran denied low back pain.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2022 and was diagnosed with a lumbosacral strain. He reported onset to be in 2017, and that he experienced persistent pain which worsened over time. The VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's back condition was caused by his active service, and that while pain may have existed during service, based upon his subjective reports, he was not treated until after service.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records show that he was treated for back pain in November 2022, and in January 2023 requested to see a chiropractor. The Veteran's x-rays showed a mild compression of the T12-L1, and he stated that he did not recall a specific injury to his back. In December 2022, the Veteran was diagnosed with mild lumbar spondylosis and chronic mild anterior wedging of the T12-L3 vertebrae (via x-ray).

The Veteran's private treatment records show that underwent chiropractic treatment for his back in November 2022. In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a private opinion from Dr. C.K., who diagnosed the Veteran with intervertebral disc syndrome, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and a back strain. She stated that the Veteran told her onset of his back pain started in 2015 during basic training after carrying a lot of heavy items (approximately 40 pounds). He stated that his pain started in his upper back and went to his lower back, and that he did not report pain at the time due to a "suck it up" attitude. He denied any trauma or history of back injury. Dr. C.K. provided a positive etiological opinion, finding that the evidence including the Veteran's lay statements, demonstrated a pattern of chronicity for his back diagnosis beginning during service, persisting to the present and progressing over time. She stated that the Veteran's STRs were silent with respect to any back issues, and that researched showed chronic lower back pain was most common amongst soldiers. Dr. C.K. also stated that medical literature showed back pain may begin suddenly or gradually after an injury, and that age, activity, smoking, and a sedentary lifestyle would affect it.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement where he stated that prior to the Army, he lived a sedentary lifestyle and that the physical requirements of the Army were much higher than anything he had done prior, in that he had to run almost every day, march with ruck sacks or assault packs and combat equipment for up to 12 miles. He reported that he carried approximately 30 pounds of combat gear on his back and more than 10-15 pounds of protective gear. He stated that the pain was manageable, so he did not seek treatment, and that he sought treatment when the pain got worse after active duty.

Analysis  

Here, while the Veteran had contended that his low back condition began in 2015 after carrying a lot of heavy items, the Board finds that the evidence does not show an event during a period of active service that may have caused the Veteran's current low back strain.

The Veteran's STRs were silent with respect to a low back condition both while on active duty and during his periods of reserve service. The Board acknowledges Dr. C.K.'s opinion that the Veteran's low back pain began in service and persisted since then, and that chronic back pain is the most common among soldiers. Additionally, she stated that the evidence plus the Veteran's lay statements demonstrate a pattern of chronicity of back problems beginning during service, persisting to the present, and progressing over time. 

However, the Veteran denied experiencing trauma or a history of injury to his back, and did not point to a specific injury that occurred during a period of either active service or INACDURA that led to his current low back pain. The Veteran stated that his low back pain was an accumulation of having to lift heavy items during his five-month active-duty training period. He then denied experiencing back pain three years later while on reserve duty and began seeking treatment for his low back after leaving reserve service. This speaks to the June 2022 VA examiner's assertion that while pain may have existed at some point based on the Veteran's subjective report, it did not persist throughout the remainder of his reserve service. The Board finds the June 2022 VA examiner's opinion therefore to be more probative, as it aligns more squarely with the additional evidence of record.

Even assuming the Veteran's records showed continued complaints of back pain, for reservists, the only time the chronic disease presumption applies is when the period of active service is for at least a period of 90 days. As stated above, the Veteran's only period of active service is from August 2015 to January 2016, and the record shows he did not have any complaints of or treatment for a low back condition during that time. While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports that he did not seek treatment for his back until the pain was no longer manageable, it does not take away from the fact that there was no specific event or injury during a period of active service that caused the Veteran's current back condition. 

As the evidence shows the Veteran's low back condition was not incurred during a period of active service, ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, service connection is denied.

Bradycardia

The Veteran is also seeking service connection for a heart condition, claimed as bradycardia.

The Veteran's STRs during active service do not show any complaints of or treatment for a heart condition. Treatment notes for an unrelated injury from November 2016 show the Veteran's heart rate was 51bpm. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2022 and was not diagnosed with a heart condition. He reported onset to be 2018 with sharp and strong chest pain, and shortness of breath. The VA examiner provided a negative opinion finding that there were no STRs or provider visits to suggest the Veteran was examined for or treated for a heart condition while in service, and that while pain may have existed in service based on a subjective report, the records supported the fact that the Veteran was treated after discharge.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in April 2023 and was diagnosed with unstable angina and bradycardia. The Veteran reported onset to be in 2017 and that he experienced heart pain for 5-10 times a day for 3-5 minutes. The VA examiner stated it was less likely than not that the Veteran's heart condition was related to a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) but noted lead inhalation at Fort Eustice.

The Veteran submitted a private examination from February 2024, where he reported onset of his heart condition to be in 2015 during basic training. He stated he felt his heart speeding up, and feelings of panic, and wondered if the symptoms were related to running. The Veteran reported he had shortness of breath in 2022, drank 1-2 drinks per week, smoked one pack of cigarettes per day in basic training and continued smoking after, and denied a history of cardiovascular issues. Dr. C.K. opined that given the physically demanding nature of the Veteran's military training and work tasks related to his military occupational specialty (MOS), that it was likely he developed asymptomatic sinus bradycardia in the military, and that there was no other more likely cause for this. She stated the etiology of the Veteran's heart condition was likely fitness related secondary to his military training and occupational physical demands. She explained that sinus bradycardia is a cardiac rhythm with appropriate cardiac muscular depolarization initiating from the sinus node, and a rate of fewer than 60 beats per minute. She stated the diagnosis required an ECG showing a normal sinus rhythm at a rate lower than 60 bmp and that while a majority of patients were asymptomatic, others have fatigue, dizziness, exercise intolerance, syncope and presyncope. Dr. C.K. stated that high levels of physical fitness predisposed patients to cardiac rhythm abnormalities and that it was unlikely that the Veteran's current condition was associated with any specific symptoms, and that the symptoms he reported were more likely related to a comorbid condition.

The Veteran's post service treatment records show that in November 2022 he reported unrelieved chest pain and difficulty breathing. Echocardiogram results from June 2022 were relatively normal with mild tricuspid regurgitation. 

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement in which he stated cardiovascular training caused his chest pain, and that he noticed a twisting in his chest, but was assured that it was a normal part of training, and that he did not seek medical attention. 

Analysis

Here, the Veteran has not been shown to have an acute myocardial infarction (heart attack), cardiac arrest (loss of heart activity), or cerebrovascular incident (CVA/stroke). Therefore, the Board finds that his diagnosis of bradycardia is considered a disease for compensation purposes, rather than an injury, and thus can only be service connected during a period of active service or ACDUTRA. As stated above, the only periods of active service the Veteran had were from August 2015 to January 2016. 

The Veteran has previously contended onset of his heart condition to be in 2017 and 2018, however, he did not specifically identify a date or set of dates when his heart condition began and whether it was during a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.  As state above, only injuries may be considered for service connection during period of INACDUTRA, and a disease must have been shown to manifest during a period of active duty or ACDUTRA. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported his heart condition began in 2015, with symptoms such as heart speeding up, and feelings of panic. However, these symptoms in and of themselves do not necessarily mean that the Veteran has a diagnosable heart condition.  Moreover, at his VA examination in April 2023 he reported that it began in 2017, calling into question the Veteran first began experiencing heart symptoms.  

In fact, the medical evidence shows that in June 2022, the Veteran was not shown to have any heart condition. 

Dr. C.K. stated that bradycardia was a condition that must be diagnosed using an ECG. Not only was this not done during a period of active service, but there were also no other reports of a heart condition while on active duty.  Additionally, she did not explain why exercise in basic training would have caused bradycardia as opposed to tobacco usage.

Dr. C.K. also failed to account for the fact that no heart condition was diagnosed in 2022, or that the Veteran's dates as to the onset of the condition have varied between 2015 and 2017.

Given the discrepancy in reporting of when the bradycardia began, and the fact that there is no suggestion of it in the STRs from the Veteran's limited period of active duty, the Board does not find Dr. C.K.'s opinion to establish onset during active service.

The Board finds this opinion was largely based off of the Veteran's lay statements and fails to account for the lack of treatment during a period of active service. On the other hand, the June 2022 VA examiner explained that there was nothing in the Veteran's STRs or provider visits to suggest that the Veteran was examined for or treated for a heart condition during service.  

Therefore, as the Veteran's bradycardia has not been shown to manifest during a period of active duty or ACDUTRA, service connection is denied. 

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elizabeth A. Gadson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.