Citation Nr: A25033906
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-452500
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date of January 22, 2021, but no earlier, for the 100 percent disability rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  From January 22, 2021, the Veteran's PTSD, chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, is manifested by total occupational and social impairment with disorientation to time or place and persistent delusions or hallucinations.

2. Prior to January 22, 2021, the Veteran's PTSD, chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, is manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, but not manifested by total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

From January 22, 2021, but no earlier, the criteria for entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 100 percent evaluation for PTSD, chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision which granted a 100 percent disability rating for PTSD, effective October 12, 2022, in which the effective date was subsequently subject to higher-level review in a July 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Earlier Effective Date

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date of February 16, 2016 for the grant of the 100 percent disability rating for PTSD chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent.  

The applicable law and regulations concerning effective dates state that, except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The effective date of an award of service connection shall be the day following the date of discharge or release if the application is received within one year from such date of discharge or release. Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

The Court has interpreted "date entitlement arose" as the date when the claimant met the requirements for the benefits sought.  This is determined on a "facts found" basis.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); Mcgrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000).  It is important to note that an effective date generally can be no earlier than the "facts found."  DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45 (2011).  These "facts found" include the date the disability first manifested and the date entitlement to benefits was authorized by law and regulation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  For instance, if a claimant filed a claim for benefits for a disability before he had the disability, the effective date for benefits can be no earlier than the date the disability first manifested. Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2008).  However, the date entitlement arose is not the date that the AOJ receives the evidence, but the date to which that evidence refers.  Mcgrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000).  When medical records indicate an increase in a disability, receipt of such medical records may be used to establish effective dates for retroactive benefits based on facts found of an increase in a disability only if a complete claim or intent to file a claim for an increase is received within 1 year of the date of the report of examination, hospitalization, or medical treatment.  Id.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a determination on a claim by the AOJ becomes final unless the claimant continuously pursues the claim by filing a supplemental claim, a request for higher-level review, or an appeal to the Board within one year of the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.1103, 3.2500(c)(1).  If a claimant continuously pursues an issue by filing one of these administrative review options within one year, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).  For supplemental claims, VA will readjudicate the claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured and may assign an effective date as early as the date of receipt of the initial claim.  Id; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501.  "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

By way of history, it is noted that the Veteran had active service from June 1976 to April 1979.  In a February 1980 Administrative Decision, it was determined that the Veteran's discharge was under dishonorable conditions and was a bar to the receipt of benefits administered by VA with the possible exception of health care benefits under 38 U.S.C. § Chapter 17 for disabilities determined to be service-connected.  02/15/1980 Administrative Decision.  

On February 16, 2016, the Veteran filed VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) for, in pertinent part, PTSD and depression.  In April 2016, the Veteran was advised that she received an other than honorable discharge on April 4, 1979 which was a bar to benefits.  04/07/2016 Correspondence.

In July 2021, the Veteran filed a VA 21-0966 Intent to File.

On December 15, 2021, the Veteran filed VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) for, in pertinent part, PTSD.  

In a June 2022 VA Administrative Decision, it was determined that the Veteran's service was under honorable conditions and is not a bar to VA benefits.  06/22/2022 Administrative Decision.  

In an August 2022 rating decision, service connection was established for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder and a 50 percent disability rating was assigned effective February 16, 2016.  

On December 26, 2022, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  

In the March 2023 rating decision, a 100 percent disability rating was assigned to PTSD, chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, effective October 12, 2022.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review with regard to the effective date assigned to the 100 percent disability rating.

In a July 2023 rating decision, an earlier effective date was denied. 

With regard to the specifics of the Veteran's PTSD claim, from March to October 2018 she underwent VA outpatient treatment.  She was treated for major depressive disorder, described as recurrent and mild.  

On mental status examination on March 2, 2018, her mood/affect was "pretty good," stable, less restricted and anxious; and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements with good eye contact.  She appeared her stated age and was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  She had no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  Her memory was immediate, recent and remote memory grossly intact as observed with no issues reported.  Concentration was intact with no issues reported.  Insight and judgment were improved.  

On mental status examination on March 9, 2018, her mood/affect was "not so good," stable, anxious; and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements with good eye contact.  She appeared her stated age and was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  She had no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  Her memory was immediate, recent and remote memory grossly intact as observed with no issues reported.  Concentration was intact, with no issues reported.  Insight and judgment were improved.  

On March 14, 2018, she underwent brief supportive therapy and medication management.  Her mood was better, and she was tired and sleepy.  She reported family issues with her son's girlfriend.  She improved communication with her husband, they were doing more talking and laughing together.  She was being more assertive and got strength from church.  She had hope for her marriage, taking things one day at a time.  She had hoarding traits, with no panic attacks lately.  On mental status examination, her mood was stable with improved insight, alert and oriented times three; she speaks quietly.  Her appearance was neat, clean and appropriate.  Anxiety was mild, continues to have difficulty focusing at times.  She denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  She reported low self-esteem with some irritability.  She denied hallucinations/delusions.  She reported that she was less disorganized with redirection frequently, linear and goal-directed.  There was no change to memory.  

On April 6, 2018, the Veteran underwent individual psychotherapy.  She did not endorse any suicidal/homicidal ideation.  On mental status/behavioral observations, her mood/affect was "so tired," stable, anxious, and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  Her memory and concentration were intact.  Her insight/judgment were improved.  

On April 13, 2018, the Veteran underwent a PHQ-9 screen was performed.  The score was 11 which is suggestive of moderate depression.  On mental status/behavioral observations, her mood/affect was "worn out," stable, anxious, and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  Her memory and concentration were intact.  Her insight/judgment were improved.  

On May 3, 2018, the Veteran underwent individual psychotherapy.  PHQ-9 screening was performed.  The score was 3, which is suggestive of no depression.  There was an 8-point reduction from the last visit.  She reported having visited her family of origin recently and "spoke up" to her mother and set boundaries.  She reported communication more effectively with her son and his girlfriend and planning to set boundaries regarding continued support.  She said she is feeling less like a victim in life.  She processed how this victim stance started with childhood sexual abuse by her father and happened again when she was in the military.  Her mood/affect was "anxious," stable and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  Her memory and concentration were intact.  Her insight/judgment were improved.  

On June 1, 2018, she underwent individual psychotherapy.  PHQ-9 screen was performed.  The score was 3, which is suggestive of no depression.  Her mood/affect was "irritated with being late today," stable and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  Her memory and concentration were intact.  Her insight/judgment were improved.  

On June 28, 2018, she underwent individual psychotherapy.  A PHQ-9 screen was performed.  The score was 10 which is suggestive of moderate depression.  PHQ score was 7 points higher since last session which the Veteran attributed to increased psychosocial stressors and considerable difficulty getting/staying focused on how she wants/needs to spend her time; lack of specific goals/plans/identification of values.  She reported often feeling overwhelmed and then spent too much engaging in time wasting/escape activities.  Her mood/affect was "frustrated with myself," stable and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  

On July 11, 2018, her mood was disturbed by change in discharge.  She had family issues, with her son and wife still living with them.  She had improved communication otherwise with her husband.  They were doing more talking and laughing together.  She started some touch positive with husband.  She had to model positive behavior she wants from him, being more assertive for herself.  She got strength from church.  She had hope for marriage, taking things one day at time.  Her concentration/focus was again distracted.  She had hoarding traits, with no panic attacks lately.  She reported her energy was improving.  She had some thoughts of guilt and worthlessness.  She had poor concentration and improved motivation.  Psychomotor was unchanged.  She had no suicidal ideation.  She had no hopeless/helpless thoughts.  On mental status examination, she was stable with improved insight.  She was alert and oriented times three.  She was speaking quietly.  Her appearance was neat, clean and appropriate.  Her anxiety was mild, continued difficulty for her to focus at times.  She denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  She had some low self-esteem.  She had some irritability.  She denied hallucinations/delusions.  Her thought process was less disorganized with redirection frequent; linear and goal-directed.  There was no change in memory.

On July 13, 2018, the Veteran underwent individual psychotherapy.  PHQ-9 screen was performed.  The score was 0, which is suggestive of no depression.  There was a decrease of 9 points since prior visit which the Veteran attributed to sustained marital satisfaction; no significant stress in living situation with son/girlfriend; engaged in pleasurable activities; setting boundaries related to church gossip; increased self-care; and improved problem solving.  Her mood/affect was "no depression" stable and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with lots of smiling and no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  

On August 17, 2018, the Veteran underwent individual counseling.  PHQ-9 screen was performed.  The score was 14, which was suggestive of moderate depression.  The score reflects an increase of 14 points from the prior session which the Veteran attributed to three factors: distress related to frustration/difficulty in completing forms for getting her discharge.  Also, she had feelings of guilt/shame subsequent to seeing a man she was interested in and having recurrent thoughts/dreams of    him again.  The Veteran also reported some increase in marital discord.  Her mood/affect was "sorta bad" stable and engaged.  Her behavior/appearance was pleasant/focused with no abnormal movements and good eye contact.  She was appropriately attired/groomed.  Her speech was mostly clear with some mumbling, low volume, slightly dysfluent rate/rhythm.  There was no delusional thinking endorsed/observed.  Her thought processing was logical/linear.  

On October 30, 2018, the Veteran underwent brief supportive therapy and medication management.  She reported that she had started to declutter her home.  Her depression is doing better.  She saw a guy crush at a funeral, they spoke briefly and felt closure, her choice to choose her husband.  She and her husband had up and down days.  She had family issues, with her son and wife still living with them.  Finally, her husband realized they are being taken advantage of.  She is realizing she has to model positive behavior she wants from him, being more assertive for herself.  She gets strength from church.  She had hope for marriage.  Her concentration/focus was again distracted.  She still had hoarding traits, with no panic attacks lately.  Her energy was improving.  She had some guilt/worthless thoughts.  Her concentration was poor.  Her motivation was improved.  Psychomotor was the same.  She had no suicidal ideation.  She had no hopeless or helpless thoughts.  Mental status examination was stable with improve insight.  She was alert and oriented times three, speaking quietly.  Her appearance was neat, clean and appropriate.  Her anxiety was mild with continued difficulty for her to focus at times.  She denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  She reported some low self-esteem with some irritability.  She denied hallucinations or delusions.  Her thought process was less disorganized with redirection frequent with linear and goal-directed.  There was no change in memory.

In December 2021, the Veteran submitted an evaluation from University of Denver, The Sturm Center, which reflects dates of assessment on January 22, January 29, February 2, February 16, February 22, February 23, March 9, March 31, and April 2, 2021.  The evaluations were conducted by a clinical psychologist and doctoral student.  The diagnoses were PTSD, chronic, with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder, and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent.  The examiners opined that the Veteran's symptoms of depression and PTSD are more likely than not due to the exacerbation of complex childhood trauma while in the Army after experiencing severe medical issues resulting in threat to her life and the loss of her unborn child while in the military, combined with lack of a proximal duty station to her husband while on deployment.  12/15/2021 Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility.

In July 2022, the Veteran underwent a C&P examination wherein the examiner diagnosed other specified trauma and stressor related disorder; the examiner determined that she did not meet the criteria A for PTSD.  With regard to the best summary of the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment, the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  

The Veteran reported sexual molestation by her father and cousin during her childhood which resulted in a pregnancy and abortion.  As a result, she had problems trusting people and was unable to make close friendships.  She joined the service directly after high school graduation to get "out of the home."  She was "sort of closed off" during service but maintained positive working relationships with peers and superiors.  She got married in 1977.  She had been married for 45 years and adopted a son.  Due to health and mental issues, her marriage has been "hard," and they irritate each other.  Her adult son and his wife currently live with them.  She had one friend from church but otherwise does not have much social interaction.  She spent the majority of her time at home or attending medical appointments.  She was last employed as a pre-school teacher in 2011.  Since discharge she has experienced depression and anxiety.  She reported VA treatment in early 2000 and has been in treatment "on and off."  She is in private therapy with The Sturm Center, but her provider is leaving in August 2022, and she will need to find a new provider.  Despite treatment she continues to experience depression, anxiety, fear, impairment to attention and concentration, lack of motivation and interest, sleep impairment, and "a worry that something bad is going to happen."  Her mental health symptoms are impacting her life "too much."  

The examiner indicated that her symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  With regard to behavioral observations, the Veteran was early to her appointment, casually dressed, and oriented times four.  She made appropriate eye contact.  Her speech was normal in volume, rate, and tone.  Her mood and affect were within normal range.  Her insight and judgment appeared intact.  Her thought process was linear and logical.  She was alert, cooperative, and forthcoming throughout the evaluation.  She appeared to be an accurate historian.  The examiner commented that she has impairment to attention and concentration and lack of motivation and interest.

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) signed by her private medical provider on October 12, 2022.  The examiner diagnosed PTSD, chronic, with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder, and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent.  With regard to the best summary of the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations judgment, thinking and/or mood.  

The examiner referred the reader to an attached May 1, 2021 report conducted by the examiner with regard to the Veteran's history and behavioral observations.  The examiner indicated that her symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, spatial disorientation, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, and disorientation to time or place.  

The referenced May 1, 2021 report was based on the assessments on January 22, January 29, February 2, February 16, February 22, February 23, March 9, March 31, and April 2, 2021.  With regard to behavioral observations, the Veteran was oriented to person, time, place and purpose throughout the assessment process.  Her hygiene and grooming appeared to be adequate, but this was difficult to determine over telehealth.  Throughout the assessment, the Veteran was cooperative and put forth a great deal of effort to complete the evaluation despite having notable difficulty with use of technology.  Her thought process was logical and coherent, although at times she would experience what appeared to be dissociative symptoms while talking about traumatic experiences.  

During the administration of the CAPS,  the Veteran experienced several moments of visible dissociation and needed to be redirected by the evaluator through sensory grounding exercises.  While answering questions about her traumatic experiences, she often had difficulty staying in the present moment as evidenced by her change in affect, change in eye contact and difficulty in staying focused on the topic at hand.  Her speech was often slow, particularly when discussing traumatic experiences and she utilized hearing aids throughout the evaluation.  She denied past and present suicidal/homicidal ideation.  When completing the MMPI-2 she reported processing questions slowly and showed mental fatigue.  It seemed as if she disassociated during the administration of the MMPI-2 as well.  She reported a great deal of frustration around receiving medical care and psychological services due to lack of clarity in diagnosis and inconsistency with mental health providers.  Despite this, she was motivated to seek an accurate diagnosis and curious about continuing therapy after the evaluation.  

She reported receiving a variety of psychiatric diagnoses, primarily anxiety and depressive disorders; she takes Fluoxetine.  She denied any current/historical suicidal/homicidal ideation or self-harming behaviors.  She reported problems with hoarding and with task initiation like cleaning and organizing her home.  She reported family as her primary support system.  She adopted one son and has a grandson.  She has been married for 44 years and decreased the relationship as "ok."  She reported becoming increasingly isolated from friends and family.

It was noted that MMPI-2 results reflect that the Veteran reported a significant degree of somatic symptoms due to a range of medical issues.  She had intrusive memories of childhood abuse.  She likely experiences cognitive disruption in the form of impairment of concentration, memory, attention and judgment.  She may also have intrusive thoughts related to her unwanted and traumatic experiences, and these may also result in confusion, disorganized thinking, and losing contact with reality rather than indicating primary psychotic symptoms.  In other words, these symptoms seem to be more related to severe dissociation and complex trauma.  She often experiences emotional dysregulation, due to depressed mood, frustration, irritability, and anger.  She may experience mistrust of others, even though attempting to help her, and may have a tendency to self-isolate.  She experienced unwanted memories of her childhood abuse and experiences a disconnection, depersonalization, and derealization.  She remained in her home and did not participate in activities she used to enjoy such as going on walks with friends and sewing.  She felt distant and cut off from others.  She experienced dissociative episodes ranging in severity from difficulty concentrating to flashbacks that disconnect her from the present moment.  She felt disconnected from her body; during the evaluation she experienced this several times while talking about trauma.  Overall, her scores reflect severe subjective distress and extreme adverse impact on her social functioning.  

The Board first observes that the symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In Vazquez-Claudio, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that the frequency, severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443; see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

Indeed, "VA must engage in a holistic analysis" that assess the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to symptoms such as the following: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Based on review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that an effective date of January 22, 2021 is warranted for the 100 percent disability rating assigned to PTSD, chronic with dissociative symptoms, depersonalization/derealization disorder and major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent.  Such effective date corresponds to the initial date that she underwent private treatment with The Sturm Center, which resulted in the May 2021 private evaluation.  Based on the findings in the May 2021 private evaluation, the examiner completed the October 2022 DBQ.  The October 2022 DBQ appears to have been based on objective findings from May 2021, rather than an evaluation conducted in October 2022.  As detailed, the May 2021 evaluation was based on treatment beginning on January 22, 2021.  Such evaluation reflects objective findings warranting most of the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating, and objective findings of disorientation to time or place and persistent delusions or hallucinations consistent with a 100 percent disability rating.  As a 100 percent disability rating was assigned based on the objective findings contained in the October 2022 DBQ and May 2021 evaluation, the Board finds that the rating should be assigned from January 22, 2021 corresponding to the initial date of private evaluation.

Prior to January 22, 2021, however, there is no basis for the assignment of the 100 percent disability rating.  As detailed, an effective date of February 16, 2016 was assigned to the establishment of service connection for her psychiatric disability, as this corresponded to her initial claim for compensation.  At that time, service connection was not considered as at that time it was determined that her character of discharge was a bar to benefits.  Upon receipt of her December 2021 claim for compensation, she began undergoing private treatment on January 22, 2021, but otherwise the evidence of record only contains VA treatment records dated in 2018.  

While the Veteran consistently sought VA mental health treatment from March to October 2018, such treatment records do not provide support for a 100 percent disability rating.  The 50 percent disability rating in effect for the period prior to January 22, 2021 contemplates the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology.  Specifically, as detailed, during the course of her VA treatment she had no delusional thinking.  Her thought processing was logical and linear, and her insight and judgment were improved.  Her mood appeared stable although at times anxious and tired.  At times she exhibited moderate depression, but other times she had minimal depression symptoms.  For this period, there are no objective findings or subjective complaints of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Total social and occupational impairment was not shown; indeed, she was taking steps to improve her relationship with her husband.  Nor were there objective findings or subjective complaints to support a 70 percent disability rating.  She exhibited no suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; or, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Her speech tended to be slow with some mumbling, low volume and slightly dysfluent but not illogical, obscure or irrelevant.  She had appropriate hygiene.  She reported stressors related to her marriage and with her son and his spouse but did not describe an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  There are otherwise no treatment records for the period from February 2016 and prior to January 22, 2021.  Thus, based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a 100 percent disability rating is warranted from January 22, 2021, but prior to such date an earlier effective date is not warranted. 

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kreindler, Marcy W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.