Citation Nr: A25033662
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-455783
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

The appeal as to the issue of whether the March 2024 rating decision proposing to reduce the evaluation rating of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent is dismissed.   

Service connection for a left hip condition, including left total hip arthroplasty, is granted.  

Service connection for left lateral hip incisional scar status post uncemented left hip total arthroplasty, as secondary to status post left total hip arthroplasty, is granted.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The July 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) appeal as to the issue of whether the proposal to reduce the evaluation rating of service-connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent is proper, as proposed in the March 2024 rating decision, was premature at the time of the July 2024 NOD, as a disability rating evaluation decision had not been issued and effectuated at such time; therefore, the appeal was premature and the Board must dismiss the matter, as the issue was not ripe for appeal.  

2. The evidence is in at least relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's left hip condition is reasonably shown to be due to or aggravated by service-connected low back disability.  

3. The Veteran's left hip condition caused his left total hip arthroplasty, which resulted in a scar, diagnosed as left lateral hip incisional scar status post uncemented left hip total arthroplasty.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the July 2024 VA Form 10182 appeal as to the issue of whether the March 2024 rating decision proposing the rating reduction in the evaluation of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent was proper, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.203, 20.205.  

2. The criteria for service connection for a left hip disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  

3. The criteria for service connection for left hip scar as secondary to the service-connected left hip disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310(a).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1996 to October 2005.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In July 2024, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 NOD, selecting Direct Review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  Thus, the Board will review evidence as of the date of the March 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions.  

1. The appeal as to the issue of whether the March 2024 rating decision proposing to reduce the evaluation rating of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent is dismissed.  

The Veteran seeks appeal of as to whether the March 2024 rating decision proposing to reduce the evaluation rating of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent is proper.  

In the March 2024 rating decision, the Agency of Original of Jurisdiction (AOJ) proposed to reduce the evaluation rating of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent.  In response, the Veteran submitted the July 2024 NOD and selected the Direct Review Option.  

However, a proposed rating action is not an appealable decision as issuance of such action does not constitute an adjudication.  A notice of disagreement may only be filed with respect to an "adjudication of a specific entitlement as described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.151(c)."  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  

In this case, the March 2024 rating decision was only a proposal and a decrease in the disability evaluation was not effectuated and thus, did not occur at that time.  See Hargrove v. Shinseki, 629 F.3d 1377, 1379-81 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (noting that the appellant's response to the proposed rating reduction was not treated as a notice of disagreement because it was received prior to the issuance of the final rating decision).  

Although the disability evaluation rating of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent, effective February 15, 2024, and from 20 percent to 10 percent effective June 4, 2024 was later finalized in a December 2024 decision, the July 2024 Board Appeal NOD explicitly references the April 2024 VA notification letter of the March 2024 rating decision as the decision being appealed.  Therefore, the July 2024 Board Appeal as to this issue was premature.  

The Board notes that the Veteran is free to submit a review option to the December 2024 rating decision, including appeal to the Board.  

However, as the Veteran's July 2024 Board Appeal as to the issue of the proposal in the reduction in the rating of service connected degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal stenosis was premature, the present appeal must be dismissed.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.203.  

Service Connection

The Veteran contends that his left hip condition is directly related to service, or in the alternative, is related to his service-connected lumbar spine condition.  

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  

In order to establish service connection for a claimed disability on a direct basis, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Service connection may also be established by evidencing a chronic disease in service, which requires a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge is required.  Id.  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) pertaining to continuity of symptomatology can be applied only in cases involving those conditions explicitly recognized under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when the evidence establishes the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

In addition to direct service connection, a disability may also be found service connected on a secondary basis by demonstrating that the disability is either (1) resulting from or the result of an already service-connected disease or injury or (2) aggravated by an already service-connected disease or injury.  See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Any medical opinion which addresses secondary service connection must include an aggravation opinion.  

VA shall consider all information lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  To deny a claim on its merits, there must be a showing that the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

2. Service connection for a left hip condition, including left total hip arthroplasty is granted.  

Turning to the service treatment records (STRs), a July 2000 STR notes the Veteran's report of lower back pain radiating to leg and causing numbness.  The record further notes that the back pain spanned to the left thigh.  A May 2005 STR reflects the Veteran's complaint of lower back pain with intermittent numbness, noted as tingling left posterior buttock, thigh.  A June 2005 STR record reflects the Veteran's report of atraumatic low back pain with intermittent left leg radiculopathy.  A subsequent June 2005 STR notes the Veteran's report of low back pain with intermittent thigh pain.  

Post-service, a July 2014 private treatment record reflects the Veteran's report of low back pain and left leg pain to the knee.  

An August 2014 private treatment record reflects the Veteran's report of left sciatic pain, with pain worse when sitting down and when getting in and out of the car.  

A May 2015 private treatment record reflects the Veteran's report of low back pain and left leg pain to the knee.  

The Veteran underwent a VA hip and thigh conditions examination in April 2022, at which time a diagnoses of left hip osteoarthritis was confirmed.  While an unfavorable secondary resulting service cause nexus opinion is associated with the examination, the secondary service connection aggravation prong opinion is not.  

A March 2024 VA hip and thigh conditions examination reflects diagnoses of left hip osteoarthritis and left hip joint replacement.  No opinion is associated with the examination.  

The Veteran underwent a VA hip and thigh conditions examination in May 2024, at which time a diagnosis of left hip joint replacement was rendered.  A favorable secondary service connection nexus opinion is associated with the examination.  

The Veteran underwent a VA hip and thigh conditions examination in July 2023, at which time a diagnosis of left hip osteoarthritis was confirmed.  An unfavorable direct service connection opinion is associated with the examination.  

The Veteran underwent a VA hip and thigh conditions examination last in June 2024, at which time diagnoses of left hip osteoarthritis and left hip joint replacement were rendered.  An unfavorable secondary causation opinion is associated with the examination.  

Regarding the unfavorable medical evidence, the April 2022 examiner opined that the Veteran's condition is less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine condition.  The examiner rationalized that arthritis in one joint does not cause arthritis in another joint.  The examiner explained that a thorough review of medical literature failed to show such causal relationship.  The examiner indicated that it is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but one joints disease does not spread to another or cause damage to it.  

Here, the April 2022 VA examiner failed to provide any medical analysis to the rationalization beyond the indication that arthritis in one joint does not cause arthritis in another joint.  In this regard, the examiner failed to discuss the objective medical record of evidence, including documented report of back pain and left thigh pain, going as far back into service.  However, in each case where a veteran is seeking service-connection for any disability due consideration shall be given to the places, types, and circumstances of such veteran's service as shown by such veteran's service record, the official history of each organization in which such veteran served, such veteran's medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence.  38 U.S.C §1154.  Thus, the Board finds that the rationale is conclusory.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007).  Hence, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate and does not assign any probative value the April 2022 opinion.  Id.  

The July 2023 examiner opined that the claimed left hip condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner rationalized that March 6, 2020 is the earliest date found regarding the onset of hip pain in the available medical records, which falls outside the period of active duty service.  The examiner found that the Veteran's medical records show that on March 6, 2020 he was noted to have reported sudden onset of left hip pain since February 1, 2020.  The examiner indicated that the April 5, 2022 radiographs of the hips showed severe left hip joint osteoarthritis, but the right hip joint was intact.  The examiner explained that asymmetry of radiological findings suggests a mechanism of injury that would place the preponderance of abnormal forces on the more involved left hip.  The examiner indicated that running and ruck marching during service would be expected to cause a symmetrical distribution of forces resulting in a symmetry of diagnosis at the hips.  The examiner expressed that, rather, the Veteran has severe degenerative joint findings in the left hip with merely a strain of the right hip.  The examiner explained that this asymmetry would not likely result from running two to six miles per day and carrying a rucksack 12 miles twice monthly unless there was a history of a lateralizing diagnosis to cause compensatory biomechanical or kinematic alteration of gait during military service.  The examiner surmised that a review of the available medical records does not produce such a history.  

Here, the July 2023 VA examiner provided a narrow review of the evidence.  Essentially, the examiner focused on the word "hip," as opposed to the totality of the evidence.  38 U.S.C §1154.  However, an opinion is adequate where it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations and also describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one.  D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 104 (2008).  Thus, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate and affords the opinion no probative value.  Id.  

The June 2024 examiner opined that the Veteran's left hip condition is less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar radiculopathy, left lower extremity condition.  The examiner rationalized that the conditions of hip replacement and lumbar radiculopathy are not related.  The examiner explained that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.  The examiner indicated that lumbar radiculopathy, typically caused by nerve compression in the lower back, can sometimes lead to pain, weakness, or numbness in the lower extremities.  The examiner explained that if left untreated or the symptoms are severe, it could lead to changes in gait or posture, which might eventually impact the hip joint.  The examiner indicated, however, that it is important to note lumbar radiculopathy does not directly cause hip replacement (hip arthroplasty).  The examiner explained that hip replacement surgery is usually performed to address issues within the hip joint, such as severe arthritis or fractures.  The examiner indicated that while lumbar radiculopathy might indirectly contribute to hip problems through altered gait or other mechanical issues, it would not be the primary cause of hip replacement.  An opinion regarding whether the left hip condition was aggravated by the service connected condition was not rendered.  

Here, the Board finds that the while the June 2024 opinion discussed whether lumbar radiculopathy is related to the left hip condition, this opinion is not an opinion regarding whether the service-connected lumbar spine condition caused or aggravated the Veteran's claimed left hip condition.  Hence, the Board does not assign any probative value to the June 2024 opinion.  

On the other hand, the favorable evidence of record includes a January 2023 private opinion from Dr. J.E.L., who opined that the Veteran's left hip and lower back conditions are on a more than probable basis directly related to his time in service.  Dr. J.E.L rationalized that the conditions are consistent with a chronic condition that has been present for at least 20 to 25 years.  Dr. J.E.L. explained that degeneration in these regions is consistent with a mechanism of injury related to repetitive strenuous activities/overuse.   Dr. J.E.L. indicated that joint degeneration is a condition that is progressive in nature and there is an increased likelihood that it will become more debilitating over the course of a person's life the longer the condition is present.  Dr. J.E.L. found that the conditions are consistent with the description of the Veteran's activities and duties during his time in the military, which included running two to six miles per day, 12-mile ruck marching twice monthly and many other repetitive strenuous activities.  

In a January 2023 private opinion submitted in January 2024, Dr. J.E.L. opined that the Veteran's left hip condition is on a more than probable basis linked to or aggravated by and likely caused by his lower back condition.  Dr. J.E.L. rationalized that the Veteran's service medical records show several documented episodes of lower back pain that usually presented with intermittent radiation of pain and numbness/tingling into his left lower extremity.  Dr. J.E.L. found that many of these episodes were insidious in nature, while others involved a direct insult to the region.  Dr. J.E.L indicated that with the Veteran's history of running two to six miles per day and carrying a rucksack 12 miles twice monthly, his lower back suffered repeated traumatic compressive forces.  Dr. J.EL. added that there were multiple documented lifting injuries that caused episodes of his lower back pain and leg symptoms.  Dr. J.E.L. explained that with these repetitive and traumatic compressive forces, not only was the structural (bony) component compromised, the discs and soft tissues of the Veteran's lumbar spine had direct insult to them as well, which led to multiple episodes of lower back pain and neurological symptoms which were lateralized to his left lower extremity, as documented in many of his medical records.  Dr. J.E.L. indicated that there is a kinematic relationship between the lumbosacral spine, pelvis and hip joints that has been thoroughly researched and studied, in which case, much research supports the idea that a lumbar or lumbosacral condition can alter pelvic and hip biomechanics and can lead to downstream issues.  Dr. J.E.L. concluded that multiple service related injuries to the Veteran's back and chronic repetitive stresses in service resulted in a cascade of additional issues that gradually formed over the years, including imbalances in the spinal-pelvic relationship influencing hip biomechanics and gait.  Dr. J.E.L. found that the Veteran had consistent documented complaints of unilateral left lower extremity symptoms in addition to his lower back pain.  Dr. J.E.L. explained that this was likely to occur in an asymmetrical pattern because these types of lumbar injuries are not always symmetrical in nature.  

The May 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left hip condition is as likely as not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability.  The examiner rationalized that the current severity level of the lumbar spine condition warrants by proximity, association of the left hip condition.  The examiner found that after having reviewed the evidence, including the Veteran's chiropractor's opinion, the records show that the Veteran has been having ongoing chronic left hip pain.  The examiner explained that it is well known in medical literature that the biomechanical characteristic of the spine and hip joint are altered by soft-tissue and bony changes, including intervertebral disk degeneration, facet joints arthrosis and hypertrophy of the ligamentum flavum.  The examiner indicated that studies have suggested he contribution of the lumbar spine relative to that of the hip is reduced in patients with low back pain, and, as a result, these patients use various strategies to try to compensate for their limited hip and lumbar spine motions, significantly altering lumbar spine-hip joint coordination, particularly in those with a positive straight leg raise sign.  The examiner explained that patients with a history of low back pain may therefore use more hip motion during early forward bending.  The examiner expressed that medical studies show that early degeneration is more common in the lumbar spine than in the hip joint and that progressively increasing degeneration in the lumbar spine is associated with hip osteoarthritis as evidenced by the case of this Veteran.  

Here, the Board finds that the factual foundation of the rationale, the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine condition has been reported by the Veteran to include left hip pain, is clearly supported by the evidence of record.  The Board notes that a review of the record supports the factual premise that the Veteran has been reporting left thigh pain in conjunction with back pain since service.  

Moreover, the Board finds that the examiners' rationales provide adequate medical analysis to explain the Veteran's reported symptoms and current left hip condition.  The Board finds that the examiners provided adequate medical analysis to clearly explain that the Veteran's service connected lumbar spine condition has been reported by the Veteran to include left hip pain.  The examiners indicated that that there is a kinematic relationship between the lumbosacral spine, pelvis and hip joints that has been thoroughly researched and studied, in which case, much research supports the idea that a lumbar or lumbosacral condition can alter pelvic and hip biomechanics and can lead to downstream issues, such as patients with a history of low back pain may therefore use more hip motion during early forward bending.  Dr. J.E.L. explicitly found that with the Veteran's repetitive and traumatic compressive forces, not only was the structural (bony) component compromised, the discs and soft tissues of the Veteran's lumbar spine had direct insult to them as well, which led to multiple episodes of lower back pain and neurological symptoms which were lateralized to his left lower extremity, as documented in many of his medical records.  

Thus, the Board finds that the opinions are well supported and factually accurate, fully articulated based on sound reasoning.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Accordingly, the Board assigns the opinions significant probative value.  

There is no existing, probative medical opinion in the record to contradict the finding of direct causation and the Board has no basis to contradict the conclusion.  See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?171, 175 (1991).  

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's left hip condition is the result of or aggravated by the service connected lumbar spine disability.  As such, the benefit of doubt is afforded to the appellant and service connected is granted for a left hip condition, including left total hip arthoplasty.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F. 4th at 781.  

3. Service connection for left lateral hip incisional scar status post uncemented left hip total arthroplasty as secondary to status post left total hip arthroplasty is granted.  

Here, as the instant decision establishes the award of service connection for the left hip condition, the Board notes that VA is obligated to develop and adjudicate claims for secondary service connection that are reasonably raised during the processing of a properly initiated claim as to the primary service-connected disability's evaluation level.  Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 103.  As the ordinary meaning of 'complications' in 38 CF.R. § 3.155(d)(2) encompasses disabilities caused or aggravated by treatment for a service-connected disability, the regulation imposes a duty on the AOJ to consider claims for secondary service connection if they are raised during the course of adjudicating a complete claim concerning a related, primary disability.  

In this case, the Board notes that a review of the record reflects that the Veteran underwent a VA scars/disfigurement examination in June 2024 at which time diagnoses of left lateral hip incisional scar status post uncemented left hip total arthroplasty and mid low back incisional scar status post lumbar laminectomy were rendered.  

It is uncontested that the Veteran's left hip condition caused his left total hip arthroplasty.  From his left total hip arthoplasty, a scar diagnosed as left lateral hip incisional scar status post uncemented left hip total arthroplasty resulted.  

Accordingly, consistent with VA's duty to maximize benefits, the Board must consider all possible schedular bases for separate ratings, including secondary service connection for scars relating to the arthoplasty.  See Morgan v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 162, 167 (2018).  In this regard, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2), a formal claim for secondary service connection need not be filed when entitlement to secondary service connection is raised by the record; rather, VA must consider those "complications" in connection with the claim on appeal.  See Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188 (2021).  

As such, the Board finds that a claim for service connection for a left hip scar, secondary left total hip arthroplasty, is within the scope of this appeal and has taken jurisdiction of that issue.  In this regard, the Board notes the evidence is overwhelmingly clear that the Veteran has a scar stemming from his service-connected left total hip arthoplasty.  

As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for his left hip total arthoplasty and the resulting scar as both disabilities were caused by his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  In so reaching that conclusion, the Board has appropriately applied the benefit of the doubt doctrine in this case.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.