Citation Nr: A25033002
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230920-378677
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) from February 1, 2022, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence shows the Veteran had been unemployed for two years preceding the current claim for compensation based on unemployability; and, the combined effect of the Veteran's claimed service-connected disabilities precludes substantially gainful employment. 

2. The Veteran filed a claim seeking increased compensation based on unemployability on December 14, 2022; and, when considering the evidence submitted within the one year look back period, the earliest factually ascertainable date for which TDIU may be warranted is February 1, 2022.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

From February 1, 2022, the criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1984 through October 1988. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in September 2023, electing the Direct Review docket in the modernized review system.

As the Veteran has selected the direct review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the RO at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the RO decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request.  If additional evidence was submitted after the RO decision on appeal, the Board will not consider it.  The Veteran is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of facts and conclusions of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

From February 1, 2022, a total disability rating based upon individual unemployable (TDIU) is granted.

The Veteran contends he last worked in January 2020 and has been unemployable since that time due to the combination of his service-connected disabilities, specifically his unspecified anxiety disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, lumbosacral sprain with degenerative arthritis, left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of extension), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of extension), right lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), left knee strain, tinnitus, pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB), right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of abduction/adduction/rotation), left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of flexion), left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of abduction/adduction/rotation), tonsillectomy, and residuals (scar) injury under left eye. 

This claim stems from a December 14, 2022, application seeking increased compensation based on unemployability. At that time, the Board notes that there were no other claims or appeals for compensation left unadjudicated in which TDIU was raised or reasonably raised. 

As will be outlined below, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran was unemployable solely due to service-connected disabilities and, therefore, the Veteran is entitled to resolution of any reasonable doubt in his favor. 

TDIU Law

A total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total and where it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to his or her age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.16, 4.19; see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).

Here, the Veteran contends that he has been unemployable since 2020 due to a combination of his service-connected disabilities. 

To meet the requirement of "one 60 percent disability" or "one 40 percent disability," the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disability of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from one common etiology; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; and (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  Id.  

Substantially gainful employment is defined as work which is more than marginal, and which permits the individual to earn a living wage.  Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991).  Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts-found basis (including, but not limited to, employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

The term "substantially gainful occupation" is not defined in the rating schedule.  Rather, the Court in Ray v. Wilkie, found the phrase has two components: an economic one and a noneconomic one.  31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).  In assessing the Veteran's ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the Board is to consider the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training as well as physical abilities and mental abilities required by the occupation at issue.  Id.  Such specific physical ability factors include lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory, and visual.  Id.  Specific mental ability factors include memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, getting along with coworkers, and demonstrating reliability and productivity.  Id.

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

The central question is "whether the [V]eteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability," not whether the Veteran could find employment.  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).

In determining whether a Veteran is unemployable for VA purposes, consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to age or any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19 (2016); Hersey v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 91 (1992); Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342 (2000).  A Veteran need not show 100 percent unemployability in order to be entitled to a TDIU.  Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

Here, for the period on appeal the Veteran was service connected for unspecified anxiety disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, rated at 50 percent disabling; lumbosacral sprain with degenerative arthritis, rated at 20 percent disabling; left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of extension), rated as 0 percent disabling; GERD, rated as 10 percent disabling; right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of extension), rated as 0 percent disabling; right lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), rated as 10 percent disabling; left knee strain, rated as 10 percent disabling; right knee strain rated as 10 percent disabling; pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB), rated at 30 percent disabling, effective December 14, 2022, and 10 percent prior to that; right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of abduction/adduction/rotation), rated as 0 percent disabling; left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of flexion), rated as 0 percent disabling; left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of abduction/adduction/rotation), rated as 0 percent disabling; tinnitus, rated at 10 percent disabling; tonsillectomy, rated at 0 percent disabling; and left eye scar, rated at 0 percent disabling. His combined disability rating is 90 percent, with a bilateral factor of 4.1 percent. 

Relevant Facts 

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran graduated high school. The Veteran took some college courses, but never obtained a degree. During his years in the Navy, the Veteran's rating (equivalent to Military Occupational Specialty, was BM2, or boatswain's mate. See DD-214. The Veteran, on his VA Form 21-8940, indicated that he worked as a food service administrator for the Federal Bureau of Prisons from January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2020. He reported his highest gross earnings per month were $8,833.00. A January 2023 VA Form 21-4192, signed by a representative of the Veteran's last employer, indicated that during the 12 months preceding his last date of employment, he made $106,245.00. The employer indicated that he had been a federal correctional worker from February 17, 1998, through December 31, 2020, and had retired voluntarily. 

The Veteran has asserted that, due to his service-connected disabilities, he is unable to secure or maintain full-time work in his usual vocational field. See December 2022 Medical Nexus Letter; April 2023 Medical Nexus Letter. 

The record supports that the Veteran has been unemployed throughout the period of appeal herein.

The Veteran submitted a December 2022 private expert medical opinion. The expert stated that due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, some of which were chronic and progressive, he was incapable of performing substantially gainful employment in his usual vocation, or other vocations. The report noted that the Veteran lacked training or education in any skill or trade with a sedentary-light work level and lacked certifications or licensure for any such level. The expert noted that the Veteran had difficulty performing the extensive tasks and work activities required of him because of his service-connected disabilities and inability to maintain substantial gainful employment. The expert listed usual and customary tasks and work activities related to a food service administrator. 

Relevant tasks for a food service administrator include performing financial activities, including cash handling, deposit preparation and payroll; resolving customer complaints, inspecting supplies, equipment and work areas; food preparation and serving duties; training workers in food preparation and in service, sanitation, and safety procedures; supervise and participate in kitchen and dining area cleaning activities; perform personnel actions; control inventories; assign duties, responsibilities, and work stations; record production, operational and personnel data; observe and evaluate workers and work procedures; estimate ingredients and supplies required to prepare a recipe; analyze operational problems; forecast staff, equipment, and supply requirements; recommend measures for improving work procedures and worker performance; develop equipment maintenance schedules and arrange for repairs; purchase or requisition supplies and equipment; develop departmental objectives, budgets, policies, procedures, and strategies, and; conduct meetings and collaborate with other personnel for menu planning, serving arrangements, and related details. 

Work activities were described as getting information; training and teaching others; making decisions and solving problems; guiding, directing, and motivating subordinates; identifying objects, actions, and events; coordinating the work and activities of others; coaching and developing others; communicating with supervisors, peers, or subordinates; monitoring processes, materials, or surroundings; evaluating information to determine compliance with standards; evaluating information to determine compliance with standards; inspecting equipment, structures, or materials; performing for or working directly with the public; judging the qualities of objects, services, or people; establishing and maintaining interpersonal relationships; selling or influencing others; developing and building teams; controlling machines and processes; communicating with people outside the organization; performing general physical activities; updating and using relevant knowledge; organizing, planning, and prioritizing work; resolving conflicts and negotiating with others; scheduling work and activities; assisting and caring for others; handling and moving objects; estimating quantifiable characteristics of products, events, or information; monitoring and controlling resources; processing information; working with computers, and; documenting/recording information. 

The expert concluded that there was no evidence the Veteran could secure gainful employment, and he had not been able to work since December 2020 and had neither worked nor sought employment since that time. The Veteran was unable to adequately and safely perform his duties due to debilitating symptoms of his service-connected disabilities. 

Concerning the non-economic component, the Veteran underwent numerous VA examinations, which are detailed below. 

May 2011 treatment records indicate the Veteran complained about low back pain upon rising from a sitting or laying position, bending, and at times with running. He described the pain as a cramping type of discomfort that lasted for seconds to several minutes after most movement. 

The Veteran was offered a psychiatry consult in August 2018 in response to his request to speak to a doctor about stress. He reported that his job as a supervisor at a correctional facility brought stress, and he was contemplating whether to retire before he turned 57. He started thinking about this due to new eligibility for retirement but was unsure about what he would do when he retired. He indicated that he slept from 10pm to 6am, with no nighttime awakenings, no nightmares, good appetite, no guilt, and denied feeling helpless or hopeless, and denied anhedonia. He reported that he enjoyed riding his bicycle, reading, watching TV, travel, and that he played basketball twice a week. With respect to PTSD, he denied nightmares. He reported that in 2009 he was involved in an altercation in a correctional facility and endorsed hypervigilance. He denied hyperarousal, flashbacks, avoidance of social situations or indifferences with others. He denied having anxiety symptoms and symptoms of mania. The provider reported that the Veteran was cooperative with treatment, mobile with a steady gait, could accomplish ADLs without assistance, intellectually capable, able to verbalize problems, understood treatment interventions, and able to identify outside stressors. The provider assessed the Veteran as emotionally and physically willing and able to work, having good insight, judgment, coping skills, alert and oriented to spheres and free of any altered thought processes. 

During an August 2019 psychotherapy session, the Veteran reported he was planning to retire in January 2020 and was requesting to speak with a psychologist regarding his transition from working as a correctional facility supervisor. The Veteran stated he had given enough time to the government and that, while he enjoyed doing his job responsibly, he had become disenchanted with the politics of the "these high-ranking positions." He reported receiving negative comments in his yearly review which he felt were undeserved, and he chose to fight the negativity. He stated he would prefer to leave his position because he wanted to, not because he was chased away. He reported fluctuating between anger and anxiety, and that he wanted more recognition for all the effort he had put into his career. The Veteran described himself as an invested, concerned, and responsible employee and that he did not want his legacy to be tainted by negative comments by supervisors who did not have as much experience as him. The Veteran discussed his behavioral patterns at work and carving a life away from work and how working at the correctional facility had impacted his daily functioning. He spoke of different options after retirement, like volunteering or taking on another job. 

The Veteran was afforded a July 2020 thoracolumbar spine conditions examination. The examiner stated that the Veteran's back condition impacted his ability to work because of the impact on his ability to function with bending, walking, sitting, and standing. During a July 2020 skin conditions examination, the examiner reported that the Veteran's PFB did not impact his ability to work. The Veteran was afforded a July 2020 knee and lower leg conditions examination. The examiner reported that the Veteran's knee disability impacted his ability to work due to functional limitations in his ability squat, kneel, stand and climb stairs. 

In a November 2020 statement in support of his mental health claim, the Veteran reported that he had to take a reduced role and call out of work because of his disabilities, which made him less productive at work. The Veteran reported having a difficult time falling and staying asleep, which led to him feeling tired and irritable the following day. In a separate statement in support of his bilateral hip claim, he reported that long car rides and sports exacerbated the pain in his hips. He founds using stairs, prolonged standing, walking, or sitting, running, jogging, jumping, and carrying heavier objects were much harder to do without increasing the pain in his hips. In a November 2020 statement in support of his lower extremity nerve claim, the Veteran reported experiencing shooting pain, and numbness. He reported that it was difficult for him to conduct certain everyday activities like prolonged sitting or walking, lying still without regularly adjusting his position, long car rides, sports, running or jogging and using stairs. In a November 2020 statement in support of the Veteran's left knee claim, he reported painful motion, buckling, weakness, and stiffness so severe he could not move his knee. He also reported cracking and popping. Using stairs, running, jogging, carrying heavy objects and squatting caused him a lot of pain. Walking and standing still were also painful, and his knee became stiff if he sat in one place for too long. 

The Veteran was afforded a January 2021 VA knee and lower leg conditions examination. The Veteran reported constant pain, with difficulty moving up and down stairs, sitting for prolonged periods of time, picking up items from the ground, and extending his knees. During the exam, the examiner noted that the Veteran's decreased range of motion impaired him from prolonged standing, walking, sitting, and impacted his ability to work. During a January 2021 VA hip and thigh examination, the Veteran reported he suffered from pain, limited movement, and popping. Car rides and sports exacerbated the pain. Using stairs, prolonged standing or walking, sitting, running/jogging, jumping, and carrying heavy objects were difficult to do without increasing the pain in his hips. The examiner noted functional impacts from limited range of motion in the hips, which impaired prolonged standing and walking. A January 2021 VA GERD examination noted that the Veteran's GERD impaired him from properly focusing on performing his tasks. A January 2021 VA back conditions examination indicated the Veteran's lumbosacral strain, degenerative arthritis, and right lower extremity radiculopathy impacted his ability to work. The Veteran's limited range of motion, decreased reflexes and sensation which caused pain while standing in one place for more than 15 minutes, walking more than 15 minutes, bending his back, twisting his back, squatting, walking up and down stairs, and lifting more than 15 pounds impacted his ability to work. The examiner also noted the Veteran reported functional impairment when driving for long periods of time. 

A January 2022 podiatry outpatient note shows that during musculoskeletal examination the Veteran's joint range of motion was normal, and non-painful. 

Private treatment records from February 2022 note that the Veteran retired in December 2020. The Veteran reported that he retired earlier than necessary because of his pain and concerns related to his chronic pain, and concerns about exacerbating the disabilities or worsening pain.

The Veteran was afforded a February 2022 VA mental disorders examination. The Veteran indicated he had worked as a prison guard for 23 years and retired in December 2020. The examiner noted the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The Veteran experienced anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events.

In June 2022, the Veteran requested a new set of knee braces. A primary care note indicated the Veteran suffered from chronic, bilateral knee pain and wore braces.

During a December 2022 telehealth appointment, the Veteran reported that he felt well in general but had a history of chronic back and knee pain. He was requesting a knee brace. 

The Veteran was afforded a December 2022 VA ear conditions examination, in which the examiner conducted a records review. The examiner opined that the functional impairment of the Veteran's tinnitus on physical and sedentary employment included difficulty sleeping. The examiner stated that lack of sleep could affect work by causing a lack of focus and concentration, requiring more time to complete tasks. 

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA knee and lower leg examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran's left and right knee strain limited the Veteran's walking and standing for 30 minutes at a time and did not impact his ability to conduct sedentary activities. 

The Veteran was afforced a January 2023 VA PFB examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran's PFB did not cause any functional impact on his ability to work. 

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA hip and thigh conditions examination. The Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups caused by prolonged sitting, sudden turns, and quick movements. He also reported that he experienced functional loss due to hip pain, stiffness, limited range of motion, difficulty with heavy lifting, prolonged standing, walking, jogging or climbing stairs. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's hip condition(s) did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task. The examiner opined that the Veteran's hip conditions limited his ability to walk and stand for 30 minutes at a time, but did not impair sedentary activities.  

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx and pharynx examination. The Veteran reported that his tonsillectomy caused him to experience a runny nose, itchy throat, and watery eyes. The examiner noted that the Veteran's condition did not impact his ability to work. 

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA scars and disfigurement examination for his PFB and his residuals (scar) injury under his left eye. The examiner reported that the scars did not result in limitation of function or impact the Veteran's ability to work.

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA mental disorders examination. The examiner noted the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity as a result of his service-connected mental health disabilities. The examiner noted that the Veteran's depression could cause the Veteran to have low motivation, experience fatigue, sadness, become weepy while working and low productivity, while his anxiety could hinder his ability to meet work-related deadlines. The Veteran reported that he had concerns about where his future is going, given his physical impairments are worsening. He also reported worsening anxiety as he aged because he realized his knees and back are deteriorating. The examiner reported that the Veteran had stated his pain related to his back and knee pain had led to his anxiety and depression increasing. As a result, he feared driving long distances due to the anxiety related to his knee pain. Additionally, he stated that his anxiety and depression decreased his motivation to work and complete functional daily tasks like running errands or maintaining hygiene. 

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA esophageal conditions examination. The Veteran presented with dysphagia, reflux, and regurgitation. The examiner reported that the Veteran's GERD resulted in no impairment on sedentary activities and no functional impact on his ability to work. 

The Veteran was afforded a January 2023 VA back examination. The Veteran complained of low back pain, stiffness, and limited range of motion. He described daily flare-ups, which last all day long. The flare-ups are precipitated by prolonged sitting, standing, bending, lifting anything heavy and prolonged walking. The examiner noted that there were no functional impairments that limited the Veteran's ability to work. 

A February 2023 physical therapy knee evaluation indicated the Veteran was referred to physical therapy due to worsening knee pain for 10 years. He reported it was worst in the morning and he took pain meds and used cream. Swelling increased if walked a lot, or greater than one mile. He also reported it was painful to ascend and descend stairs. He also reported hip pain and feeling unsteady. The Veteran reported his pain level as 8/10. He also stated he went to the gym but avoided leg activities, rode his road bike for 3 miles or 45 minutes once per week, and played 9 holes of golf for approximately 2 hours. He reported his activity level as sedentary. March 2023 VA physical therapy records show the Veteran had reported doing well, was going to the gym and able to do all exercises with no increase in pain or joint and muscle soreness. He reported experiencing mild discomfort. He was discharged after being in physical therapy from February 2023 through March 2023. He reported increased knee pain going up and down stairs at home, after walking one mile, standing 15 minutes, and driving to his appointment. 

The Veteran submitted an April 2023 private opinion with his April 2023 supplemental claim. The expert indicated that they reviewed the Veteran's rating "breakdown letter", VA Form 21-8940, and credible lay statement. The expert concluded the Veteran was unable to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities. The expert indicated the Veteran served as a Boatswains Mate in the Navy, and had only completed the 12th grade of high school and only completed a GED. He also took some college classes but never obtained a degree. He had not maintained substantially gainful employment since December 2020 when he last worked as a food service administrator. He experienced daily pain with limited physical ability due to his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions which caused functional impairment to include difficulty with mobility, difficulty finding comfortable positions, especially with sleep, and daily chronic fatigue. The expert reported that the Veteran experienced daily symptomatology which included depression, irritability, and cognitive impairs which made it very difficult for him to be around others, concentrate, or complete daily tasks in the workplace. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused sleep disturbances, which left the Veteran groggy and unable to focus or concentrate. Because of this, he was unable to complete required daily tasks. The expert concluded that the Veteran was not capable of securing and following substantially gainful employment at any activity level. 

Analysis

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran was unemployable solely due to service-connected disabilities and, therefore, the Veteran is entitled to resolution of any reasonable doubt in his favor. 

From an economic standpoint, the Veteran's work history and education level make him suitable work as a correctional officer or food service administrator. 

The Board notes that the Veteran was last employed in December 2020, as a food service supervisor and correctional officer. The record indicates that, while some of the Veteran's job duties relied on his physical abilities, his job duties were largely supervisory. See December 2022 Expert Medical Opinion on Individual Unemployability; April 17, 2023, Medical Nexus Letter Re: Total Disability due to Individual Unemployability. The Veteran has indicated that he did not complete any higher education or obtain any training or certifications outside of his chosen profession before he claimed he became too disabled to work. 

Looking at the Veteran's service-connected disabilities following his December 2022 TDIU claim, the Board finds that the Veteran does have significant physical ability limiting factors. The Board considered things such as lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, auditory, and visual. The evidence, as a whole, indicates that the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral sprain with degenerative arthritis, left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of extension), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of extension), right lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), left knee strain, right knee strain, PFB, right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of abduction/adduction/rotation), left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of flexion), left hip trochanteric pain syndrome with osteoarthritis (limitation of abduction/adduction/rotation), rated as tinnitus, and tonsillectomy, impact the Veteran's ability to walk and stand for 30 minutes at a time, sit, drive, squat, kneel, and climb stairs. The evidence as a whole indicates the Veteran would have difficulty conducting manual labor or engaging in employment with stringent physical requirements. 

Additionally, the evidence, as a whole, based on the medical evidence of record and lay statements, indicates the Veteran would have a difficult time participating in even sedentary employment. Particularly, VA examiners have opined that the Veteran's disabilities, namely his hip disabilities, impact his ability to sit for prolonged periods of time. While the Board notes that the VA examiners, in January 2023 indicated that there was limited to no functional impairment on the Veteran's ability to perform sedentary work due to his service-connected disabilities, previous VA examinations had indicated that, individually, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would provide functional limitation with sedentary work. The Veteran's vocational expert has also opined that the combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him incapable of engaging in substantially gainful employment. 

The Board also considered the mental ability factors noted in Ray, to include memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, getting along with coworkers, and demonstrating reliability and productivity. VA examiners have noted that the, for example, the Veteran's tinnitus causes sleep disturbance, which cause a lack of focus and concentration. The Veteran's medical treatment records indicate that in 2019 he reported having difficulty interacting with his supervisors. The Veteran's expert report indicates that he deals with pain, limited physical ability, depression, cognitive impairments, and sleep deprivation, which make it difficult for him to be around others, concentrate, and complete daily tasks in the workplace. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's unemployability is due solely to his service-connected disabilities alone, and not due to non-service-connected disabilities or other non-service-related factors, such as age. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19 (2016); Hershey v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 91 (1992); Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342 (2000). Based on the record, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would limit or prevent his ability to conduct sedentary work. 

As the Board is granting entitlement to TDIU, the effective date of such award is also addressed herein. 

While the Veteran's claim was filed on December 14, 2022, a TDIU claim is a claim for increased compensation, and the effective date rules for increased compensation apply to a TDIU claim. See Hurd v. West, 13 Vet. App. 449 (2000). In this regard, the effective date for the assignment of an increased rating may be up to one year prior to receipt of a formal claim for increase when it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred based on all evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2). The increase in disability must be within the one-year period prior to the date of claim, rather than prior to the one-year period, in order to obtain an effective date earlier than the date of the claim. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 983-984 (Fed. Cir. 2010). As such, the Board finds it appropriate to determine whether it is factually ascertainable that the Veteran is entitled to a TDIU during the one year look back period preceding the submission of the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2).

Thus, as VA received the Veteran's claim for a TDIU on December 14, 2022, the look back period commences from one year prior to such date, on December, 14, 2021. Therefore, the Board will consider whether it is factually ascertainable that a TDIU is warranted during the one-year look back period. As explained above, while the Board has considered the Veteran's entire disability picture along with his occupational and educational history, the Board finds that when looking at only the evidence within the one year look back period, the earliest date it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred was on February 1, 2022, the date of the VA and private treatment records noting that his disabilities affected his employment and contributed to his retirement. There is no relevant evidence prior to February 1, 2022, and within the one year look back period commencing on December 14, 2021, for which the Board could find that TDIU was factually ascertainable. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence in at least in approximate balance, that the Board will resolve doubt in the Veteran's favor, finding TDIU warranted from February 1, 2022.

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Slowik, Saul J., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.