Citation Nr: A25033165
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240504-437710
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 100 percent disability rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on statutory housebound status is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's PTSD symptoms caused a total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated totally disabling, and additional disabilities rated at least 60 percent disabling combined.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a 100 percent disability rating for posttraumatic stress disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38C.F.R. §§4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for a grant of special monthly compensation based on statutory housebound status have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352, 4.25.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service with the U.S. Army from May 1977 to May 1980 and from January 1991 to May 1991. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

The Veteran also appealed a December 2023rating decision which denied an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD by submitting a separate VA Form 10182 on the same day in May 2024.  Both appeals elected the Direct Review docket. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.

Under the Direct Review Docket, the Board considers the same evidentiary record as that considered by the AOJ in reaching the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The appeal stream stemming from the December 2023 rating decision has been dismissed under Docket 240504-437712, in a separate Board decision, based on the probation against concurrent appeals. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500. 

Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement (NOD) within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later; unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303, or the appellant or their representative has requested a waiver of the right to request to switch dockets during this timeframe. See Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 934 (Vet. App. June 21, 2024). In March 2025, the Veteran filed for priority processing. The Board will interpret this as a waiver from the recent holding in Williams. Thus, the Board will proceed with adjudicating the claim on appeal.

The Board notes that an August 2023 VA treatment record indicated that the Veteran received counseling from an outside source. Given the Veteran is being granted a 100 percent disability rating as discussed below, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in not remanding for those treatment records. 

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and, above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. 

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991). Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the evaluations may be staged. Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under 4.130, Diagnostic Code (Code) 9400. Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A 70 percent rating is provided for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is provided for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Code 9400.

When rating a mental disorder, VA must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the claimant's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. VA shall assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, VA will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).

A Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 by demonstrating the presence of the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). In addition to requiring the presence of the enumerated symptoms, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 requires that they have caused the specified level of occupational and social impairment. Id.

However, the factors listed in the rating schedule are simply examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating, so the determination should not be limited solely to whether a veteran exhibited the symptoms listed in the rating scheme but should also be based on all of a veteran's symptoms affecting his level of occupational and social impairment. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-443 (2002); 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).

In an August 2023 statement, the Veteran wrote that his head was "about to explode" due to severe depression, and his brain was "moving in [my] head." He reported "brain pain" and a "red angle [sic]" coming to carry him away at night when he had nightmares. He stated he had nightmares, forgetfulness, would forget to take a bath, and wet the bed.  Anxiety and an inability to maintain relationships were also present. Due to daily panic attacks and sadness he isolated himself. 

In an August 2023 PTSD disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) completed by a treating VA psychologist, Dr. JO, and submitted by the Veteran, he reported that his alcohol use had increased significantly due to extreme psychological issues. He had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and affectively, chronic sleep impairment, memory loss, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, gross impairment in thought processes or communication, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interferes with routine activities, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, persistent delusions or hallucinations, persistent danger of hurting self or others, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, and disorientation to time or place. The examiner noted that the Veteran had other symptoms of isolating severe nightmares. The Veteran woke up sweating and screaming. The Veteran felt like his brain was moving around in his head. The Veteran felt a hopelessness as his dreams were not going away. The Veteran continued to see red colored soldiers carrying him away to cure his body. The Veteran had severe depression because he wet the bed and had to sleep in the basement. The Veteran's suicidal thoughts would not go away. He had weekly bouts of crying spells. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms caused a total occupational and social impairment.

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The Veteran reported he was friendly with a handful of men who served with him during Gulf War. He had an increased frequency of nightmares since his last evaluation. The Veteran experienced panic attacks weekly. The Veteran was married for over 30 years and had one daughter. The Veteran had been treated by Dr. RM at the VA; however, he no longer saw him. The Veteran now saw therapist Dr. JO. He had also recently started seeing Dr. AG. He reported an increase in alcohol use. The Veteran reported that he got upset easily. The Veteran noticed a greater degree of angry outburst. The Veteran was appropriately dressed and groomed. He was oriented to the purpose of the evaluation. He was pleasant and cooperative with the examiner. The examiner noted that the Veteran was fidgeting. His mood was described as dysphoric. His affect was wide ranging and appeared somewhat anxious. The Veteran was briefly tearful when discussing his time in service. The Veteran's thought processes were logical, and goal directed. He denied any suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation. He had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. The examiner opined that his symptoms caused an occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking and/or mood.

In a December 2023 PTSD DBQ, completed by Dr. JO, the examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms caused a total and occupational and social impairment. He had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, near-continuous panic or depression affective the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social, relationships, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, and disorientation to time or place.

In a December 2023 statement, the veteran wrote that he forgot the time and place sometimes. He indicated that he forgot to take care of his personal hygiene, and his clothes smelled of urine. The Veteran indicated that he had thoughts of suicide.

In December 2023, he submitted a September 2023 private treatment record. The record noted that his PTSD had worsened since his last ER visit in July 2022. The Veteran had multiple doctor's visit and multiple GU procedures that aggravated his mental status. The Veteran was feeling depressed and admitted to having helpless thoughts of the uncertainty of the outcome of his medical condition. The Veteran had been following up with a VA psychiatrist and going to counseling.

In a December 2023 letter, Dr. JO wrote that the Veteran had been treated at his program since 2014. The Veteran was referred by the Department of Veteran Affairs Community Health Network. The Veteran continued to struggle with setbacks in his health and wellness from PTSD and other health issues. The Veteran suffered from gross impairment, persistent danger to self, suicidal thoughts, persistent delusions, disorientation, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene).

A February 2024 VA treatment record documented that he reported suicidal ideation. The Veteran had been feeling hopeless within the last month. He indicated that he felt like hurting himself.

Accordingly, the Board finds the overall disability picture more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent disability rating. The Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing  and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. The Board notes that from the Veteran's past communication via VA treatment records to his August 2023 showed deterioration in his thought process and skill. In an August 2023 statement, he indicated that it felt like his brain moved in his head and he had brain pain. He indicated that he forgot to take a bath, and he had daily panic attacks. The Board notes that the August 2023 statement was confusing and had no streamline of thoughts. The December 2023 statement noted that he forgot the time and place sometimes. He forgot to take care of his personal hygiene, and his clothes smelled like urine. The Veteran indicated that he had thoughts of suicide. A February 2024 VA treatment note documented that the Veteran had suicidal ideation, and he reported that he felt like hurting himself. Thus, considering the Veteran's competent assertions concerning his psychiatric symptoms, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that, an increased rating of 100 percent for the Veteran's PTSD. 

When a Veteran is entitled to compensation at the 100 percent level for a single service-connected disability and has additional service-connected disabilities ratable at least 60 percent disabling independent of the single total rating, entitlement to housebound special monthly compensation is established as a matter of law. 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.

Here, the Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated totally disabling. As discussed above, the Veteran's PTSD is rated 100 percent disabling.  Further, his multiple additional disabilities result in a combined rating in excess of 60 percent independent of PTSD. 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Accordingly, entitlement to special monthly compensation based on statutory housebound status is warranted. 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Baxter, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.