Citation Nr: A25033053
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240505-439233
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for actinic keratosis (claimed as pre-skin cancers) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic bronchitis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for schizophrenia with alcohol use disorder and cannabis use disorder (hereinafter "acquired psychiatric disability") is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Actinic keratosis did not manifest in service and is not otherwise related to service.

2. The Veteran has not been diagnosed with or treated for chronic bronchitis.

3. Tinnitus did not have its onset during active duty, did not manifest within one year of discharge from service, and is not otherwise shown to be related to service.

4. The acquired psychiatric disability is manifested by symptoms that most closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, including symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, and disturbances of motivation and mood.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for actinic keratosis (claimed as pre-skin cancers) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for service connection for chronic bronchitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1113, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

4. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for an acquired psychiatric disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1 4.7, 4.21, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9201.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service with the United States Navy from September 1979 to August 1981.  This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from August 2023, January 2024, and March 2024 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the relevant AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  For the tinnitus service connection claim, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision.  For the actinic keratosis and chronic bronchitis service connection claims, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision.  For the acquired psychiatric disability increased rating claim, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Some chronic diseases may be presumed to have been incurred in service, if they become manifest to a degree of ten percent or more within the applicable presumptive period.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101 (3), 1112(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a).  For those listed chronic conditions, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Tinnitus, as an organic disease of the nervous system, is a listed disease, with a presumptive period of one year following separation from service.

Determinations as to service connection will be based on review of the entire evidence of record, to include all pertinent medical and lay evidence, with due consideration to VA's policy to administer the law under a broad and liberal interpretation consistent with the facts in each individual case.  38 U.S.C. § 1154 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA must determine whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event.  The evidence is not in approximate balance, or nearly equal, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Actinic Keratosis

The Veteran contends that his actinic keratosis, claimed as pre-skin cancer, is related to sun exposure during his service.  In his April 2023 VA 21-526EZ, the Veteran stated, "I got a lot of sun while I was serving in the Navy."

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosed disability of actinic keratosis.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  A current disability is established.

Service treatment records (STRs) do not show treatment for or complaints of actinic keratosis or excessive sun exposure, such as sunburns or sun poisoning.  At the separation examination, the skin was normal except for athlete's foot-like rash bilaterally.  There is no evidence of record regarding excessive sun exposure during active service other than the  April 2023 statement that he got a lot of sun during service.  There are no reports of any specific sun-related injuries in service.  

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran likely had significant sun exposures in the years after his active service.  Military personnel records note that the Veteran reported his occupation to be "laborer" at the time of his September 1979 entrance examination.  In records provided by the Social Security Administration (SSA), the Veteran reported working in construction as a pipe fitter from 1981 to 1985 and as a carpenter from 1986 to 1987.  The SSA records also included a July 1998 evaluation where the Veteran's mother noted that the Veteran spent most of his time outside working in the yard and that he liked to go fishing.  VA treatment records from August 2003, July 2004, July 2005, July 2006, July 2007, January 2009, and April 2009 note part time work as a farm superintendent.  

VA treatment records document a diagnosis of actinic keratosis in 2022.  Treatment notes from September 2022 note a dermatology consult, and the Veteran appears to have been diagnosed with actinic keratosis due to chronic solar damage in October 2022.

The Veteran was afforded a VA skin conditions examination in August 2023.  The VA examiner noted the diagnosis of actinic keratosis.  The Veteran reported an onset of the condition on his arms, nose, face, and ears about ten years prior.  The VA examiner stated that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by sun exposure in the Navy because the Veteran was a craftsman, which is known to have chronic sun exposure.  The only further rationale provided was that actinic keratosis is caused by frequent or intense exposure to ultraviolet rays from the sun, and the risk factors include having a history of sun exposure without use of sunscreen, working outdoors, and living in a sunny area.  The examiner did not cite any records specific to this Veteran regarding excessive sun exposure in during active service or address the evidence regarding post-service sun exposures.  

A clarification opinion was requested, and in September 2023 the VA examiner noted no connection between the athlete's foot noted during service with the currently diagnosed skin disability.

In January 2024, VA obtained a medical opinion regarding any connection between documented in-service toxic exposures as a hull maintenance technician and the claimed skin condition.  The January 2024 medical opinion concluded that actinic keratosis was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities in service, considering the total potential exposure for the Veteran as a hull maintenance technician in the Navy for one year and eleven months.  The rationale provided included a description of the cause of actinic keratosis, particularly sun exposure, and considered risk factors of a history of multiple or severe sunburns and certain genetic traits, such as blonde or red hair, blue or green eyes, or a fair or light complexion.  The January 2024 examiner specifically noted that the Veteran had risk factors outside of the military based on his post-service occupation as a farm superintendent.

The Board gives the August 2023 VA opinion little probative weight, as the rationale did not include any discussion of the Veteran's specific circumstances.  The Board gives the January 2024 VA opinion more probative weight, as while the rationale could be more robust, the essence of the examiner's reasoning comports with the evidence of record, including the Veteran's in-service exposures, risk factors, and post-service exposures related to the claimed condition.

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against service connection for actinic keratosis.  First, the evidence does not show that the Veteran suffered an in-service sun exposure injury.  The only evidence regarding sun exposure in service is the Veteran's April 2023 statement that he got "lots" of sun while in the Navy, which was a period of less than two years.  STRs do not show that the Veteran sought treatment for a sun related injury, and the  skin was normal at separation, except for bilateral athlete's foot, which the medical evidence shows is not a sun related injury.  The Veteran himself has not alleged a specific injury, such as a bad or repeated sunburn in service, nor explain why if he had such an injury why he would not have sought treatment.  In addition, there is evidence of significant sun exposures post-service.  In sum, the evidence of record is against a finding that actinic keratosis was caused by his active military service.

The evidence is persuasively against the claim, and the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine cannot be applied.  Service connection for actinic keratosis is not warranted, and the appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v, Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53-56 (1990).

Chronic Bronchitis

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for chronic bronchitis.  The July 2023 VA 21-526EZ listed both shortness of breath and bronchitis as new claimed disabilities.

STRs are silent for any treatment for shortness of breath, bronchitis, or other respiratory symptoms.  

Per post-service VA treatment records, he was treated for bronchitis once in December 2022.  There are no other records of treatment for or diagnoses of bronchitis, and no documentation of a diagnosis of chronic bronchitis.

The Veteran was afforded a VA respiratory conditions examination in November 2023.  The VA examiner noted the December 2022 history of acute bronchitis, but did not diagnose or note any prior diagnosis of chronic bronchitis.  The VA examiner instead noted a diagnosis of bronchiectasis, which the examiner opined was at least as likely as not due to in-service toxic exposure.

In a November 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was service connected for bronchiectasis based on his July 2023 claim.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds no evidence of a current diagnosis of chronic bronchitis, and the claimed shortness of breath has already been attributed to the Veteran's service-connected bronchiectasis.  There is no evidence that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of active or chronic bronchitis.  The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation, and in the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

The evidence is persuasively against the claim, and the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine cannot be applied.  Service connection for chronic bronchitis is not warranted, and the appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53-56.

Tinnitus

The Veteran asserts his tinnitus is related to noise exposure from loud tools and firearms during service.  

Service treatment records (STRs) were silent for any complaints of or diagnosis of tinnitus or any specific incident of noise-related trauma.

Post-service treatment records do not document complaints of tinnitus until approximately thirty years after separation from active service.  In January 2016, VA treatment notes related to complaints of vertigo noted that the Veteran denied other symptoms, including tinnitus.  During a March 2016 VA audiology consultation, the Veteran reported tinnitus "once in a while", but no date of onset was noted.  The audiologist noted that the Veteran reported both military noise exposure and civilian noise exposure.  A September 2022 VA treatment note documented that the Veteran experienced bilateral intermittent tinnitus.  

In April 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA tinnitus examination.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported recurrent tinnitus that he first noticed after service, "about 3-4 years ago."  The examiner opined that while the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) indicated a high probability of hazardous noise exposure, tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  The examiner explained that threshold shifts in hearing cannot be verified during service and that the Veteran reported an onset of tinnitus post-separation.  The VA examiner also noted that STRs do not contain any complaints or reports of tinnitus during service or at separation, and post-service medical records do not contain complaints of tinnitus immediately after service.  The examiner noted that the current medical literature does not support late onset noise-induced tinnitus.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not the result or was caused by his military noise exposure.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that his tinnitus is related to service, to include his claim that he worked with loud tools and the 5-inch gun was very loud.  Concerning chronicity of tinnitus, the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms of tinnitus.  See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).  However, it is unclear from the his statements when tinnitus began.  At best, it was around 2016.  The earliest complaint of tinnitus in VA treatment records is from March 2016, while such was not present in January 2016.  During the April 2023 VA examination, he reported an onset of tinnitus in approximately 2019 or 2020.  He has not asserted that tinnitus began in service, contemporaneous with any specific noise exposure incident, or within the first post-service year.

As to an etiology opinion, the Veteran is not competent to opine that his tinnitus is related to service as opposed to other factors.  Such an opinion lies outside his knowledge and expertise as a layperson.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).  He is not reporting a directly observed cause and effect relationship; he is applying reasoning and logic to draw conclusions of a medical nature.  The Board gives more probative weight to the VA examiner's well-reasoned opinion that there is insufficient evidence to support a nexus.

The evidence does not demonstrate that tinnitus had its onset in service or has been continuous since service.  The reasoned medical opinion finds no basis for delayed onset tinnitus.  Therefore, the evidence is persuasively against the claim, and the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine cannot be applied.  Service connection for tinnitus is not warranted, and the appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53-56.

Increased Evaluation

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing the Veteran's current symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted.  A claim will be denied only if the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 56.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to a higher disability evaluation for his acquired psychiatric disability, which has been evaluated at 50 percent disabling since January 28, 2011.

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is rated pursuant to the general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 C.F.R § 4.130 ("General Rating Formula").  A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time and place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or name.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the Veteran's occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 426 (2002).  Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442; see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Nevertheless, all ratings in the General Rating Formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in February 2024.  The VA examiner noted two diagnosed mental disorders, schizophrenia and alcohol use disorder.  The VA examiner opined that the diagnosed alcohol use disorder was in sustained remission for over twenty years without any symptoms or impairment attributable to that diagnosis.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran to be alert and oriented in all spheres and appropriate in appearance.  His thought content and processes were within normal limits with no evidence of hallucinations or delusions.  His insight and judgment appeared good.  

During the examination, the Veteran reported that he lives with his wife.  He reported having positive relationships in his church, where he is a deacon who attends at least three times per week, leads services and meetings, and sings in the choir.  The Veteran reported that he maintains his realtor license in hopes of returning to work at some point but that he has not worked in approximately three years due to difficulty dealing with rude and inconsiderate people.  The Veteran's diagnoses were noted to have not changed since July 1998 when his diagnosis was updated to schizophrenia paranoid type in partial remission and alcohol abuse in apparent remission.  The VA examiner documented depressed mood and disturbances of motivation and mood as the symptoms attributable to the service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.  The VA examiner characterized the level of impairment as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, noting that the reported symptoms were consistent with those reported previously without any new or additional diagnoses to consider.

VA treatment records are consistent with the VA examination.  A note from January 2023 documents that the Veteran's anxiety continued to be treated with Sertraline.  The Veteran was consistently noted to be alert and oriented with a congruent affect and normal mood.  VA treatment records also show that the Veteran consistently denied any suicidal or homicidal ideations.

After a thorough review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder symptoms do not more nearly approximate the criteria for a rating in excess of the 50 percent disability rating he currently receives.  The Veteran's symptoms predominantly manifested in depressed mood, disturbances of motivation and mood, and anxiety, which the VA examiner characterized as causing occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment consistent with a rating higher than 50 percent.  Throughout this period, the Veteran was noted as alert and oriented, with appropriate behaviour and appropriately groomed.  The evidence shows that the Veteran does not experience impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; inability to establish or maintain effective relationships; illogical speech; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; neglect of appearance or hygiene; or obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  The Veteran was able to maintain relationships with his family and fellow church members, including becoming a deacon to lead services in his church.  He denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation.  There are no reports or findings of memory loss.  The Veteran's total functional impairment does not rise to the level of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

Considering the record as a whole, the Veteran's deficiencies due to his acquired psychiatric disability more closely approximate a disability picture no worse than a 50 percent rating for the period on appeal.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the weight of the evidence is against the claim for a higher rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.21.  Due to the foregoing, an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is denied. 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Welsh, Brigid C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.