Citation Nr: A25033013
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-438953
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

The severance of service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disability was proper; the appeal is denied. 

The severance of service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disability was proper; the appeal is denied. 

FINDING OF FACT

1. It was clear and unmistakable error (CUE) as a matter of law or fact that the Veteran has a diagnosed right upper extremity nerve disability.

2. It was clear and unmistakable error (CUE) as a matter of law or fact that the Veteran has a diagnosed left upper extremity nerve disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The severance of service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disability was proper; the criteria for restoration of service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disability have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §?5112; 38?C.F.R. §?3.105.

2. The severance of service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disability was proper; the criteria for restoration of service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disability have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §?5112; 38?C.F.R. §?3.105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from May 2013 to October 2023.

These matters are on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran contends the severance of service connection for her bilateral upper extremity nerve disability was erroneous.   

The RO granted entitlement to service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability in a November 2023 rating decision.

In a December 2023 rating decision, the RO proposed to sever service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability, saying that new evidence showed the Veteran did not have a diagnosed bilateral upper extremity nerve disability. 

In a May 2024 rating decision, the RO severed service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability, effective July 1, 2024, with notice sent to the Veteran in the same month.

Previously granted benefits will be severed only where evidence establishes that the award of service connection was clear and unmistakable error (CUE) (the burden of proof being on the Government). 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(d). 

When severance is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(d). 

A change in diagnosis may be accepted as a basis for severance action if the examining physician or physicians or other proper medical authority certifies that, in the light of all accumulated evidence, the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. This certification must be accompanied by a summary of the facts, findings, and reasons supporting the conclusion. 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(d). 

To establish that a grant of benefits was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3?Vet. App.?310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38?C.F.R. §?20.1403(a). 

In most respects, the CUE standard under § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. See id. 

However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under sections 5109A or 7111. Id. 

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. at 62 (internal quotations omitted). 

The initial question for the Board is whether the RO followed the due process requirements of 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(d) for severing service connection.   The Board finds that it did.

The RO issued the proposed severance in a December 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran was sent a notification in the same month at her latest address of record of this contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore and was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that benefits should be maintained.  The notice letter also informed the Veteran that she had the opportunity for a predetermination hearing if such a request for a hearing was received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice. See 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(i).   The Veteran did not request such a hearing.  

The RO issued the May 2024 rating decision, which severed service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability, effective July 1, 2024.  Notification of this rating decision, plus her appeal rights, was sent to the Veteran in the same month.  The Board finds that this effective date was proper as it was greater than the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date the May 2024 notice expired. See 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(d).  

The remaining question before the Board is whether the grant of service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability was CUE.  

For the following reasons, the Board finds there was CUE in the grant of service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability.

The evidence does not show the Veteran has been diagnosed with a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability.  

The Veteran had an examination for her nerves in March 2023. The examiner saw the Veteran in person, reviewed her file, and noted her sciatica but didn't note any upper extremity nerve conditions. The examiner did note the Veteran's symptoms of upper extremity nerve problems with mild intermittent pain but opined that the Veteran's upper extremity nerves were all normal.

In an April 2023 separation health assessment, the Veteran complained of bilateral nerve pain in her arms. 

The Veteran said it occurred in 2020 when typing for a prolonged periods. 

However, there was no NCV/EMG testing performed and there was no diagnosis of a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability even after considering the Veteran's reports of pain in her arms.

In a July 2023 proposed rating decision, based on an initiative between the Department of Defense (DoD) and VA for the Veteran who was then currently still on active duty but who had been referred to a Physical Evaluation Board (PEB) as unfit to continue active service, was issued.  The disability determination was prepared for use by DoD in determining a final disposition for unfit conditions as well as to determine the Veteran's entitlement to VA disability compensation.  

In that rating decision proposed service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability. 

However, in the subsequent PEB formal findings, the Veteran was not found unfit due to a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability.

Service connection was then granted in the November 2023 rating decision based on the above.  

However, even while noting the Veteran's subjective reports of upper extremity arm and nerve pain, examiners did not diagnose her with a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability. 

Simply stated, the Veteran was never diagnosed with this problem. 

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Court) found that pain alone can qualify as a disability for VA purposes if it amounts to a functional impairment of earning capacity.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-68 (Fed. Cir. 2018).   The Court defined functional impairment as the inability of the body or a part of it "to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment" and found that the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability."  Id. at 1363.   

However, the Federal Circuit did limit its holding, stating it did not "hold that a Veteran could demonstrate service connection simply by asserting subjective pain...." Id.  Accordingly, subjective pain alone will not be enough to establish a current disability, and consideration should be given to the impact, or lack thereof, from the reported pain, focusing on evidence of functional limitation. In this case, the Board does not find evidence that the Veteran's pain alone could constitute a diagnosed bilateral upper nerve disability.  The Veteran has reported pain when typing for prolonged periods of time, flaring up once per month, lasting one to two hour but the Veteran did not say the pain prevented her from doing her job or from performing daily activities. However, there is no indication in the objective or subjective record that shows the Veteran's condition prevents her from functioning under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  Rather, the Veteran reported only those intermittent flare ups of pain and the only objective notation of a problem with her bilateral upper extremity nerves is the March 2023 examiner's notation of mild intermittent pain, which does not indicate problems with functional impairment of earning capacity.

While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms she feels, she is not competent to opine on matters requiring medical knowledge, such as the nature or diagnosis of a medical condition.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Therefore, the Board does not find the Veteran's lay statements competent for the purposes of establishing a diagnosed disability. 

Additionally, even after considering her statements, examiners still did not find the Veteran had a diagnosed bilateral upper extremity nerve disability.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Further, the Veteran is not medically qualified to diagnosis herself with a disability.  While the Veteran may, in fact, had pain after long period of typing, this does not always indicate a chronic disability related to service a this time.  Service and post-service medical records support the finding that the Veteran does not have a disability at this time related to service. 

Thus, in this case, the Board finds there was CUE with the original grant of service connection for a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability.  Here, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, saying that the Veteran had a diagnosed bilateral upper extremity nerve disability.  This error is undebatable as none of the competent evidence indicates the Veteran has been diagnosed with such.  Had the adjudicator not improperly found the Veteran was diagnosed with a bilateral upper extremity nerve disability, service connection would not have been granted, manifestly changing the outcome of the prior decision.  Therefore, the severance was proper; the appeal is denied.

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Snoparsky, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.