Citation Nr: A25033360
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473145
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a back disorder is remanded. 

Service connection for bilateral foot disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee strain, is remanded

Service connection for left ankle disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee strain, is remanded.

Service connection for a left eye disorder, to include ocular migraine, is remanded.

Service connection for a left hip disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from September 2011 to September 2019.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 rating decision, on higher-level review of an October 2022 rating decision of a Department of Veteran's Affairs (VA) Regional Office of the Veteran's Benefits Administration, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In September 2024, the Veteran elected to appeal to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and selecting the direct review docket.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed on the date of the prior AMA decision on October 7, 2022.

The Board has recharacterized the Veteran's left eye disorder to include ocular migraine, to reflect an in-service diagnosis of ocular migraine.

1. Service connection for back disorder is remanded.

Favorable Findings were identified in the February 2024 rating decision: The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  Review of your service treatment records shows in November of 2014 you reported lower back pain. 

The Veteran has asserted, "I injured my back throughout my normal duties, from PT, hiking, falling off the top of a tank, and other events."

Service treatment records dated November 2014 show complaints of lower back pain noted as 6/10 in severity, when sitting or lying down pain is 8/10.  The Veteran reported that he was awakened during sleep due to back spasms with 9/10 pain every night.  Symptoms were present greater than one year.  The Veteran was not aware of injury.  The Veteran denied pain management.  He described pain predominately lower back to the middle of back; no pain on palpation; denied numbness/tingling.  Paraspinal muscle strain was noted.

Service treatment records dated December 2017 show complaints of lower back pain, severe.  The Veteran stated that he might have injured his back in the field moving boxes.  He reported 8/10 pain in the center of his lower back.  The Veteran stated that he has taken tylenol and advil.  The Veteran stated that he has a history of lower back injuries.  He reported back pain and muscle aches.  Gait abnormality was noted.  He reported lower back pain s/p lift partner dropping container while team carry in the field.  Pain was localized to bilateral lower back (L>R) w/o radiation into legs, numbness/tingling, or weakness.  The Veteran reported chronic history of brief muscle laxity with sneezing that resolves w/o other symptoms.   

Service treatment records show complaints of mid to low back pain x 7 days in June 2019.  The Veteran stated that he went scuba diving and may have aggravated his back while lifting the scuba gear.  The Veteran described back pain as 5/10 sharp pain in his mid to low back.  The Veteran reported a history of back pain; about 7 years ago he fell off a tank and injured his back.  He stated that he took NSAIDS/tylenol with some improvements with the pain.  He stated that he does at home stretches which also helps with the pain.  Pain currently interrupts some activities.  Unremarkable examination noted, other than mild TTP at bilateral lumbar paraspinal muscles, range of motion slightly decreased on forward flexion.  Impression noted as: likely sprain / strain w/out focal neuro symptoms.  Plan: Light duty to allow for recovery.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2022.  The examiner found that the Veteran does not have any currently diagnosed back condition.  The Veteran reported date of onset was 2013.  The Veteran reported that he fell off the top of a tank onto his left side/shoulder/back in full body armor.  He reported chronic lower back pain after this injury.  The condition has progressed/worsened since onset.  Lower back pain was described as constant daily pain, intermittent stabbing pain with flares.  Flares were described as every other day frequency; duration of 1-2 hours with lower back pain described as constant daily pain, intermittent stabbing pain with flares.  Mild functional impact was described as difficulty with prolonged standing, walking, sitting, or bending.  ROM testing was normal.  The examiner opined that the claimed back injury condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  This was based on a finding of no diagnosis of back condition on examination.

A February 2024 HLR informal conference determined that the examination provided was not adequate.

The Board finds that a remand is required to provide the Veteran with an adequate VA examination and medical opinion addressing his back condition claim, due to a pre-decisional failure to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty to provide such examination and medical opinion.  38 CFR § 20.802.  

2. Service connection for bilateral foot disorder to include as due to service-connected bilateral knee strain 

Favorable Findings were identified in the February 2024 rating decision:  The claimed primary disability is service-connected.  You are service connected for bilateral knee strain.

The Veteran has asserted that, "I have foot pains in my both of my feet from conducting PT, hikes, and other training events with military issues footwear."

February 2024 HLR Informal Conference identified errors of law or fact as:  Lay statements not considered.

Competent lay evidence is any kind of evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2).  This may include some medical matters, such as describing symptoms or relating a contemporaneous medical diagnosis.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Lay evidence must be addressed.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

Generally, a VA medical examination is required for a service connection claim when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service; but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The third prong, requiring that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold.  Id.

The Board finds that a VA medical examination is required under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006) and that failure to provide such examination constitutes a pre-decisional error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, requiring remand.  38 C.F.R. 

3. Service connection for left ankle disorder to include as due to service-connected bilateral knee strain 

Favorable Findings were identified in the February 2024 rating decision:  The claimed primary disability is service-connected. You are service connected for left knee strain. 

The Veteran has asserted that, "I injured my ankle while conducting PT, hikes, and other training events on poor ground conditions with numerous pot holes."

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for right and left ankle conditions in July 2022.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of right ankle strain.  The Veteran reported onset in 2011.  He reported injury of ankle in basic and then later while conducting PT, hikes, and other training events on poor ground conditions with numerous potholes.  He reported numerous occasions of rolling the ankles without seeking medical treatment.  The condition has progressed/worsened since onset.  Current symptoms were noted as pain with prolonged standing treated with OTC pain relievers, ice PRN.  Functional loss noted as difficulty with prolonged standing, walking, running.  The examiner stated, "While veteran has subjective complaints no evidence found on exam of left ankle condition."  The examiner opined that the claimed ankle condition left / ankle condition right condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  Service treatment records do not indicate any complaint, injury or treatment for ankle(s).  While right crepitus was found on exam there were STRs evidencing an ankle condition found.  Right ankle strain is diagnosed but is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  

Following higher level review, a VA medical opinion was submitted in February 2024.  (The Board notes that in July 2024, the RO granted service connection for right ankle strain.) 

The February 2024 VA medical examiner opined that the right ankle strain is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.  He cited medical literature:  https://adventpt.com/are-knee-and-ankle-pain-related/#:~:text=Muscle%20imbalances%20that%20affect%20one,then%20lead%20to%20ankle%20pain.  He stated that according to Advent Physical Therapy 2024, muscle imbalances that affect one joint can also cause you to compensate by putting more weight on another joint or area of your body. For instance, if your knee joint is unstable, you may compensate by putting more weight on your ankle.  The added weight on your ankle can then lead to ankle pain. In the veteran's case, the added weight on his right ankle caused it to become strained over time.  The Veteran's right knee strain did cause his right ankle strain.  Therefore, it is my medical opinion that the right ankle strain is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.

The examiner provided additional rationale pertaining to right ankle strain as due to left knee strain.  He repeated the prior rationale with some changes, in particular stating that the "Veteran's left knee strain did cause his right ankle strain."  Therefore, it is my medical opinion that the right ankle strain is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition. 

The February 2024 HLR informal conference identified error(s) of law or fact as secondary to bilateral knees.  

The Board finds that the second part of the examiner's addendum opinion rationale, finding that the Veteran's right ankle strain is due to his left knee strain, requires remand for an addendum opinion to clarify the seeming inconsistency with the prior findings that the Veteran's left ankle disorder is not due to his left knee strain.  The Board finds that a remand is necessary for an addendum medical opinion addressing that issue.  The lack of clarity in the medical opinion renders it inadequate, requiring remand to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty to provide an adequate medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

4. Service connection for left eye disorder, to include ocular migraine, is remanded

Favorable Findings were identified in the February 2024 rating decision:  The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  Review of your service treatment records notes intermittent episodes of blurry vision in April 2018.

The Veteran reported, "I injured my left eye during a training event and my vision in my left eye had become worse due to it.  At times my vision in my left eye would become very blurry and I would become dizzy.

Service treatment records note an eye examination in September 2011.  No eye symptoms were reported.

Service treatment records in April 2018 note heteronymous bilateral field defects: the Veteran reported that within the past few months he will have intermittent episodes of bilateral peripheral blurry vision.  He stated that these episodes last 30-60 minutes and self-resolve.  He denied headaches associated with symptoms.  He also noted that he has "daily nausea/vomiting in the morning that started one month previously."  Symptoms will start when he wakes around 0330 and self-resolve around 1000.  Pt denies HA associated with these symptoms.  The records noted concern for ocular migraines vs migraines vs pituitary adenoma.  This was discussed with neurology who recommended a CT scan as the Veteran was due to PCS (permanent change in duty station) in 10 days.  However, when discussing imaging, he declined at that time due to not wanting to interfere with the PCS.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2022.  The Veteran reported that he was poked in the eye in 2014.  Symptoms have since resolved.  The examiner found that there is no currently diagnosed eye condition.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The rationale was that the Veteran's claimed left eye condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the eye issue in service treatment records.  There are no currently diagnosed eye conditions.

The February 2024 HLR informal conference identified no error of fact or law.

The Board finds that the VA examination provided is inadequate as there was a diagnosis of ocular migraine or pituitary adenoma based on the Veteran's symptoms that was noted in the service treatment records, with imaging recommended to confirm.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).  In addition, the Board finds that a claim for ocular migraines was reasonably raised by the record and that his claim on appeal may be broadened to include this disorder.  VA is required to adjudicate all theories of entitlement reasonably raised by the record.  The failure to address such reasonably raised claim requires remand to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty.  38 C.F.R § 20.802. 

5. Service connection for a left hip disorder is remanded.

Favorable findings were identified in the February 2024 rating decision as follows:  The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  Review of your service treatment records shows symptoms of left hip pain in September of 2017.  The claimed primary disability is service-connected. You are service connected for left knee strain. 

The Veteran has asserted, "I injured my left hip from PT, hikes, and other training events."

Service treatment records dated September 2017 show hip pain reported with a history of hip pain within the last three years.  Service treatment records dated May 2013 show joint pain localized in hip.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2022.  The examiner stated there is no current diagnosis of a left hip disorder.  The Veteran reported onset was in 2012-2013.  The Veteran reported injury of the left hip from PTS, hikes, and other training events.  He reported no specific injury.  The condition since onset has progressed/worsened.  Functional impairment was described as difficulty with prolonged standing, walking, running, and physical activity involving the hips.  The examiner stated that there is no objective evidence to support an ongoing condition.  The examiner opined that the claimed hip condition, left was at least as likely as not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The rationale was that service treatment records note left hip pain in February 2012.  The Veteran reported he was playing football and fell on his hip.  He denied any bruising or swelling.  Service treatment records dated September 2017 note complaints of left hip pain with the last three years. 

February 2024 HLR Informal Conference notes left hip secondary to left knee, direct and secondary.

As the medical opinion does not correlate to the examiner's finding that there is no diagnosis of a hip condition or with the rationale provided, the Board finds that the medical opinion is inadequate and that a remand is required for an addendum medical opinion.  The inconsistency in the medical opinion renders it inadequate, requiring remand to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty to provide an adequate medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his back disorder.  The examiner must review the claims file, and provide the following medical opinion:  For any current back diagnosis, the examiner should provide an opinion addressing whether it is it as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such is related to active service.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any bilateral foot and left ankle disorder.  For any identified disorder of the bilateral feet and left ankle, the examiner should provide an opinion addressing:

(a.) Whether it is it as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any identified foot and left ankle disorders are related to active service.  

(b.) Whether it is it as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any identified foot and left ankle disorders are proximately caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

If the examiner does not find that a left ankle disorder is secondary to the Veteran's service-connected left knee strain, provide an addendum medical opinion to clarify the inconsistency with prior findings that the Veteran's right ankle disorder is due to his left knee strain.  

3. Provide a VA examination and medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's symptoms of a left eye disorder, to include ocular migraines, are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to active service. 

4. Provide an addendum medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of a current left hip disorder.  If so, the examiner should provide a medical opinion addressing:

(a.) Whether any current left hip diagnosis is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to active service. 

(b.) Whether any current left hip diagnosis is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. 

5. For all requested opinions, the examiner should address the circumstances of the Veteran's service; the Veteran's service treatment records; and the Veteran's lay statements pertaining to in-service onset and in-service events; and reported continuity of symptomatology post-service.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mcloughlin, Debra

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.