Citation Nr: A25033303
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 250225-522006
DATE:  

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the probative evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's tinnitus is etiologically linked to in-service noise exposure. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1967 to May 1971. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2025; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the March 2024 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In November 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus most recently addressed in a September 2024 rating decision. In February 2025, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2025 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of bilateral hearing, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims, including the Veteran's lay statements of exposure to loud noises throughout his active service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision in Williams regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has ended. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303. 

In this case, less than one year has passed since the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal; however, as the Board is granting one issue and remanding the other issue for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the claim on appeal prior to the expiration of the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch.

Service Connection - Tinnitus

The Veteran asserts service connection for tinnitus due to his military occupation specialty (MOS) as a helicopter chre chief and his military work as being generally around helicopters. See Fully Developed Claim, VA 21-526EZ, September 2023. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.?38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(d). 

The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi,?381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67?(Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Some chronic diseases may be presumed to have been incurred in service if they become manifest to a degree of ten percent or more within the applicable presumptive period. 38 U.S.C. §§?1101(3), 1112(a); 38?C.F.R. §§?3.307(a), 3.309(a). For those listed chronic conditions, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Tinnitus, as an organic disease of the nervous system, is a listed condition, with a presumptive period of one year following separation from service. 

Finally, a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected. When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. 38?C.F.R. §?3.310. 

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the claimant prevailing in either event. See 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.102. 

Turning to the evidence, VA administered a tinnitus medical examination December 2023, after which the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current tinnitus is less likely than not related to active service as the service records are silent to complaints and tinnitus is rather a symptom associated with bilateral hearing loss. However, this finding is inconsistent with the law evidence of record. The examiner made no mention of the Veteran's statements throughout the evidentiary record regarding his MOS and his ongoing noise exposure during service and his continuity of symptoms post service. 

As such, the Board finds the December 2023 VA examination report and opinion regarding tinnitus inadequate to decide the claim. In that regard, the December 2023 VA examiner's conclusion that the Veteran did not experience tinnitus is contrary to the evidence of record, and the examiner did not provide an adequate rationale for the conclusion reached. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake,?22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?120, 123 (2007). The VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements and contentions, namely, that his tinnitus?had its onset following noise exposure while a helicopter mechanic during service and continued post service. This opinion is therefore afforded no probative weight. 

With regard to some disabilities, lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson,?492 F.3d 1372?(Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson,?451 F.3d 1331?(Fed. Cir. 2006). 

In this case, the Veteran is competent to describe his in-service recollections of tinnitus, the circumstances of his service, as well as his continuous manifestations of tinnitus since service because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 470. The Board finds that the Veteran has credibly reported the?continuity?and duration of his tinnitus symptoms and his in-service noise exposure. 

In sum, the Veteran sustained acoustic trauma in active service and has competently and credibly reported tinnitus in service and since. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus. There is no competent VA etiology opinion of record against the claim. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is warranted. The appeal is granted. 38?U.S.C. §?5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection - Bilateral Hearing Loss

The Veteran asserts service connection for bilateral hearing loss due to his military occupation specialty (MOS) as a helicopter chre chief and his military work as being generally around helicopters. See Fully Developed Claim, VA 21-526EZ, September 2023. 

Following a review of the record, the Board finds that it cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of service connection for bilateral hearing loss, as there is not an adequate VA examination in the file. As such, the Board determines that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error to obtain an adequate medical opinion concerning the Veteran's claim. 

VA administered a hearing loss examination December 2023, after which the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss is less likely than not related to active service as the service record audiograms from enlistment and separation in 1967 and 1970 only document normal hearing. The Board finds this opinion inadequate as it is based upon a lack of in-service evidence and a lack of documented treatment after service, but does not acknowledge the Veteran's general, and repeated assertions, that his bilateral hearing loss was are due to active service and his MOS. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). 

Providing the Veteran with an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and, therefore, must be remanded. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). On remand, the AOJ should obtain an adequate medical opinion that properly addresses all relevant lay and medical evidence of record. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a VA audiologist or otherwise appropriately qualified VA examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral hearing loss. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present bilateral hearing loss had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? 

The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

The examiner is reminded that the lack of in-service complaints of, treatment for, or diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss is not a sufficient basis to find that the claimed disorder is not etiologically related to active service.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mary E. Carter, Associate Attorney

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.