Citation Nr: A25033917
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-462702
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood; but not total social and occupational impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for rating in excess of 70 percent for depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1990 to July 1994, June 1995 to February 2000, and October 2007 to December 2016.  The Veteran received numerous awards during his active service including the Southwest Asia Service Medal and the Parachutist Badge.  The Board thanks the Veteran for his honorable service.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

By way of background, in February 2017, the RO granted service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, assigning a 30 percent disability rating. 

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a private examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance that was based on several service connected disabilities, to include his psychiatric disability.  Thereafter, a July 2023 rating decision granted entitlement to special monthly compensation based on housebound criteria being met and an August 2023 rating decision granted entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound criteria being met.  Subsequently, in August 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes.  A November 2023 rating decision denied the claim.  VA then initiated a review of the previous grant of special monthly compensation for aid and attendance and issued a March 2024 rating decision which, in part, granted a rating of 50 percent for depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes, effective January 27, 2024.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that a subsequent July 2024 rating decision awarded an increased rating of 70 percent for the Veteran's depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes effective January 27, 2024.  To reflect this increase, the Board has recharacterized the issue as stated on the title page.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) in 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.  When a claimant's disability is not specifically listed in the Rating Schedule, it is rated analogous to a disability in which the functions affected, as well as the anatomical localization and symptoms, are closely related.  38 C.F.R. § 4.20.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Nevertheless, the Board acknowledges that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  The analysis in the following decision is therefore undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

If the evidence for and against a claim is approximately balanced, the claim will be granted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  A claim will be denied only if the record persuasively weighs against the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes.

The Veteran contends his depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes (psychiatric disability) warrants a rating in excess of 70 percent.  The appeal period before the Board stems from the Veteran's July 24, 2023 claim for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, plus the one-year look-back period.  See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

The Veteran's psychiatric disability is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434.  Psychiatric impairment is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

For the reasons that follow, the Board concludes that during the period on appeal, the Veteran's symptoms were, at most severe, indicative of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  The Board also concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause total occupational and social impairment, the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent or higher.

Private treatment records reveal the Veteran is prescribed Buspirone for treatment of his psychiatric disability.  His problems list includes anxiety and depressive disorder.  The Veteran's anxiety and depression are controlled and there is no suicidal or homicidal ideation.  A November 2022 mental status examination revealed the Veteran had good judgement; normal mood and affect; he was active and alert; and oriented to time, place and person.  See November 2022 Village Medical records.  A November 2022 Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) revealed no or minimal depression with a score of 0.  Id.

VA treatment records during the period on appeal reveal the Veteran did not seek mental health treatment through the VA until February 2024.  A February 2024 mental health initial evaluation reveals the Veteran is taking Trazadone, Buspirone, and Gabapentin to treat his psychiatric disability.  The Veteran reported he has not participated in therapy and denied previous inpatient hospitalizations for psychiatric reasons.  The mental status examination revealed the Veteran was oriented to time, place, person, and event; he was calm and cooperative; speech was within normal limits; he had euthymic affect; his thought process was organized and logical; there was no indication of delusions or hallucinations; memory was normal; he had good insight; and he had good judgment.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations.  The plan is for him to continue psychotherapy.  During a March 2024 follow-up mental health appointment, the Veteran reported he recently celebrated his birthday with his brothers and their wives.  The Veteran reported his father's health is declining and he continues to help him.  The Veteran also reported he has been spending time with his adult children.  The mental status examination revealed the Veteran was oriented to time, place, person, and event; he was calm and cooperative; speech was within normal limits; he reported his mood as "good;" his affect was congruent with his mood; his thought process was organized and logical; there was no indication of delusions, hallucinations, or ruminations; memory was normal; he had good insight; and he had good judgment.  The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) revealed a score of 9, which indicates mild depression.  The Veteran's depressive symptoms make it somewhat difficult to work, take care of things at home, or get along with others. His Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7) score was 13, which indicates moderate anxiety.  The Veteran stated his anxiety symptoms make it somewhat difficult to work, take care of things at home, or get along with others. The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations and denied previous suicidal and homicidal attempts.  Overall, the clinician stated the Veteran's reported symptoms of depression are not consistent with a major depressive episode.  See March 2024 Mental Health Note, Dallas VAMC.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted an Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance that was completed by his private internal medicine physician, Dr. M.L.  Dr. M.L. stated that the Veteran's neck pain, radiculopathy, back pain, fibromyalgia, headaches, psychiatric disability, and prostate cancer cause the Veteran to be housebound or in need of regular aid and attendance.  The examiner stated that prostate cancer, neck pain, psychiatric disability, migraines, fibromyalgia, and sleep apnea are considered permanent and totally disabling.  The Veteran is not confined to his bed.  He requires assistance with medication management, housekeeping, laundry, and meal preparation.  The Veteran is not blind and he does not require nursing home care.  Dr. M.L. states the Veteran has severe physical pain due to his neck, back and radiculopathy; and that these disabilities cause difficulties with daily tasks.  Due to intermittent pain and weakness, the Veteran is only able to leave home sometimes, and only go short distances.  Aids such as canes, braces, crutches, or the assistance of another person are required for locomotion and the Veteran is limited to a distance of 5 or 6 blocks.

The Veteran's spouse submitted two statements in August 2023 describing the Veteran's psychiatric disability.  She stated the Veteran's memory has been declining over the last several years and he is no longer the same person.  He is no longer organized and forgets things daily.  He has trouble remembering routine daily tasks and procedures and does not remember appointments or schedules.  The Veteran has to use GPS when driving all the time, even familiar routes.  His ability or willingness to do anything outside his normal daily routine is almost nonexistent.  In addition, the Veteran's spouse reported the Veteran is sometimes cold and distant.  She walks on eggshells during those times because she is unsure how the Veteran will react.  He has episodes of depression and has resisted seeking mental health treatment.  The Veteran is disconnected from others and interacts shallowly with other people.  The Veteran has strong controlling behaviors and uncontrollable irritability.  See August 2023 VA Forms 21-4138.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a PTSD disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) completed by his private internal medicine physician, Dr. M.L.  Dr. M.L. indicated he reviewed the Veteran's VA records.  He diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD, anxiety, depression, and bipolar disorder.  He also stated the Veteran has additional diagnoses of TBI and panic attacks.  The examiner stated that although the Veteran has more than one mental disorder, it is not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis.  The examiner also stated that although the Veteran is diagnosed with a TBI, it is not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to TBI and non-TBI mental health diagnoses.  Concerning social and marital history, the Veteran reported worsening symptoms of mental illness.  He is currently in his third marriage and his two previous marriages ended due to his mental illness symptoms.  Concerning occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported he is not currently working and he is unable to hold a steady job.  Concerning mental health history, the Veteran reported a family history of mental illness.  The Veteran is taking Trazadone and Buspar.  The Veteran has no legal history but reported a history of anger management issues.  He also reported substance abuse with medication and alcohol in the past.  The examiner stated the Veteran has total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; persistent danger of hurting himself or others; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  During the examination, the Veteran was observed to be anxious and depressed.  The examiner stated the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs.

The Veteran attended a VA mental disorders examination on September 5, 2023.  The examiner diagnosed adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner stated the Veteran only has one mental disorder and does not have a TBI.  Concerning social and marital history, the Veteran reported being married to his wife for 12 years.  Concerning occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported he is not currently working.  Concerning mental health history, the Veteran reported seeking mental health treatment at the VA from 2017 to 2019.  The Veteran still takes Trazadone and Buspar.  No additional legal or substance abuse history was reported.  The examiner stated the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  During the examination, the Veteran was observed to be anxious and depressed.  He was fully oriented; cooperative; had congruent affect; normal thought process; no hallucinations or delusions; his judgement, insight, intellect, memory, and perception were intact; and he had no suicidal ideations, plans, or intent.  The examiner stated the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs.

The Veteran attended a VA mental disorders examination on September 11, 2023.  The examiner diagnosed unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress and stated this new diagnosis is a progression of the Veteran's previous diagnosis of adjustment disorder.  The examiner stated the Veteran only has one mental disorder and does not have a TBI.  Concerning social and marital history, the Veteran reported being married to his wife for 11 years.  They do not have children together.  His relationship with his son from a previous relationship is distant.  The Veteran has a close relationship with his siblings.  His mother passed away in 2020, which has been difficult for him.  He has a few friends he talks to on a regular basis.  The Veteran stated that the older he gets, the more he just wants to be left alone.  Concerning occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported he is not currently working.  Concerning mental health history, the Veteran reported seeking mental health treatment at the VA from 2017 to 2019.  The Veteran stopped seeking mental health treatment when he got a job as a teacher.  The Veteran still takes Trazadone and Buspar, which is prescribed by his primary care provider at VA.  The Veteran states the medications "keep [him] even."  The Trazadone helps him sleep, leading to him sleeping well.  The Veteran stated he continues to experience grief due to his mother's death.  No additional legal or substance abuse history was reported.  The examiner stated the Veteran has occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms of depressed mood and anxiety.  During the examination, the Veteran was observed to be fully oriented; cooperative; his mood was euthymic; affect was within normal limits; intellect was estimated to be average; speech was within normal limits; the Veteran was engaged throughout the examination and did not appear to be responding to any internal stimuli.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations.  The examiner stated the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs.

The Veteran attended a VA TBI examination on October 18, 2023. The examiner determined that the Veteran does not have a TBI.

The Veteran attended a VA mental disorders examination on October 18, 2023.  The examiner diagnosed adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner stated the Veteran only has one mental disorder and does not have a TBI.  He noted that the Veteran "feels he has PTSD" but found his "symptoms and level of clinical impairment do not meet the diagnostic standard for PTSD."  Concerning social and marital history, the Veteran reported no changes since his last VA examination.  Concerning occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported no changes since his last VA examination.  Concerning mental health history, the Veteran reported his current emotional health as poor.  He endorsed frequent moods including depression, anxiety, stress, and excessive anger.  Current symptoms include sad feelings, problems with sleep, isolation, feeling restless, and irritability.  The Veteran denied having panic attacks; he also denied suicidal ideations, plan, and attempts.  He denied hallucinations and delusions.  The Veteran still takes Trazadone and Buspar.  No additional legal or substance abuse history was reported.  The examiner stated the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency, and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation due to symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment.  During the examination, the Veteran was observed to be fully oriented; his mood was depressed and intensity was mild; his affect was congruent to his mood; communication and speech were within normal limits; concentration was within normal limits; judgement was not impaired; abstract thinking was normal; and his memory was within normal limits.  The examiner stated the Veteran appears to be a reliable historian.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations.  The examiner stated the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs.

The Veteran attended a VA mental disorders examination on October 25, 2023.  The examiner diagnosed adjustment disorder with mixed symptoms of depression and anxiety.  The examiner stated the Veteran only has one mental disorder and does not have a TBI.  Concerning social and marital history, the Veteran reported being married to his wife for 12 years.  He has a 30 year old son from a prior relationship, who he gets along with well.  The Veteran has two or three long term friendships.  In his spare time, he enjoys eating, music, relaxing, and spending time with his family.  Concerning occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported he is not working and is not sure he wants to go back to structured employment.  The Veteran reported he does not feel that memory or concentration problems have ever been an issue with his ability to work.  He just does not want to feel the pressure of having a job.  The Veteran reported he has a master's degree in business.  Concerning mental health history, the Veteran reported some short-term memory problems as well as issues with focus and attention.  The Veteran reported mild symptoms of depression and anxiety.  He reports some sleep disturbance in the form of middle insomnia, but that the Trazadone helps significantly with his sleep.  He has some problems with short term memory and attention. He has low stress tolerance and problems coping with stress.  The Veteran has not received mental health counseling since 2019.  The Veteran still takes Trazadone and Buspar.  No additional legal or substance abuse history was reported.  The examiner stated the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  During the examination, the Veteran was observed to be fully oriented; his mood and affect were appropriate; he was cooperative and there was no evidence of issues with his communication skills; and there was no evidence of any problems with reality testing.  The examiner stated the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs.

The Veteran and his spouse each submitted a statement in August 2023 describing the Veteran's psychiatric disability.  The Veteran reported he recently started seeing a therapist at the VA for mental health treatment.  He also reported difficulty going to sleep and staying asleep; the Veteran takes Trazadone and Cyclobenzaprine to help him sleep.  The medication can sometimes cause brain fog.  He is difficult to be around when he does not sleep well.  The Veteran stated his physical pain makes him depressed and irritable.  His depression and anxiety worsened after being diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2019.  That has also increased his irritability.  The Veteran stated his patience became short and he did not want to be around people.  The Veteran's spouse reported the Veteran has cycles of depression.  He has resisted seeking mental health treatment.  She also reported the Veteran is disconnected from others, is controlling, and has uncontrolled irritability.  He also has difficulty adapting to change.

The Veteran and his spouse are competent to report the Veteran's observable symptoms and there is no indication their reports are not credible.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

On January 25, 2024, the Veteran attended a VA Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's psychiatric disability, upper and lower extremity radiculopathy, hip strain, knee pain, back pain, neck pain, shoulder strain, migraines, and fibromyalgia cause the Veteran to be housebound or in need of regular aid and attendance.  The Veteran is not confined to his bed.  He is able to feed himself.  The Veteran cannot prepare his own meals; his wife prepares them due to his disabilities.  The Veteran stated he does his own bathing and hygiene but his wife often helps him with getting dressed.  The Veteran requires medication management; his wife prepares his medications.  The Veteran is not blind and he does not require nursing home care.  The examination report reveals that only the Veteran's physical disabilities interfere with his ability to get dressed, shave and attend to the needs of nature; impact his mobility, weight bearing, balance, and propulsion; and impact his ability to bend, turn, lift, and carry objects.  The Veteran's headaches interfere with his ability to work in a stressful, bright, or loud work environment.  The examiner stated the Veteran is able to leave the house, but he requires assistive devices and is limited to traveling 5 or 6 blocks.

The Veteran attended a VA mental disorders examination on January 27, 2024.  The examiner diagnosed depressive disorder, with major depressive-like episodes.  The examiner stated the Veteran only has one mental disorder and does not have a TBI.  Concerning social and marital history, the Veteran reported he still lives with his wife of 12 years.  He stated things are going okay at home but admits there is some stress related to his depressive episodes, anxiety, irritability, angry outbursts, and increased tendency to isolate himself from others outside of his family.  The Veteran stated he has a few close friends.  He sees two of his sons as they live close by.  Concerning occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported he is not working.  Concerning mental health history, the Veteran reported he has not received mental health services since 2019.  He stated he would like to return to counseling services but has difficulty talking about his anxiety and depression.  The Veteran continues to experience symptoms that include depressive episodes, anxiety with panic attacks, irritability with anger outbursts, sleep problems, excessive worry, decreased energy and interest in previously enjoyed activities, he avoids crowded and unfamiliar social situations whenever possible, and he isolates from others outside of his family.  No additional legal or substance abuse history was reported.  The examiner stated the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; impaired judgement; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  During the examination, the Veteran was observed to be fully oriented; his mood was moderately anxious with some irritability when discussing the impact of his service-connected disabilities on his overall daily functioning; his thought process was linear, logical, and goal directed; recent and remote memory were intact; attention and concentration were within normal limits; and judgement and insight were intact.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations.  The examiner stated the Veteran appears to be a reliable historian and he is capable of managing his financial affairs.

Based on the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms and resulting functional impairment are indicative of serious symptoms resulting in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas.  However, at no time during the rating period have the Veteran's symptoms caused total occupational and social impairment, the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent or higher.

In particular, the evidence has consistently shown the Veteran's psychiatric disability manifests with depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names), disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting), and impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence).

The Board finds that an evaluation in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's psychiatric disability at any time during the appeal period.  Although the Veteran submitted a private PTSD DBQ in August 2023 stating he has total occupational and social impairment, the probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against such severity.  The Board finds the private PTSD DBQ to be competent, as it was completed after a review of the Veteran's VA records and an in-person examination by a physician; and there is no indication the evidence is not credible.  The Board assigns the private PTSD DBQ some probative weight.  However, for the reasons that follow, the Board finds the VA examinations to be more probative than the private PTSD DBQ.

Although a higher rating is available for total occupational and social impairment, the evidence persuasively weighs against such severity.  The August 2023 private PTSD DBQ states the Veteran experiences persistent danger of hurting himself or others and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  However, the record does not reflect any reports of the Veteran experiencing persistent danger of hurting himself or others.  Rather, the record consistently reveals the Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations, plans, and intent.  Regarding intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, the record does not reveal that symptom is persistent or of such severity as to cause total occupational and social impairment.  In that regard, the July 2023 and January 2024 Examinations for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance reveal the Veteran's physical disabilities, not his psychiatric disability, are responsible for the Veteran's inability to perform activities of daily living.  In addition, although the Veteran has not worked during the period on appeal, being unemployed is not the same as being totally occupationally impaired.  The record instead reveals the Veteran has a master's degree in business and he is not sure he wants to go back to structured employment.  Furthermore, the Veteran reported he does not feel that memory or concentration problems have ever been an issue with his ability to work.  He just does not want to feel the pressure of having a job.  The board acknowledges that the July 2023 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance states the Veteran's psychiatric disability is considered permanent and totally disabling. In addition, the VA examiners have demonstrated expertise with respect to psychiatric disabilities. Conversely, the Board finds the private diagnosis of PTSD to be of limited probative value as the examiner is an internal medicine specialist and provides no supporting documentation as to how the diagnosis conforms with the DSM criteria.  In sum, the record reflects the Veteran is not totally occupationally impaired due to his psychiatric disability.

The record also does not reflect that the Veteran is totally socially impaired due to his psychiatric disability.  The Veteran reported he is married to his third wife and they have been married for 12 years.  He reported things are going okay at home but admits there is some stress due to his psychiatric disability.  The Veteran consistently reported he has a few friends and he spends time with his family, to include his sons.  Although the Veteran reports on numerous occasions that he is not social and prefers little contact with others, a preference for minimal social interaction does not equate to total social impairment.  Notably, none of the Veteran's VA examinations or treatment records indicate he has total social impairment due to his psychiatric disability.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the Veteran's psychiatric disability symptomatology most nearly approximates the criteria for a 70 percent evaluation for the entire period on appeal.  Accordingly, a rating in excess of 70 percent for depressive disorder with major depressive-like episodes is denied.  As the probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 70 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Gary, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.