Citation Nr: A25033860
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210816-179687
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis, on a basis other than the PACT ACT, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran served in in Southwest Asia from January 21, 1991, to March 15, 1991, and was diagnosed with sinusitis after his service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish service connection for sinusitis, on a presumptive basis under the PACT Act, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; PACT Act, Pub. L. 117-168, §§ 302, 406; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The veteran served on active duty from March 1990 to May 1996.

The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2021 under The Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) review system.  

In August 2021, the Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board and selected the hearing lane for this claim.  Thus, the Board can only consider evidence submitted prior to the April 2025 AMA rating decision and evidence provided within 90 days of the Veteran's Board hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

In April 2025, the Veteran testified at a video conference Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge.  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).  Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a link between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013).  Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

The Veteran contends that his sinusitis is related to his service in Southwest Asia. He contends that his symptoms began after his service.  He reported that since his separation from service he has two to three sinus infections a year.  See October 2020 Correspondence. 

With respect to the first element of service connection, the February 2021 VA examination report confirms a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.  See February 2021 VA Sinusitis/Rhinitis and Other Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  Thus, the first element of service connection is satisfied.

With respect to the second element of service connection, i.e., the in-service incurrence, in an April 2021 VA rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (e)(2), for at least one day between August 2, 1990, through July 31, 1991.

The Board further notes enactment of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022, also known as the Honoring our PACT Act of 2022 (hereinafter referred to as the PACT Act), which expands VA health care and benefits for Veterans exposed to burn pits or other toxic substances during military service.  As it pertains to this case, the PACT Act lists several diseases or illnesses that can be considered presumptively service-connected if a Veteran was exposed to burn pits or other toxic substances during the Vietnam, Gulf War, and post 9/11 eras.  Veterans who were exposed to burn pits or toxic substances specifically during the Gulf War and post 9/11 eras are eligible for presumptive service connection if they have a current disability diagnosed as brain cancer, glioblastoma, respiratory cancer of any type, gastrointestinal cancer of any type, head cancer of any type, lymphoma of any type, lymphatic cancer of any type, neck cancer, pancreatic cancer, reproductive cancer of any type, kidney cancer, melanoma, asthma (diagnosed after service), chronic rhinitis, chronic sinusitis, constrictive bronchiolitis or obliterative bronchiolitis, emphysema, granulomatous disease, interstitial lung disease (ILD), pleuritis, pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis, chronic bronchitis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).  See PACT Act.

In the instant case, in an April 2021 VA rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (e)(2), for at least one day between August 2, 1990, through July 31, 1991.  Additionally, he was diagnosed with chronic sinusitis after service.  Chronic sinusitis is one of the service-connected illness listed in the PACT Act.  As such, the Board finds the evidence is at least equally balanced and satisfactorily establishes that the Veteran's sinusitis is due to his presumed exposure to burn pits and other toxic substances during his service in Southwest Asia.

The Board therefore resolves all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds service connection for sinusitis is warranted under the PACT Act.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Lynch, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Here, while the Board granted service connection for sinusitis pursuant to the PACT Act, the Board must also consider service connection on an alternative theories of entitlement other than the PACT, such as direct service connection, as the Veteran might be entitled to an earlier effective date under a different theory of entitlement. 

The Veteran contends that his sinusitis is related to his exposure to chemicals, burn pits, environmental hazards, and vaccinations during his service.

Although the Board notes that there was a VA examination conducted in February 2021.  The VA examiner did not provide an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's sinusitis.  Thus, given that the Veteran has confirmed service during the Southwest Asia theater of operations, a medical opinion is warranted as to whether the Veteran's sinusitis is related to his service, to include his verified service in Southwest Asia.  In other words, the Board finds that an opinion on a direct service connection basis is warranted.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed. Cir. 1994)).

As such opinion was not previously provided, the Board finds that this constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and a remand is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request a VA medical opinion to ascertain the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sinusitis from a qualified medical professional.  After review of the record, the VA examiner is asked to address the following:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's sinusitis is related to his service, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards during verified service in Southwest Asia and or any vaccinations he had during his service.

"	The examiner is reminded that a negative medical opinion may not be rendered solely on the lack of notations indicating diagnosis or treatment for sinusitis in the service treatment records, or general medical literature untethered to this particular Veteran and the facts of his case.  To rely exclusively on the above alone or in conjunction with each other will render the opinion inadequate for VA adjudication purposes.

"	If the examiner determines that he/she cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, he/she should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion. Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 389 (2010) (The Agency of Original Jurisdiction should ensure that any additional evidentiary development suggested by the examiner be undertaken so that a definite opinion can be obtained).

"	Any opinion expressed by the VA examiner must "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Abdelbary, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.