Citation Nr: A25033857
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240209-415203
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

A rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral pes planus is denied.

The reduction of the rating for the Veteran's rating for left ankle strain from 20 percent to 10 percent was not proper, and the 20 percent rating is restored effective November 15, 2023.

A rating in excess of 20 percent for left ankle strain is denied.

The issue of entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on loss of use of a creative organ is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for alcohol use disorder as secondary to service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence does not show that the Veteran's pes planus is pronounced with marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation, not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.

2. The November 2023 rating decision reduced the evaluation for the Veteran's left ankle strain from 20 percent to 10 percent effective November 15, 2023. 

3. The Veteran's left ankle strain did not show actual improvement under the normal circumstances of life and work at the time of the reduction.

4. The Veteran's left ankle limitation of motion is marked in severity.

5. The September 2023 rating decision granted SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ effective March 7, 2023; thus, there is no case or controversy for adjudication.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral pes planus are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.1, 4.7, 4.14, 4.71a, DC 5276.

2. The reduction in the rating for the Veteran's left ankle strain from 20 percent to 10 percent effective November 15, 2023 was not proper.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, 4.71a, DC 5271.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left ankle strain are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5271.

4. The criteria for dismissal of the claim for entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ are met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1998 to June 2001, including foreign service.  He was awarded the Army Achievement Medal (third award), among others.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)'s decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the AMA framework.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

In the Veteran's February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), he selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.  

As the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, in regard to the issues of entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral pes planus, the reduction of the rating for the Veteran's rating for left ankle strain from 20 percent to 10 percent, and entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left ankle strain, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its November 30, 2023 decision.  In regard to the issue of entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, service connection for alcohol abuse, and service connection for sleep apnea is denied, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its September 16, 2023 rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such disabilities and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Although the evaluation of a service-connected disability requires a review of a Veteran's medical history with regard to that disorder, the primary concern in a claim for an increased evaluation for a service-connected disability is the present level of disability. VA is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation; however, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  VA has a duty to consider the possibility of assigning staged ratings in all claims for increase.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

When evaluating joint disabilities rated on the basis of limitation of motion, VA must consider granting a higher rating in cases in which functional loss due to pain, weakness, excess fatigability, or incoordination is demonstrated, and those factors are not contemplated in the relevant rating criteria.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) clarified that although pain may be a cause or manifestation of functional loss, limitation of motion due to pain is not necessarily rated at the same level as functional loss where motion is impeded.  See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011); cf. Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31, 34 (1999); Hicks v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 417, 421 (1995).

Instead, the Mitchell Court explained that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the possible manifestations of functional loss include decreased or abnormal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance, as well as less or more movement than is normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, and pain on movement (as well as swelling, deformity, and atrophy) that affects stability, standing, and weight-bearing.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45.  Thus, functional loss caused by pain must be rated at the same level as if the functional loss were caused by any of the other factors cited above. In evaluating the severity of a joint disability, VA must determine the overall functional impairment due to these factors.

1. A rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral pes planus is denied.

The Veteran's bilateral pes planus is currently rated 30 percent disabling pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5276.  

The Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for his bilateral pes planus in June 2023.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  In his February 2024 VA Form 10182, he contends that his bilateral pes planus is increasingly painful and crippling.  

Under DC 5276, a 30 percent rating is warranted for severe bilateral acquired flat foot; objective evidence of marked deformity (pronation, abduction, etc.), pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, characteristic callosities.  A maximum 50 percent rating is warranted for pronounced bilateral acquired flatfoot; marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation, not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5276.

It should be noted that use of terminology such as "marked" and "pronounced" by VA examiners or other physicians, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must instead evaluate all the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  "Pronounced" flatfoot, as recognized by the applicable rating criteria, is characterized by marked pronation of a foot that is "not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances."  "Marked" is not defined within DC 5276, however according to Merriam Webster Dictionary, it means "having a distinctive or emphasized character."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/marked.  

The Board also notes that the criteria under DC 5276 are conjunctive, not disjunctive; thus, all criteria must be met. See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision meant that all of the conditions listed in the provision must be met); compare Johnson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 95 (1994) (only one disjunctive "or" requirement must be met in order for an increased rating to be assigned).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his bilateral pes planus in November 2023.  At that time, he reported pain with and without use of his feet and difficulty walking and standing for a prolonged period.  He stated that he treated this condition with over-the-counter Ibuprofen.  He reported flareups daily all day which consisted of aching pain.  He reported precipitating factors for flareups were prolonged standing, walking, using stairs, and squatting and alleviating factors were rest and medication.  He stated that the severity was moderate.  In regard to functional impairment during flareups, the Veteran noted that during acute and intense pain episodes involving the feet, he had to offload the weight from his feet due to pain.  Upon examination, there was no marked pronation, no extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, and no marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation.  The examiner determined that the procured evidence did not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time; and that there was no other functional loss during flareups and/or after repeated use over time.

A review of the private and VA treatment records also do not show that the Veteran's flat foot is pronounced with marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, or marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation which is not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.  As such, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted.

In making the above findings, the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran has used medication, including Ibuprofen, to treat his pain.  The Court has held that in assigning a disability rating, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  More recently, the Court stated that the "the Board [is] obligated to discount the beneficial effects of the medication taken for each disability and evaluate the baseline severity of those disabilities" and held that "Jones applies in the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant [diagnostic code] does not reference medication as a factor in evaluation."  See Ingram v. Shinseki, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *15-19 (March 12, 2025).

The Board notes, however, that neither Jones nor Ingram address how the Board is to discount the beneficial effects of medication, particularly when used as treatment for musculoskeletal symptoms and where examiners do not reasonably have the ability to assess range of motion both with and without use of medication. Remanding this appeal to order an addendum medical opinion based on Jones and Ingram, and in the lens of the rating criteria under § 4.71a, would almost certainly require an examiner to engage in medical speculation and would result in a medical opinion that lacks the degree of certainty to ascertain, even under the benefit-of-the-doubt standard, the impact of the ameliorative effects of medication on the severity of a veteran's musculoskeletal disability in terms of range of motion.  See, e.g., Hood v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 295, 298-99 (2005) (medical opinions that are speculative have "little probative value").  Significantly, one of the judges in McCarroll, joined by another judge in concurrence, expressed the same concern as to the implications of the holding in Jones:

The requirement that the Secretary "may not consider the relief afforded by [a veteran's] medication when" applying the rating schedule, as Jones demands...invites medical speculation in trying to guess what a veteran's symptoms might be without the medication, or medical malpractice in the cessation of medication so that the veteran's symptoms without medication might be recorded. The former invites non-helpful guesswork by medical practitioners,...and the latter raises, at a minimum, serious ethical concerns that no court should encourage. That Jones essentially requires the Board to consider whether a medical examination is required to determine how serious a veteran's symptoms would have been in an alternate reality in which he or she was not taking his or her required medication should alone demonstrate the fallacy of the Jones holding.  McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 278 (2016) (internal citations omitted). Because it is highly unlikely that remand to obtain a medical opinion as to the ameliorative effects of medication on the severity of the Veteran's [musculoskeletal disability] would result in a probative, non-speculative opinion as to such, the Board does not wish to further delay adjudication of the Veteran's appeal to engage in likely unfruitful further development pursuant to Jones and Ingram. Moreover, the Board certainly cannot - and will not - order the Veteran to stop taking medication to undergo an examination that would reflect the severity of his/her [musculoskeletal disability] without the use of pain medication. This would not only be cruel and potentially damaging to the Veteran, but the undersigned finds it would be legally unethical to ask such.

Finally, the Board notes that VA compensation does not contemplate hypothetical symptoms or impairment.  Instead, the purpose of VA benefits is to compensate for decreased earning capacity - to compensate for actual symptoms or impairment that an individual experiences in the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  The Veteran's manifestations of pain have been considered in rating his pes planus, but it remains the Board's obligation to rate the condition based on the application of the rating criteria found in the diagnostic codes to the objective medical evidence. 

In sum, a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's bilateral pes planus.

2. The reduction of the rating for the Veteran's rating for left ankle strain from 20 percent to 10 percent was not proper, and the 20 percent rating is restored effective November 15, 2023.

3. A rating in excess of 20 percent for left ankle strain is denied.

The Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for his left ankle strain in June 2023.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's evaluation for his left ankle strain from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective November 15, 2023, under DC 5271.  The Veteran disagrees with disability evaluation and contends that his ankle is increasingly painful.  See February 2024 VA Form 10182.

DC 5271 provides a 10 percent disability rating for moderate limited motion (less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion) and a 20 percent rating for marked limited motion (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion).  

Pursuant to VA regulations, normal range of motion for ankle dorsiflexion is 0 to 20 degrees and for plantar flexion is 0 to 45 degrees.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate II.

Initially, the Board notes that this reduction in rating did not affect the Veteran's overall disability rating.  Therefore, the due process protections of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply.  VAOPGCPREC 71-91 (Nov. 1991); Stelzel v. Mansfield, 508 F.3d 1345, 1347-49 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Board will now consider the propriety of the rating reduction.

A rating reduction is not proper unless the Veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000).  In considering the propriety of a reduction, the Board must focus on the evidence available to the AOJ at the time the reduction was effectuated (although post-reduction medical evidence may be considered in the context of considering whether actual improvement was demonstrated).  Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-82 (1992).  The Veteran need not demonstrate that retention of the higher evaluation is warranted; rather, it must be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the reduction was warranted.  See Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 418 (1993).  

In a May 2019 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for a left ankle strain with an evaluation of 20 percent based upon the May 2019 VA examination.  At that time, his dorsiflexion was 10 degrees and his plantar flexion was 5 degrees.  He reported that he used over-the-counter Aleve or Motrin as needed for his ankle pain.  He reported his symptoms were bilateral ankle pain and swelling.  He reported no flareups.

The reduction in rating was based upon a November 2023 VA examination.  At that time, the Veteran reported pain with use and that he treated this with over-the-counter ibuprofen.  He reported flare-ups of his ankle condition which occurred daily, all day, and were characterized by aching pain.  He noted that precipitating factors were prolonged standing, walking, using stairs, and squatting activities; and that alleviating factors were rest and medication.  He rated the severity as moderate.  In regard to the extent of functional impairment during a flareups, the Veteran stated that during acute pain episodes involving the left ankle, he had difficulty with activities that involved prolonged standing, walking, using stairs, and squatting.  Range of motion (ROM) testing showed plantar flexion to 25 degrees and dorsiflexion to 15 degrees.  The examiner estimated that, during flareups, his plantar flexion would be to 20 degrees and dorsiflexion would be to 15 degrees.

The Board finds that the weight of the evidence does not establish sustained improvement in the Veteran's service-connected left ankle strain under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  Although the November 2023 VA examination showed improvement in the Veteran's ROM, the Veteran reported that he continued to have pain and continued to treat with over-the-counter medication at that time.  Further, while in 2019, the Veteran did not have flareups of his condition, the Veteran reported flareups in 2023 which caused functional impairments.  Specifically, he stated that during acute pain episodes involving the left ankle, he had difficulty with activities that involved prolonged standing, walking, using stairs, and squatting.  

The Board acknowledges that the AOJ is correct in finding that the current severity of the Veteran's ROM findings does not meet the rating criteria for a 20 percent evaluation under DC 5271.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5271.  However, the Veteran does not bear the burden of demonstrating entitlement to retention of the higher evaluation.  Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 418.  The burden of proof is on VA to establish that a reduction is warranted by the weight of the evidence.  Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320 (1995).  The weight of the evidence of record does not show a sustained improvement in the Veteran's left ankle disability under the ordinary conditions of life and work at the time of the November 15, 2023 reduction.  As such, the reduction of the Veteran's evaluation from 20 percent to 10 percent for his left ankle strain was not proper.  Therefore, the requirements for restoration have been met; and the 20 percent rating is restored.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.  

A 20 percent rating is the maximum rating under DC 5271.  However, ratings for the ankle are also available under DCs 5270, 5272, 5273, and 5274. 

Pursuant to DC 5270, ankylosis of the ankle is rated as follows: 20 percent for ankylosis in plantar flexion of less than 30 degrees; 30 percent for ankylosis in plantar flexion between 30 and 40 degrees or in dorsiflexion between zero and 10 degrees; and 40 percent for ankylosis in plantar flexion at more than 40 degrees, in dorsiflexion at more than 10 degrees, or with abduction, adduction, inversion or eversion deformity.

DC 5272 provides a 10 percent disability rating for subastragalar or tarsal joint ankylosis in good weight-bearing position and a 20 percent disability rating for ankylosis in poor weight-bearing position.

DC 5273 provides a 10 percent disability rating for moderate deformity resulting from the malunion of the os calcis or astragalus and a 20 percent disability rating for a marked deformity resulting from the malunion of the os calcis or astragalus.

DC 5274 provides a 20 percent disability rating for astragalectomy.

The Board has considered whether a higher or separate rating is warranted under another of the DC related to the ankle; and finds that it is not.  The Board finds that DCs 5270, 5272, 5273 and 5274 are inapplicable as there is no evidence of ankylosis, malunion of os calcis or astragalus, or astragalectomy.  See November 2023 VA examination; VA treatment records; private treatment records.  As such, a higher or separate rating under another DC applicable to the ankle is not warranted.

In making the above findings, the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran has used medication, including Aleve, Motrin, and Ibuprofen, to treat his pain.  The Court has held that in assigning a disability rating, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  More recently, the Court stated that the "the Board [is] obligated to discount the beneficial effects of the medication taken for each disability and evaluate the baseline severity of those disabilities" and held that "Jones applies in the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant [diagnostic code] does not reference medication as a factor in evaluation."  See Ingram v. Shinseki, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *15-19 (March 12, 2025).

The Board notes, however, that neither Jones nor Ingram address how the Board is to discount the beneficial effects of medication, particularly when used as treatment for musculoskeletal symptoms and where examiners do not reasonably have the ability to assess range of motion both with and without use of medication. Remanding this appeal to order an addendum medical opinion based on Jones and Ingram, and in the lens of the rating criteria under § 4.71a, would almost certainly require an examiner to engage in medical speculation and would result in a medical opinion that lacks the degree of certainty to ascertain, even under the benefit-of-the-doubt standard, the impact of the ameliorative effects of medication on the severity of a veteran's musculoskeletal disability in terms of range of motion.  See, e.g., Hood v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 295, 298-99 (2005) (medical opinions that are speculative have "little probative value").  Significantly, one of the judges in McCarroll, joined by another judge in concurrence, expressed the same concern as to the implications of the holding in Jones:

The requirement that the Secretary "may not consider the relief afforded by [a veteran's] medication when" applying the rating schedule, as Jones demands...invites medical speculation in trying to guess what a veteran's symptoms might be without the medication, or medical malpractice in the cessation of medication so that the veteran's symptoms without medication might be recorded. The former invites non-helpful guesswork by medical practitioners,...and the latter raises, at a minimum, serious ethical concerns that no court should encourage. That Jones essentially requires the Board to consider whether a medical examination is required to determine how serious a veteran's symptoms would have been in an alternate reality in which he or she was not taking his or her required medication should alone demonstrate the fallacy of the Jones holding.  McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 278 (2016) (internal citations omitted). Because it is highly unlikely that remand to obtain a medical opinion as to the ameliorative effects of medication on the severity of the Veteran's [musculoskeletal disability] would result in a probative, non-speculative opinion as to such, the Board does not wish to further delay adjudication of the Veteran's appeal to engage in likely unfruitful further development pursuant to Jones and Ingram. Moreover, the Board certainly cannot - and will not - order the Veteran to stop taking medication to undergo an examination that would reflect the severity of his/her [musculoskeletal disability] without the use of pain medication. This would not only be cruel and potentially damaging to the Veteran, but the undersigned finds it would be legally unethical to ask such.

Finally, the Board notes that VA compensation does not contemplate hypothetical symptoms or impairment.  Instead, the purpose of VA benefits is to compensate for decreased earning capacity - to compensate for actual symptoms or impairment that an individual experiences in the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  The Veteran's manifestations of pain have been considered in rating his left ankle strain, but it remains the Board's obligation to rate the condition based on the application of the rating criteria found in the diagnostic codes to the objective medical evidence. 

In sum, a 20 percent rating is the appropriate rating for the Veteran's left ankle strain.

4. The issue of entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of use of a creative organ is dismissed.

In the Veteran's February 2024 VA Form 10182, he indicated that he wished to appeal the issue of entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ.  He stated that the areas of disagreement were the disability evaluation and service connection.  He explained that this issue ruined his life and that he cannot reproduce.  See February 2024 VA Form 10182.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.

The Board notes that the Veteran is already in receipt of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a) based on loss of use of a creative organ, effective March 7, 2023, pursuant to the September 2023 rating decision.  As such, there is no case or controversy before the Board.  See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d. 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  As the benefit sought has been granted in full, there remains no case or controversy for appellate review, and the appeal is dismissed as moot.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for alcohol use disorder as secondary to service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder is remanded.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that: 1) service connection is in effect for insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannabis use disorder and 2) the Veteran has a diagnosed disability, alcohol use disorder in early remission.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023.  The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion regarding the relationship between the Veteran's alcohol use disorder in early remission and his service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannabis use disorder.  However, the Board finds that the May 2023 VA medical opinion is not compliant with Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  In Spicer, the Federal Circuit held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" causation in direct and secondary service connection claims.  Therefore, it held 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) was unlawful because it required proximate causation to establish aggravation of a disability, rather than but-for causation.  The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  Stated another way, but-for causation is broad, undisputedly broader than proximate cause.  Thus, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause to establish secondary service connection.  In rendering an opinion regarding secondary service connection, the May 2023 VA clinician in this case used the "proximate cause" standard, which has been deemed unlawful by Spicer.  The May 2023 VA examiner also did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's alcohol use disorder in early remission was aggravated by his service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannabis use disorder.  The Board finds that this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  As such, a VA medical opinion is warranted regarding whether the Veteran's alcohol use disorder is secondary to his service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder.

2. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that: 1) service connection is in effect for insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannabis use disorder and 2) the Veteran has a diagnosed disability, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023.  The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion regarding the relationship between the Veteran's OSA and his service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannabis use disorder.  However, the Board finds that the June 2023 VA medical opinion is not compliant with Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  In Spicer, the Federal Circuit held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" causation in direct and secondary service connection claims.  Therefore, it held 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) was unlawful because it required proximate causation to establish aggravation of a disability, rather than but-for causation.  The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  Stated another way, but-for causation is broad, undisputedly broader than proximate cause.  Thus, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause to establish secondary service connection.  In rendering an opinion regarding secondary service connection, the June 2023 VA clinician in this case used the "proximate cause" standard, which has been deemed unlawful by Spicer.  The June 2023 VA examiner also did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by his service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannabis use disorder.  The Board finds that this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  As such, a VA medical opinion is warranted regarding whether the Veteran's OSA is secondary to his service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate VA clinician to provide a medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's alcohol use disorder.  The entire claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the clinician in conjunction with this request.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted in order to provide the requested opinion, one should be provided.  The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following: 

a.) whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder, he would not have alcohol use disorder.

b.) whether the Veteran's alcohol use disorder would have been less severe and have resulted in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder.

If the clinician opines that the Veteran's alcohol use disorder would result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

The clinician should provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If he or she cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

2. Forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate VA clinician to provide a medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA.  The entire claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the clinician in conjunction with this request.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted in order to provide the requested opinion, one should be provided.  The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following: 

a.) whether it is at least as likely as not (the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or is nearly equal) that the Veteran's OSA had its onset in, was caused by, or are otherwise related to his service.

b.) whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder, he would not have OSA.

c.) whether the Veteran's OSA would have been less severe and have resulted in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder.

If the clinician opines that the Veteran's OSA would result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and major depressive disorder with anxious distress and cannibis use disorder, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

The clinician should provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If he or she cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Samuelson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.