Citation Nr: A25033041
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240520-441124
        DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a generalized anxiety disorder, with unspecified depressive disorder, and panic disorder, claimed as neurobehavioral effects to include depression and anxiety/panic attacks, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 1986 to November 1987.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In May 2024, the Veteran disagreed with the decision by submitting a VA Form 10182 and electing direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's representative, in a November 2024 brief presentation, asserted that the potential physical effects of long-term exposure to contaminated water led to his current psychiatric disorders.  Moreover, he indicated that the most recent VA examination does not account for the Veteran's current symptoms. As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  However, the Board cannot consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the notice of disagreement, known under the AMA system as the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. The appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered.  Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Upon review of the claims file, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred that requires remand of the claim.

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1168, a disability examination and medical opinion may be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving TERA. However, the sub-regulatory guidance defines four exceptions to the requirement to obtain a TERA examination and medical opinion: physical trauma, mental disorders, disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide agent exposure, and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure (to include due to post-service events). VBA Letter 20-22-10, 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022). As the claim for generalized anxiety disorder with unspecified depressive disorder and panic disorder is under the exception of physical trauma, a TERA examination is not required.  Nevertheless, once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or opinion when developing a service connection claim, it must provide one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Veteran does not appear to have been afforded an in-person VA examination. In a May 2023 TERA opinion, the VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not the Veteran's psychiatric conditions were caused by toxic exposure risk activities.  In doing so, he noted the disorders were not presumptive conditions for Camp Lejeune water exposure. Additionally, he stated the Veteran did not have continuous treatment for depression or anxiety since his discharge from service.  However, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate as it is conclusory and is not supported by a well-reasoned rationale.  The examiner relied on the fact that the condition cannot be presumptively connected and lack of continuous treatment.  However, he did not render an opinion regarding whether the conditions could be caused by exposure to contaminated water, despite not being presumptively connected.  Moreover, the examiner relied on an absence of evidence in finding against the Veteran and did not address the etiology of the Veteran's conditions. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1335 (the absence of documented treatment, in of itself, is not a valid basis for discrediting lay statements of continuity). As such, a remand is warranted for a supplemental VA opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded an in-person examination to determine the nature and etiology of his conditions. The AOJ should obtain a supplemental VA TERA opinion from an appropriately qualified clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder, with unspecified depressive disorder, and panic disorder. 

After review of the claims file, the examiner should opine whether the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder, with unspecified depressive disorder, and panic disorder is related to his documented TERA, despite not being on the presumptive conditions list. In forming this opinion, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner should also provide an opinion addressing whether the Veteran's conditions are directly related to his asserted in-service symptoms and exposure.

A complete rationale for any opinion expressed must be provided.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.M. Walker

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.