Citation Nr: A25033565
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240618-448790
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for service-connected left knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right knee strain based on limitation of extension is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for service-connected right knee strain based on limitation of flexion is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2015 to August 2020. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA or Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for service-connected left knee strain is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right knee strain based on limitation of extension is remanded.

3. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for service-connected right knee strain based on limitation of flexion is remanded.

After a thorough consideration of the evidence considered at the time of the May 2024 rating decision, the Board finds a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024 that noted pain with range of motion on flexion and extension; however, the examiner did not provide measurements of where pain began. In addition, the examination report notes objective evidence of pain on active and passive range of motion testing, as well as with weight-bearing; however, the examiner did not express these findings in terms of degrees of range of motion. A remand is needed to obtain these measurements. See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). Finally, the Veteran reported having instability in the left knee and the previous March 2022 VA examination noted that a December 2018 physical therapy noted "Bilateral knee pain/strain/patellofemoral;" however, the February 2024 examiner stated that instability was based solely on the Veteran's statements. A remand is also necessary to confirm whether the Veteran has a diagnosed condition causing his left knee instability. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should arrange for an examination of the Veteran to assess the current severity of his service-connected left and right knee disabilities, including all necessary testing and imaging. The examiner must review the entire record (including this remand) in conjunction with the examination and note such review was conducted. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms associated with the Veteran's disability. The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) What are the Veteran's symptoms and manifestations associated with his left and right knee disabilities? Pathology, symptoms (frequency and severity), and any associated impairment of function should be described in detail, including the cause of the Veteran's reported instability of the left knee.

(b.) Range of motion measurements should be included for active and passive motion in both weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing circumstances. Regarding the Veteran's documented pain on range of motion testing, the point in the range of motion at which pain starts should be clearly noted. If it is not possible to provide the requested range of motion measurements, the examiner should clearly explain why this is so.

(c.) Describe whether pain has significantly limited functional ability during flares and/or use over time. The examiner must glean information regarding the flare ups' severity, frequency, duration, and functional loss manifestations, as well as use over time, from the Veteran, medical records, and other available sources. Efforts to obtain such information must be documented. If there is no pain and/or no limitation of function, such facts must be noted in the report. 

If any requested finding or opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Meawad, Julie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.