Citation Nr: A25033810
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 231218-418202
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Challenges to the propriety of the creation of an overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild during the period from October 19, 2019, to May 31, 2020, are granted.

REMANDED

Challenges to the propriety of the creation of the overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild from June 1, 2020, forward are remanded.

The claim for a waiver of the recoupment of overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild from June 1, 2020, forward is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

While the Veteran and B.L.E.'s separation agreement demonstrates that B.L.E., the custodian parent of N.G.W., entered a separation agreement and began living apart in May 2020, the record is silent as to whether the Veteran was contributing at least half of the financial support N.G.W. required after May 31, 2020.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The portion of the overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as the Veteran's minor stepchild during the period from October 19, 2019, to May 31, 2020, was improperly created. 38 C.F.R. § 3.4(b)(2).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation beneficiary having a combined rating of 50 percent or higher since April 2019, had active duty from July 1997 to July 2000 and from July 2001 to January 2002. The law provides for the rates of disability compensation and payment of additional compensation for dependents of veterans who are at least 30 percent disabled.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114 (c), 1115, 1134, 1135.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on his appeal from the November 2023 decision of the VA Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) that granted the Veteran's claim for a waiver of the recoupment of an overpayment debt arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward spousal adjustment based on B.L.E. as his dependent spouse but denied the Veteran's claim for a waiver of the recoupment of an overpayment debt arising from his receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W., B.L.E.'s biological child, as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild.

The record is not in dispute that the Veteran and B.L.E. obtained a conversion divorce, i.e., a divorce granted to spouses who have been separated for a period of one year or longer pursuant to a valid separation agreement. The separation agreement demonstrates that the Veteran, B.L.E., as well as their biological child and N.G.W. were residing together until the Veteran and B.L.E. separated in May 2020. 

Correspondingly, the record is not in dispute that, until the May 2020 separation, N.G.W. was the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild. Accordingly, the portion of the Veteran's overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild until May 31, 2020, was improperly created, since the separation took place in May 2020. 38 C.F.R. § 3.4(b)(2). 

In other words, while the Board acknowledges that the Veteran - being seemingly uncertain as to the reporting requirements - waited until his divorce decree was issued to report the fact that N.G.W. no longer qualified as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild, the Veteran's reporting delay cannot affect the fact of N.G.W.'s qualification as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild. It follows that - as to this portion of the overpayment at bar - the Veteran's waiver claim is moot since his challenges to the propriety of the creation of this portion of his overpayment debt are hereby granted by the Board.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The same, however, cannot be said as to the portion of the Veteran's overpayment arising from his receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as the Veteran's dependent minor stepchild from June 1, 2020, forward. Indeed, the separation agreement is silent as to the Veteran's financial support and the living arrangements of N.G.W. since the separation agreement focused only on the Veteran's financial support and the living arrangements of the biological child of the Veteran and B.L.E. Therefore, the Board cannot rule out that - if afforded an opportunity - the Veteran could demonstrate that he was providing at least half of the financial support for N.G.W. from June 1, 2020, until the date of the Veteran and B.L.E.'s divorce. Accordingly, a remand for further development of the record is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran a period of at least 60 days to submit evidentiary proof, to include the Veteran's and/or third parties' lay statements detailing the living arrangement of N.G.W. and whether the Veteran was providing at least half of the financial support that N.G.W. required during the period from June 1, 2020, to July 31, 2023, or any portion thereof.

2. Upon the Veteran's submission of the evidence described in Step 1 or the expiration of the period of time allotted per Step 1, adjudicate the Veteran's challenges to the propriety of the creation of the overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward adjustment based on N.G.W. as his dependent minor stepchild from June 1, 2020, to July 31, 2023.

3. Upon completion of the foregoing, if the Veteran's entire overpayment described in Step 2 is not deemed improperly created, forward the Veteran's clams file to COWC for a readjudication of the Veteran's waiver claim pursuant to the guidance provided in Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991) (it is an abuse of discretion to adjudicate a waiver claim where the litigant asserts or the record suggests that the debt was created in error or calculated in error since the waiver claim must be addressed only after the challenges to the propriety of the creation of the debt are adjudicated).

4. Upon completion of the foregoing, notify the Veteran of the outcome of the determinations made pursuant to Steps 2 and 3 and clarify to the Veteran that his claims would not be returned to the Board automatically, and the Veteran's timely and proper actions would be required in 

(Continued on the next page)

the event he desires further review by the Board.  

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kapellan, Anna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.