Citation Nr: A25033212
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230403-336411
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 2, 2022, for the award of service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected TBI is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On October 13, 2010, the Veteran informally claimed entitlement to service connection for a TBI which was denied in a final unappealed February 2011 rating decision. 

2. The Veteran subsequently sought to reopen the claim on September 2, 2022, and a December 2022 rating decision granted entitlement to a TBI finding that the Veteran had a pre-existing TBI that was aggravated by his active-duty service.

3. The Regional Office (RO) assigned a 10 percent disability rating effective September 2, 2022, the date the Veteran's supplemental application was received. 

4. Service department records received in June 2016 did not address a dispositive issue and did not therefore affect the outcome of the case. 

5. The evidence persuasively shows that the facets of the Veteran's TBI have not manifested by worse than level one (1) of impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to September 2, 2022, for the award of service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) have not been met. ?38?U.S.C. §§?5110, 38?C.F.R. §?3.400.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected TBI is denied.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from December 1965 to October 1969.

This appeal comes from a December 2022 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision.  See VA Form 10182 AMA Notice of Disagreement (Direct Review Lane) received April 2023.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AMA decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Veteran timely appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).

In a September 2024 Memorandum Decision from Chief Judge Allen, the Court vacated the Board's denial and remanded it to the Board for development consistent with that decision.

The Board has reviewed, in detail, the arguments of the Veteran's representative.  In this regard, the Board apologies to the Veteran for the delays in the full adjudication of this case. 

1. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 2, 2022, for the award of service connection for a TBI.

The Veteran maintains that he is entitled to an effective date prior to September 2, 2022, for the grant of entitlement to service connection for a TBI.  

More specifically, the Veteran argues that an effective date of October 13, 2010, is appropriate because service personnel records, added to the claims file following denial of the claim in February 2011, documented the Veteran's behavioral problems during service thus showing that the Veteran had TBI related problems. 

By way of history the Veteran filed an informal claim for entitlement to service connection for a TBI that was received on October 13, 2010.  

On VA TBI examination in December 2010, the VA examiner opined that that the Veteran had a history of an in-service mild TBI with no residuals from the same, to include normal physical and neuropsychological testing.

Context in this case is important:  At the time of the December 2010 examination, the examiner essentially found no evidence of this problem at that time.  The Board finds that such a medical record provides highly probative evidence against this claim that the Board cannot ignore.

Again, the Veteran is requesting that service connection for this problem begin on October 13, 2010.  Two months later, in December 2020, a qualified examiner provided a detailed medical opinion which failed to find the disability at issue.  The examination report (beyond any service medical records that may have been submitted after this date) fundamentally undermines the granting of service connection for a problem that, simply stated, based on the best evidence, at that time, did not exist.   

The Board is being asked to grant service connection on a date that the Board finds the disability at issue did not exist. 

A February 2011 rating decision denied service connection for TBI finding that although the Veteran had a diagnosis of a mild traumatic head injury there were no subsequent permanent residuals or chronic disability. 

The Veteran did not appeal that rating decision and it became final. 

In June 2016, the Veteran's service personnel records were added to the record.  

These records noted the Veteran's behavioral problems during service.  

On September 2, 2022, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim noting asserting that service records were added to the claims file in June 2016 which were not available to the AOJ or medical examiner at the time of the prior February 2011 denial. 

In October 2022 the Veteran underwent a TBI examination.  Following a review of the claims file and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner found that the Veteran's TBI, which pre-existed service, was aggravated beyond its natural progression by head injuries in service, including in a motor vehicle accident (MVA) in April 1966.  The examiner cited to the service treatment records, which documented head trauma in a pre-service MVA, in support of the opinion.  

Very importantly, the examiner did not reference the service personnel records received in June 2016.  

Following the VA examination in October 2022, a December 2022 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for a TBI finding that the Veteran had a TBI prior to service which was aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event or illness.  

In reaching this conclusion, the AOJ referenced the October 2022 VA examination report and the service treatment records.  

Very importantly, the December 2022 rating decision made no reference the service personnel records added to the claims file in June 2016.  

When there is a prior final decision in the claims file and a later reopened claim results in a grant of the benefit, the general rule for effective dates for reopened claims applies.  In such cases the effective date cannot be earlier than the subsequent claim to reopen.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5110(a), (i), 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(q), (r); Sears v. Principi, 349 F.3d 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  The award can be made effective no earlier than the date of the new application.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5110(a), (i), 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(c), 3.400(q), (r).

However, an exception to this rule occurs when the new and material evidence includes service department records.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c); Vigil v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 63 (2008).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c), if at any time after VA issues a decision on a claim, VA receives or associates with the claims file relevant official service department records that existed and had not been associated with the claims file when VA first decided the claim, VA will reconsider the claim.  Here, service personnel records were associated with the claims file after the February 2011 rating decision was issued.

In Kisor v. Wilkie, 969 F.3d 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2020) the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit explained that for records to be relevant in the context of 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c), the record must address a dispositive issue and therefore affect the outcome of the case.  

In other words, the record must speak to a matter in dispute. Id. at 1338-39.

The February 2011 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for a TBI relying on a December 2010 TBI examination that had found that the Veteran had a history of an in-service mild TBI with no residuals from the same, to include normal physical and neuropsychological testing.  

The Board finds the service personnel records added to the claims file in June 2016 did not address a dispositive issue and therefore affect the outcome of the case.  The December 2022 rating decision relied on an October 2022 examination which referenced the Veteran's service treatment records, already of record in 2011, but did not reference or rely on the Veteran's personnel records.  The Board finds that this fact provides highly probative evidence against the Veteran's contention.

In this regard, Judge Allen found that the "Board failed to adequately explain what it found dispositive issue remaining to be, and if it was the issue of 'residuals,' why the SPRs did not speak to that question."  The Board must note that is having some concerns fully addressing this issue.  Simply stated, service personnel records received in June 2016 did not affect the outcome of the case.  The problem the Veteran faced in February 2011 was that there was no evidence of a TBI of any medical probative value, and, in fact, significant evidence that he did not have a TBI at that time, not that he had a motor vehicle accident both before and during service (as noted in service medical records and service personal records) or that he had issues during service.  The prior injury was clear, the existence of the disability was not.  Therefore, it is profoundly unclear as to how service records could provide a basis to grant this claim on October 13, 2010, even if all service personnel records where within the VA file at that time.

To address questions raised by Judge Allen:  Did the Board make a finding as to the relevance of the 2016 service personnel records?  Yes, it does:  The service personnel records are not relevant.  The rating action that granted service connection did not reference the service personnel records (in this regard, the Board apologies regarding any typographical error in the prior Board decision - the Board is attempting to address many decisions in an expedited manner, including the reviews of cases it has repeatedly addressed).  In any event, in reviewing this issue on a de novo basis, the Board finds that the service personnel records are not relevant.  In fact, they are in no way, shape or form germane to the issue of whether the Veteran has a TBI at all related to service.  In this regard, indications within these records that the Veteran, for example only, was "[i]nsubordinate" in 1967 to a noncommissioned officer is found not relevant to a finding that the Veteran had an injury in service, or had an accident in service, or had TBI, or had a TBI at this time one-half-century later and is found to be entirely irrelevant information.  The limit of the probative value of the service personnel records in this case, on this limited issue, is difficult to overemphasize.  To suggest otherwise (that somehow his problems with insubordination were a symptom of a TBI) is found to be extraordinarily speculative and has no probative value.  

The Board has concerns with this review.  The addressing of effective date issues is important.  However, the Board has seen this situation before, particularly with this representative.  When a Veteran files a claim in the past the VA always, when possible, obtains the service medical records from the military to address the Veteran's claim.  It did not, in the past, and even today, always seek out the service personnel records unless it believes, at that time, that they have some pertinence to the issue before the VA (example: a claim for PTSD based on combat).  The Veteran files another claim (sometimes decades later) attempting to reopen the previously denied claim and, based on new and relevant evidence (in this case, proof that the Veteran has a TBI and that it was aggravated by service) the claim is granted.  The Veteran's representative submits service personnel records that were not in the record and argues that this record allows the VA to ignore finality under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c), seeking an earlier effective date for service connection.

The Board respectfully raises the above issue because the Veteran's representative, in written argument to the Court dated April 15th, 2024, page nine, states the purpose of 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c) is to "put the veteran in the position he would have been had VA done its job appropriately in the first place."  The Board takes exception to this argument.  The actions of the RO in 2010 and 2022 were very appropriate.  To suggest otherwise disregards the facts of this case.  Any effort to argue for what is essentially an end-run around finality to obtain retroactive benefits should never be used to suggest, somehow, the people at the RO made some type of mistake in 2010 or, more importantly, did not do their job.  A review of the facts of this case supports the conclusion that claim adjudicators at the RO did their jobs well.  It is a legal fiction, based on a retroactive review of actions 15 years ago, to argue otherwise. 

In this case, the Board has reviewed the service medical records and the service personnel records later obtained.  The service personnel records tell us nothing of importance, or relevance, that was not known by the service medical records.  The service personnel do not diagnose the Veteran with TBI, or suggest that the Veteran has a TBI, which was the key issue when the RO denied this claim in 2010.  The Board considers this a clear and unambiguous issue regarding the granting to this claim effective October 13, 2010:  The Veteran did not have this disability on that date.  The other examination that does find the Veteran to have a TBI does not provide a rational basis to find error in the prior examination years earlier.  In fact, in weighing the probative value of the two examinations, the Board must find that the first examination to be of higher probative value than the second.  While it is possible that the Veteran did develop a TBI after the first examination, this does not provide a basis to find that the Veteran had a TBI in 2010. 

At best, and ignoring the finality of the first rating action, the second key examination in the case provided a basis to find that the Veteran had a TBI on the date of this examination. 

Judge Allen has indicated that the prior Board decision provided inadequate reasons and bases to support its prior decision.  To be clear (and to avoid any need to "guess" ) in this case there are two, entirely separate reasons to deny this claim: (1) The Board cannot grant service connection for a problem on a date in which the best evidence clearly reveals that the problem did not exist: October 13, 2010; and (2) The Board's factual finding that service personnel records added to the claims file after the VA denied service connection for TBI residuals were not relevant to the later grant of benefits in December 2022.

Either provide an independent basis to deny this claim. 

Although the Veteran believes that an earlier effective date is warranted for the grant of service connection for TBI, the Board is bound by the laws and regulations that apply to Veterans' claim.  38 U.S.C. § 7104(c)(1); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.400, 19.52, 19.55.  Those laws and regulations, as applied to the present case, indicate that an effective date prior to September 2, 2022, is not warranted for the grant of service connection for a TBI.

As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the Board finds that the criteria for an earlier effective date than September 2, 2022, for the award of entitlement to service connection for a TBI, have not been met.? See 38?U.S.C. §?5107 (b); Lynch?v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).? 

Increased Rating

Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity.? 38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §?4.1.? Separate?diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.? 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind.  Schafrath v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?589?(1991).  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.7.  The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal.  Fenderson v. West,?12?Vet. App.?119?(1999); Hart v. Mansfield,?21?Vet. App.?505 (2009). 

The assignment of a particular diagnostic code to evaluate a disability is "completely dependent on the facts of a particular case."  See Butts v. Brown,?5?Vet. App.?532, 538?(1993).  One diagnostic code may be more appropriate than another based on such factors as an individual's relevant medical history, the diagnosis, and demonstrated symptomatology. 

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for TBI.

The Veteran's?TBI?is?rated?under as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code?8045.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a.? 

The Board notes that a March 2023 rating decision granted service connection posttraumatic migraine headaches as secondary to TBI and assigned a separate noncompensable evaluation effective September 2, 2022.  The Board understands that the headaches were caused, directly or indirectly, by the TBI.  The Board also understand that there is sometimes overlap between the problems.  However, this rating is not currently on appeal before the Board and will therefore not be considered in this decision.  In any event, if the Board were to address this issue, there would be no basis to grant the Veteran an increase for this problem. 

To the extent the Veteran claims an acquired psychiatric disorder as due to TBI, the claim was remanded in May 2023 for additional development and is currently pending at the AOJ.  This claim is currently not before the Board and will therefore not be considered in this decision. 

Diagnostic Code?8045?states that there are three main areas of dysfunction that may result from a?TBI?and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after a?TBI), emotional/behavioral, and physical.? Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation.?Id.?? 

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.? Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive.? Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others.? In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day.? VA is to evaluate cognitive impairment under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified."?Id.?? 

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of a?TBI?or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.? Subjective symptoms that are residuals of a?TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, should be evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified."? However, VA is to?separately?evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine?headache?or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" table. Id.?? 

VA is to evaluate emotional/behavioral dysfunction under?38?C.F.R. §?4.130 (Schedule of?ratings-mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.? When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, VA is to evaluate emotional/behavioral symptoms under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified." Id.?? 

VA is to evaluate physical (including neurological) dysfunction based on the following list, under an appropriate Diagnostic Code: Motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions. Id.?? 

The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of a?TBI.? For residuals not listed in Diagnostic Code?8045?that are reported on an examination, VA is to evaluate those residuals under the most appropriate Diagnostic Code.? Each condition is to be evaluated?separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation and combine under?38?C.F.R. §?4.25?the evaluations for each separately rated condition.? The evaluation assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations. Id.?? 

Diagnostic Code?8045?instructs that VA should consider the need for special monthly compensation for such problems as loss of use of an extremity, certain sensory impairments, erectile dysfunction, the need for aid and attendance (including for protection from hazards or dangers incident to the daily environment due to cognitive impairment), being housebound, etc.?Id.?? 

The table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" contains?10?important facets of a traumatic brain injury related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms.? It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total." However, not every facet has every level of severity.? The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.? A 100?percent evaluation is assigned if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets.? If no facet is evaluated as "total," the overall percentage evaluation is assigned based on the level of the highest facet as follows: 0 = 0?percent; 1 =?10?percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70?percent.? For example, a 70?percent?evaluation is assigned if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet. Id.? 

The first facet is memory, attention, concentration, and executive functions and is evaluated as follows: 0 for no complaints of impairment; 1 for a complaint of mild loss of memory (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing; 2 for objective evidence on testing of mild impairment resulting in mild functional impairment; 3 for objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment resulting in moderate functional impairment; and total for objective evidence on testing of severe impairment resulting in severe functional impairment. Id.? 

The second facet is judgment and is evaluated as follows: 0 for normal judgment; 1 for mildly impaired judgment (for complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision); 2 for moderately impaired judgment (for complex or unfamiliar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, but having little difficulty with simple decisions); 3 for moderately severely impaired judgment (for even routine and familiar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision); and total for severely impaired judgment (for even routine and familiar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, such as being unable to determine appropriate clothing for current weather conditions or judge when to avoid dangerous situations or activities). Id.? 

The third facet is social interaction and is evaluated as follows: 0 for routinely appropriate social interaction; 1 for occasionally inappropriate social interaction; 2 for frequently inappropriate social interaction; and 3 for social interaction that is inappropriate most or all of the time.?Id.? 

The fourth facet is orientation and is evaluated as follows: 0 if always oriented to person, time, place, and situation; 1 if occasionally disoriented to one of those four aspects; 2 if occasionally disoriented to two of those four aspects or often disoriented to one of them; 3 if often disoriented to two or more of them; and total if consistently disoriented to two or more of them. Id.? 

The fifth facet is motor activity (with intact motor and sensory system) and is evaluated as follows: 0 for normal motor activity; 1 for motor activity that is normal most of the time, but mildly slowed at times due to apraxia (inability to perform previously learned motor activities despite normal motor function); 2 for motor activity that is mildly decreased or with moderate slowing due to apraxia; 3 for motor activity that is moderately decreased due to apraxia; and total for motor activity that is severely decreased due to apraxia.?Id.? 

The sixth facet is visual spatial orientation and is evaluated as follows: 0 for normal visual spatial orientation; 1 if mildly impaired (occasionally gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps or following directions, but is able to use assistive devices such as GPS); 2 if moderately impaired (usually gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps, following directions, and judging distance, and has difficulty using assistive devices such as GPS); 3 if moderately severely impaired (gets lost even in familiar surroundings and is unable to use assistive devices such as GPS); and total if severely impaired (may be unable to touch or name own body parts when asked by the examiner, identify the relative position in space of two different objects, or find the way from one room to another in a familiar environment). Id.? 

The seventh facet is subjective symptoms and is evaluated as follows: 0 for subjective symptoms that do not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships (such as mild or occasionally?headaches?or mild anxiety); 1 for three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships (such as intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate?headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, and hypersensitivity to light); and 2 for three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships (such as marked fatigability, blurred or double vision, or?headaches?requiring rest periods during most days). Id.? 

The eighth facet is neurobehavioral effects and is evaluated as follows: 0 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that do not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction (such as irritability, impulsivity, unpredictability, lack of motivation, verbal aggression, physical aggression, belligerence, apathy, lack of empathy, moodiness, lack of cooperation, inflexibility, and impaired awareness of disability); 1 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction but do not preclude them; 2 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both, but do not preclude them; and 3 for one or more neurobehavioral effects that interfere with or preclude workplace interaction, social interaction, or both on most days or that occasionally require supervision for safety of self or others. Id.? 

The ninth facet is communication and is evaluated as follows: 0 for ability to communicate by spoken and written language and to comprehend spoken and written language; 1 for occasional impairment of comprehension or expression of spoken or written language, but with the ability to communicate complex ideas; 2 for inability to communicate by or comprehend spoken and/or written language more than occasionally but less than half of the time, but generally with the ability to communicate complex ideas; 3 for inability to communicate by or comprehend spoken and/or written language at least half of the time but not all of the time, but with the ability to communicate basic needs and maybe with reliance on gestures or other alternative modes of communication; and total for complete inability to communicate by or comprehend spoken and/or written language, with the inability to communicate basic needs. Id.? 

The tenth facet is consciousness and warrants a total?rating?if there is a persistently altered state of consciousness, such as a vegetative state, minimally responsive state, or coma.? As stated above, there is no lesser?rating?for impairment of consciousness. Id.? 

As both the Veteran and the Court can understand, the evaluation of this problem is complex. 

Diagnostic Code?8045?contains the following notes:? 

Note (1): There may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be?separately evaluated under another diagnostic code.? In such cases, do not assign more than one evaluation based on the same manifestations.? If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly?separated, assign a single evaluation under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.? However, if the manifestations are clearly?separable, assign a?separate?evaluation for each condition. Id.? 

Note (2): Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present in order to assign a particular evaluation. Id.? 

Note (3): "Instrumental activities of daily living" refers to activities other than self-care that are needed for independent living, such as meal preparation, doing housework and other chores, shopping, traveling, doing laundry, being responsible for one's own medications, and using a telephone.? These activities are distinguished from "Activities of daily living," which refers to basic self-care and includes bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out of bed or a chair, and using the toilet. Id.? 

Note (4): The terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" traumatic brain injury, which may appear in medical records, refer to a classification of a traumatic brain injury made at, or close to, the time of injury rather than to the current level of functioning.? This classification does not affect the?rating?assigned under diagnostic code?8045. Id.? 

Note (5): A veteran whose residuals of a traumatic brain injury are?rated?under a version of?38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code?8045, in effect before October 23, 2008, may request review under Diagnostic Code?8045, irrespective of whether his disability has worsened since the last review.? VA will review that veteran's disability?rating?to determine whether the Veteran may be entitled to a higher disability?rating?under Diagnostic Code?8045.? A request for review pursuant to this note will be treated as a claim for an increased?rating?for purposes of determining the effective date of an increased?rating?awarded as a result of such review; however, in no case will the award be effective before October 23, 2008.? For the purposes of determining the effective date of an increased?rating?awarded as a result of such review, VA will apply?38?C.F.R. §?3.114, if applicable.? Id.? As the Veteran's service connection for?TBI?residuals is from 2016, Note (5) does not apply to the Veteran's case.? 

Initially, the Board notes that treatment?records?throughout?the?appeal?period are consistent?with VA examination findings, and nothing in these records show his adverse symptomatology to be worse than what was reported by the above VA examiner.

The Veteran underwent a VA TBI examination in October 2022.  The examiner noted the Veteran's history of head trauma prior to his period of active duty service and opined that the Veteran had a pre-existing TBI was aggravated by in-service head injuries and concussions in 1966. 

On examination the Veteran had no complaints with respect to memory, attention, concentration and executive function, which equates to level 0 impairment under Diagnostic Code 8045.  Regarding judgment, the Veteran was noted have normal judgment with equated to level 0 impairment under Diagnostic Code 8045.  As to social interaction, the examiner found that social interaction was occasionally inappropriate, corresponding to a level 1impairment.  Orientation, motor activity, communication and consciousness were deemed normal, corresponding toa level 0 impairment.  Visual spatial orientation was found to be mildly impaired, corresponding to a level 1 impairment.  

The Veteran was found to have subjective symptoms that did not interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living or work, family or other close relationships, corresponding to a level 1impairment.  The Veteran was also noted to have one or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but did not preclude them, corresponding to a level 1 impairment, providing highly probative evidence against this claim. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements as to the severity of his TBI symptoms.  Although the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his observable symptoms of TBI, he and his representative do not have the medical knowledge or training to provide an opinion as to the level of cognitive impairment resulting from these symptoms.  They have not been shown to possess the requisite training or credentials needed to render a competent opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's TBI.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  As such, the lay statements and arguments that the Veteran's TBI symptoms resulted in a higher level of impairment do not constitute competent medical evidence and lack probative value.

Overall, in fact, in an unfamiliar situation, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements undermine the Veteran's representative's request for an increase.  For example, in the VA examination of June 2023, the Veteran stated that his TBI problems include: "dizzy spells in a blue moon" and "headaches, but I don't have them very often".  The Board takes judicial notice that "blue moons" do not occur often (if at all), and the Board thanks the Veteran for his candor in evaluating his own disability.  The Veteran also denied these things interfere with his functioning.  The Board cannot ignore the Veteran's statements.  While the Veteran has filed other statements, the Board finds this statement, beyond any other statement the Veteran has submitted, to be of high probative value and undermines the granting of a higher evaluation.

Context in this case that has been to the Veteran's Court must be considered.  Overall, there is little evidence of the existence of this problem, let alone the basis for a higher evaluation for this disability. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for a service-connected TBI is warranted.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5107 (b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Lynch, supra.?

Again, it is important for the Veteran to understand that a detail review of the evidence of record, including the Veteran's own statements, does not always fully support the current evaluation, or a finding that the Veteran has a TBI.  In this regard, it is imperative for the Veteran to understand that he was given all benefit of the doubt in the granting of service connection and the current rating.  

Notwithstanding, as the case has been presented to the Chief Judge of the Veteran's Court, and remanded, leading to a $9,807.54 fee paid to the Veteran's representative under the Equal Access to Justice Act, it is essential to note that the issue of an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for a problem the Veteran's himself has insinuated (based on the criteria cited above and his "blue moon" reference, among other statements from the Veteran himself) he does not actually have undermines any coherent discussion of an earlier effective date (to a point in time at which the best medical evidence strongly indicates he did not have this problem) or an increased evaluation.  While the Board may, at some points, be inarticulate in its decision-making as it tries to address complex and evolving issues of Veterans Law in large numbers, the facts of this case provide highly probative evidence against this claim. 

Finally, the Board acknowledges that a?claim?for entitlement to a to a total disability rating based?on?individual unemployability (TDIU) is?part?and?parcel?of an increased rating?claim, when such a?claim?is?raised?by the record.  See?Rice?v. Shinseki,?22?Vet. App.?447, 454?(2009).  The evidence of record, to include the VA examination reports, does?not?show that his service connected?TBI renders him unemployable.  In the event that a claim of a TDIU was implicitly raised, review of the medical evidence does not reflect that the Veteran met the required percentage criteria.  Therefore, a?claim?for?TDIU?has?not?been?raised?by the record?in connection with?the current appeal, and no action pursuant to?Rice?is warranted.

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Azizi, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.