Citation Nr: A25033205
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-469042
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation of high frequency hearing loss, left ear, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain (claimed as a low back condition) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran failed to report to an examination scheduled in connection with his claim for an increased rating for a left ear hearing loss disability without good cause.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Entitlement to a higher rating for a left ear hearing disability is denied as a matter of law. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1969 to February 1971, and from October 1973 to June 1993.

In the August 7, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on November 6, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the issue of entitlement to a compensable evaluation for left ear hearing loss, and evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or representative, at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation of high frequency hearing loss, left ear

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a compensable rating for his left ear hearing disability.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (b), when a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied. The claims file indicates that a VA examination was scheduled for September 27, 2023. The Veteran failed to appear.

On October 3, 2023, the Veteran was contacted to reschedule the appointment. However, he refused to confirm his identify over the phone and requested to be notified by mail. 

Subsequently, a letter was sent to the Veteran dated October 4, 2023, requesting that he call to reschedule his appointment. On October 10, 2023, the Veteran called and requested to reschedule his examination. A second VA examination was scheduled for November 16, 2023, to determine the current level of disability; however, evidence expected from the examination, which might have been material to the outcome of this claim, could not be considered as records indicated the examination was cancelled at the Veteran's request.

In his November 2024 Board Hearing, the Veteran testified that he did not receive notice of prior hearings.

Finally, the Veteran was scheduled for a third VA Hearing examination on December 12, 2024, to determine the current level of disability; however, evidence expected from the examination, which might have been material to the outcome of this claim, could not be considered as records indicated the examination was cancelled at the Veteran's request.

Based on a review of the record, the contractor contacted the Veteran multiple times to confirm the scheduling of several Hearing Loss examinations throughout the record. The Veteran failed to report to any of these examinations and did not provide an explanation as to why he did not attend. While the Veteran indicated at his hearing that he failed to attend his second scheduled VA Hearing Loss examination because he was not notified about it, it does not address the Veteran cancelling the third scheduled VA Hearing Loss examination that was subsequently scheduled.

As the Board finds the Veteran failed to appear at the examination without good cause in connection with his claim for an increased rating, the matter must be denied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (b); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 367, 369 (1991).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for Lumbosacral Strain (claimed as a low back condition) is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his current back disability is due to an inservice injury, and his service-connected knee and ankle conditions.  Service treatment records document a November 1992 complaint of back pain.  Most recently, a December 2024 VA examination found that the Veteran's current low back disability, diagnosed as intervertebral disc syndrome, disc bulge, and degenerative changes of the lumbar spine, are less likely as not related to the inservice injury.  However, although the examiner noted the in-service incident, the examiner failed to offer a detailed rationale based on the evidence of record. Further, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's secondary service connection contentions. As such, the Board finds that this matter must be remanded to obtain an addendum opinion to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his lumbar condition(s). The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner, and note review of the record in the examination report. All indicated tests and studies should be conducted and clinical findings reported in detail. The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. Following complete review of the record, the examiner must respond to the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (approximately a 50 percent probability or greater) that the Veteran's lumbar condition(s) was caused or aggravated by his service-connected knee and ankle conditions?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (approximately a 50 percent probability or greater) that the Veteran's lumbar condition(s) was caused or aggravated by his service-connected knee and ankle conditions?

The examiners MUST address the Veteran's in-service complaint of back pain and Board hearing 

?

testimony. 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elliott, Robert A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.