Citation Nr: A25033660
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-459196
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a left shoulder disability, to include as secondary to a service-connected right shoulder sprain, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from October 1984 to July 1996.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In his VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, which is the July 2023 rating decision. 38?C.F.R. §?20.301. 

Remand is permitted only to correct a pre-decisional error or for any other error the correction of which raises a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

VA has a duty to assist claimants to obtain evidence needed to substantiate a claim. 38?U.S.C. §?5103A; 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c).  The duty to obtain relevant records requires making as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records from a federal department or agency, including, but not limited to, military records, VA medical records, records from facilities with which the VA has contracted, and records from Federal agencies such as the Social Security Administration (SSA).?38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(2).  VA's duty to assist claimants to obtain evidence needed to substantiate a claim also includes making reasonable efforts to obtain relevant private medical records. 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(1). 

Here, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran has applied for Social Security disability benefits (SSDI).  Specifically, VA medical records show that the veteran was applying for SSDI in June 2021, and in November 2021 he participated in at least one examination as part of that process; he submitted a copy of the report to VA soon after.  Records from the Social Security Administration have neither been associated with the claims file nor requested.  A remand to obtain such is required.  

In addition, VA treatment records show that the Veteran has received care from a private primary care provider, Dr. Williams, as well as private diagnostic imaging, some of which appear to have been scanned into VA's system. However, neither these records nor requests for such are in the claims file.  A remand to assist the Veteran in obtaining them is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take appropriate steps to obtain complete SSA record related to the Veteran's application for disability benefits. Efforts must be continued until it is certified that the records are unavailable, and such must be in writing.  

2. Contact the Veteran and request properly executed releases for any private care providers who have treated him for any claimed conditions; a release for Dr. Williams must be specifically requested.

Upon receipt of such, VA must take appropriate action to contact the identified providers and request complete treatment records.  The Veteran should be informed that in the alternative he may obtain and submit the records himself.

3. Take appropriate steps to associate complete VA treatment records, to include all scanned VISTA images, particularly treatment records and diagnostic imaging regarding the Veteran's left shoulder, with the claims file for the period prior to July 2023.  

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Viccellio, MB

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.