Citation Nr: A25033320
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230503-344254
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits, other than employment services, under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here at issue, the Veteran had service-connected disabilities with a combined rating of 100 percent. 

2. At the time of her application for VR&E benefits, the Veteran possessed an associate degree in recreation and leisure studies-therapeutic recreations; she had marketable and transferable skills.

3. During the period under consideration, the evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran had overcome any impairment to employability to which her service-connected disabilities had substantially contributed; she qualified for employment consistent with her abilities, aptitudes, and interests.

4. The evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period here at issue.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to VR&E benefits were not met during the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3100, 3101, 3102; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.1, 21.32, 21.33, 21.35, 21.40, 21.50, 21.51.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from August 1992 to September 1998.  Her decorations include the Army Achievement Medal and the Overseas Service Ribbon.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2023 decision issued by the VR&E Division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in May 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to VR&E benefits

The Veteran seeks to establish entitlement to VR&E services for the purpose of establishing a small business related to culinary arts or a daycare.  See April 2023 VA Form 28-1902w (Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI)).

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.1.  For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.40(b).  An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35(g). 

The determination as to whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC).  38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50(b), 21.51.  An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with her abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and her service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51.

The primary regulations pertaining to VR&E self-employment services are found at 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.257 and 21.258.  Pertinent to this case, 38 C.F.R. § 21.257(a) generally indicates that a program of vocational rehabilitation benefits and services may include self-employment for an individual if VA determines that such an objective is a suitable vocational goal.  VA will make this determination based on (1) the results of the individual's initial evaluation conducted in accordance with the provisions of § 21.50; and (2) the provisions of this section.  38 C.F.R. § 21.257(a).  38 C.F.R. § 21.257(c)-(e) defines the scope of self-employment services. 

Individuals who have generally qualified for VR&E services will normally develop a proposed self-employment business plan in collaboration with their VRC and others.  This plan includes a breakdown of the type of support services and supplies that VR&E will provide to a veteran's proposed business and the estimated cost of the services and supplies.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 21.258, self-employment plan proposals that include a request for funding of $25,000 or greater must be approved by the Director of VR&E Services.

In the present case, the Veteran's basic eligibility for VR&E benefits is not in dispute.  During the period here on appeal, she was service connected for multiple disabilities with a combined evaluation of 100 percent from September 1, 2021.  She therefore met the basic threshold requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation.  However, as noted, in order to meet the full requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation, she must also have been determined by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.40.

In her April 2023 RNI, the Veteran indicated that she wanted additional training for more management skills.  As noted, she was interested in starting a small business related to culinary arts or a daycare.  The Veteran reported that she had an associate degree in recreation and leisure studies-therapeutic recreations.  She reported that she had been employed full-time from July 2017 to March 2023 as a logistics coordinator for an Army Reserve warehouse, earning approximately $58,000 per year.  She reported that her duties included shipping and receiving equipment, sitting at a desk, typing, scanning, emailing, and getting equipment ready.  She stated she resigned the position due to her migraines.  In addition, she reported that she was a security specialist from September 2009 to July 2017.  She stated that her service-connected disabilities caused difficulty with co-worker relations and missed work time.

During a March 2023 VA vocational evaluation, a VRC considered the Veteran's education and work history, as well as her symptoms and impairment due to service-connected disabilities, which had a combined rating of 100 percent, and determined that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap.  As such, she was not entitled to receive VR&E services.

The VRC thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's history and noted the limitations that the Veteran would likely experience based on her service-connected disabilities.  The VRC indicated that the Veteran experienced anxiety provoked by intrusive thoughts; she had difficulty standing or walking for long periods of time; and she experienced chronic headaches throughout the week.  Other factors that the VRC identified were an unwillingness to seek employment and applying for Social Security disability benefits.

The VRC also determined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities contributed to the vocational impairment in a measurable, identifiable, observable manner.  The VRC noted that the physical disabilities led to functional limitations that precluded occupations with physical demands that were incompatible with disabilities such as standing for long periods of time.  The mental health issues could cause negative impacts at every stage of the rehabilitation process due to the nature of the disabilities and functional limitations.  

The VRC also concluded, however, that the Veteran had overcome the effects of her vocational impairment.  It was noted that the Veteran resigned from her position as a logistics coordinator because she was unable to cope with her migraines.  However, the Veteran reported that the migraines have since subsided and she took Excedrin as needed.  The VRC noted that the Veteran's most recent employment was sedentary, and she was responsible for shipping and receiving equipment for soldiers overseas.  The VRC observed that the Veteran openly communicated that she had not been seeking employment despite knowing that with her security clearance and experience, she could quickly find employment.  The VRC noted that with selective job placement, the Veteran would be able to work in a sedentary position and not be responsible for physically stocking items.  In so concluding, the VRC remarked that a job search on Indeed.com found viable positions related to logistics and communications available to the Veteran.  In the final analysis, the VRC found that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for an employment handicap because she had overcome the vocational impairments to employability.

As for a serious employment handicap, because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the VRC assessed that the Veteran did not have a serious employment handicap.  Instead of education and employment benefits, the VRC referred the Veteran to non-VA resources that she could pursue.

Following review of the evidence properly available for consideration, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits were not met during the period on appeal.  Specifically, the record shows that based on the Veteran's transferrable skills, education, work experience, and training, she had overcome any impairment of employment to which her service-connected disabilities substantially contributed, and she was employable with her then-current skills, experience, and education.  While the evidence reflects that her service-connected disabilities, rated as 100 percent disabling, caused some difficulties with aspects of her employment, including prolonged sitting and standing and migraines, the VRC nevertheless determined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would not cause an impairment in her ability to obtain, maintain, or retain suitable employment.  The VRC reached that conclusion in the specific context of addressing the Veteran's vocational goals.  See April 2023 VA Form 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report); April 2023 VR-58 (Decision Letter).

The Board has considered the Veteran's assertions.  See May 2023 VA Form 10182 (attachment).  Specifically, she expressed frustration with VA and her VRC for denying her further education to gain knowledge needed to start a business.  She further asserted that she was almost 50 years old and that "being over the hill is not fun or easy;" her disabilities are not improving with age; and she finds it overwhelming to continue working in a warehouse setting at her age.  

The Board understands the Veteran's frustration and is cognizant of the fact that she disagrees with the VRC's findings.  However, the Board finds that her lay assertions are entitled to less weight than the findings rendered by the VRC, who has specialized training in this area.  The VRC in this case had sufficient facts and data before her to support a determination that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap and provided a sound rationale for that determination.  See Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 297 (1997) (an opinion rendered by one with specialized training may be considered more probative than a non-specialist's finding).  As noted previously, VRCs are specifically delegated the authority, by regulation, to determine whether a veteran has an employment handicap.  On review, the Board finds that the April 2023 assessment by the VRC is entitled to significant probative weight.  The Veteran, on the other hand, has not presented persuasive evidence to show that he had an employment handicap during the period on appeal and was entitled to VR&E services.

Considering all of the available evidence, the Board finds that the legal requirements for entitlement to Chapter 31 VR&E benefits have not been met because the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period here at issue and was therefore not in need of rehabilitation.  Because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the Veteran also did not have a serious employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.52(a).

The Board commends the Veteran for wanting to pursue further training to open her own business.  Although she has every right to seek career training at the level of her choosing, allowing a veteran to pursue whatever level of career training she chooses when she is capable of obtaining suitable employment frustrates the purpose of VR&E benefits.  In that regard, the Board emphasizes that the purpose of Chapter 31 VR&E services is not to provide the claimant with whatever level of career training she chooses should her interests or career objectives change.  Rather, the purpose of such services is to provide a level of training that facilitates suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.70.

The Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, but finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  That is to say, the evidence on the issue is not in approximate balance.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The appeal must be denied.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.