Citation Nr: A25033762
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250225-517971
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability, to include as secondary to service-connected degenerative disc disease (DDD) of the lumbar spine, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1962 to January 1966.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2022 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which was later reviewed and continued in a March 2024 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.

The Veteran appealed the decision in a February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 AOJ decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, as this claim is being remanded herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability, to include as secondary to service-connected degenerative disc disease (DDD) of the lumbar spine, is remanded.

The Board finds that at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, the record reasonably raised the theory of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability as secondary to his service-connected DDD of the lumbar spine. No development was ever completed with respect to this theory, constituting a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

In particular, it is not in dispute that the Veteran has been diagnosed with several cervical spine disabilities over the course of his appeal, to include cervical strain, upper extremity radiculopathy, and intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS). See June 2021 VA Cervical Spine Examination. It is also clear, that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) contain various documented reports of in-service injuries to his back resulting in recurring back pain. They also contain reports of "whole back pain" as well as numbness and pain radiating into his shoulders. See April 1963, July 1963, and May 1965 STRs. In the November 2022 AOJ decision, the RO granted entitlement to service connection for DDD of the lumbar spine. The Veteran, through his attorney, reported that the injuries sustained to his back in service are also "inextricably intertwined" to his claimed neck disabilities. See July 2022 HLR Informal Conference. 

Given the above, the Veteran's theory of service connection that his diagnosed cervical spine disabilities are secondary to his service-connected lumbar spine disability, has been reasonably raised by the record prior to the November 2022 rating decision. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552-56 (2008).  The AOJ should have obtained a VA opinion addressing the theory, a pre-decisional duty to assist error necessitating a remand prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim. Accordingly, remand is necessary to obtain a VA opinion addressing this reasonably raised secondary theory of entitlement.

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time to obtain a VA addendum medical opinion, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine disabilities. The entire claims file, as well as this remand, should be made available to the clinician. Another examination should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the clinician.

The clinician is asked to completely review the claims file, and to opine as to the following:

(a.)  Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's cervical spine disabilities are 1) caused by service-connected degenerative disc disease (DDD) of the lumbar spine; or 2) was aggravated by his service-connected DDD of the lumbar spine.

NOTE: It is "but for" causation or aggravation that is required, not proximate cause.

Specifically, would the Veteran have developed a cervical spine disability, or would his cervical spine disabilities have been less severe but for the service-connected DDD of the lumbar spine, either because there is an etiological link or because the service-connected DDD of the lumbar spine resulted in the inability to treat his cervical spine disability?

(b). If the clinician determines that the claimed condition was aggravated by a service-connected disability, the clinician must provide the baseline level of severity of his cervical spine disability established by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of his cervical spine disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2. After the above development, and any other development deemed necessary, readjudicate the claim.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Minnitte, Samuel F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.