Citation Nr: A25033726
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-463233
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a heart disability is denied.

Service connection for erectile dysfunction, claimed as a penile condition, is granted.

An initial compensable evaluation for migraine headaches is denied.

An initial evaluation of 30 percent, but not in excess thereof, for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran does not have a current heart disability.

2.  The Veteran's erectile dysfunction arose in service.

3.  The Veteran's migraine headaches are not productive of characteristic prostrating attacks.

4.  The Veteran's sleep apnea is productive of persistent daytime hypersomnolence but does not require the use of a breathing assistance device such as a CPAP, is not productive of chronic respiratory failure?with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, and did not require a tracheostomy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for a heart disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024).

2.  The criteria for service connection for erectile dysfunction, claimed as a penile condition, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024).

3.  The criteria for an initial compensable evaluation for migraine headaches are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100 (2024).

4.  The criteria for an initial evaluation of 30 percent, but not in excess thereof, for obstructive sleep apnea are met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2015 to November 2023, including service in the United Arab Emirates.

This appeal is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In his August 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection requires:  (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the claimant prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability

The Veteran claims service connection for a heart disability.

Service treatment records reflect that in March 2019 the Veteran reported chest pain on breathing for two weeks.  He was diagnosed with likely pleurisy from a viral illness one month prior.  He had palpitations of unclear etiology.  An electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus bradycardia; his physician noted that the EKG was unremarkable.  In September 2023 he reported intermittent chest pain for the past two to three years, mostly with activity, rarely with some associated shortness of breath.  Physical examination was within normal limits.  An EKG showed sinus bradycardia and early repolarization but was otherwise normal.  His treating nurse practitioner doubted significant cardiac etiology.   

In his November 2023 pre-discharge claim, the Veteran reported that he was told by his doctor in service that he had an abnormality in his heart after an EKG.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2024.  He had not been diagnosed with, treated for, or prescribed medication for a heart condition.  An EKG, echocardiogram, and chest x-ray were normal.  The examiner found no diagnosable heart disability.  

In his August 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran argued that he "never felt this before service."

The Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a current heart disability.  The February 2024 VA examiner found no evidence of a heart disability, and all diagnostic tests were normal.  These findings were consistent with his service treatment records.  While those records indicated abnormalities in his EKGs, his treatment providers did not find these abnormalities to support a diagnosis, with one physician calling the EKG "unremarkable."  The Veteran is not competent to diagnosis a heart disability, and as such the findings of his treatment providers and the VA examiner constitute the most probative evidence.  Where the evidence does not support a finding of current disability upon which to predicate a grant of service connection, there can be no valid claim for that benefit.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).  As such, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a current disability and service connection must therefore be denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, claimed as a penile condition

The Veteran claims service connection for erectile dysfunction.

Service treatment records do not reflect any symptoms of or treatment for erectile dysfunction.

In his November 2023 pre-discharge claim, the Veteran reported a penile condition that he attributed to day to day stress and anxiety.  

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2024.  He reported an inability to maintain an erection beginning in 2021.  He did not use medication.  Physical examination was normal.  The examiner found no findings, signs, or symptoms to report a diagnosis of a penile condition.

In his August 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran argued that he had no issues with erectile dysfunction prior to his service-connected mental health disability.

The Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran has erectile dysfunction that arose in service.  It is unclear why the VA examiner noted the Veteran's reports of erectile dysfunction but did not diagnose it.  It is possible that the examiner did not consider the disability to be a "penile condition" as claimed.  In any event, the Veteran is competent to report his own erectile dysfunction, and he has credibly stated that it began in service.  Indeed, he submitted his claim prior to separation.  For these reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran has erectile dysfunction that arose in service.  Service connection is therefore granted.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by application of the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  An evaluation of the level of disability present must also include consideration of the functional impairment of the Veteran's ability to engage in ordinary activities, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  

When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  The Veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). 

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for migraine headaches

The Veteran claims an increased rating for his headaches.

The Veteran's headaches are rated as migraine headaches under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  Under this code, headaches are rated at 0 percent with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over a period of several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over a period of several months.  The maximum rating of 50 percent is warranted for headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The criteria of Diagnostic Code 8100 are successive.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018).  Successive criteria exist where the evaluation for each higher disability rating includes the criteria of each lower disability rating, such that if a component is not met at any one level, the claimant can only be rated at the level that does not require the missing component.  Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 156 (2008).

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, regarding severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

The rating criteria for migraines contemplate all migraine symptoms.  As such, Diagnostic Code 8100 contemplates more than just headache symptoms and requires that VA consider all the symptoms a claimant experiences as a result of migraine attacks, rating those symptoms based on the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact.  Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 73 (2020).  Accordingly, the rating criteria for headaches contemplate the various manifestations of such disability by focusing on the resulting overall functional impairment, rather than particular symptoms.  Id.

In his November 2023 pre-discharge claim, the Veteran reported headaches that he attributed to stress and anxiety.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2024.  He reported worsening headaches with associated light and sound sensitivity.  He treated his headaches with Excedrin.  Typical headache pain lasted less than one day.  The examiner found that he had no characteristic prostrating attacks.  He was diagnosed with migraine headaches.

In his August 2024 notice of disagreement, the Veteran argued that a higher rating was warranted because he slept with migraine medicine within arm's reach.

The Board finds that a compensable evaluation is not warranted for the Veteran's headaches.  Higher ratings are available for characteristic prostrating attacks.  The evidence persuasively weighs against such finding.  The February 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran did not experience characteristic prostrating attacks.  There is no evidence to contradict this finding.  There are no recent treatment records for headaches, and the Veteran has offered no description of his symptoms to establish such prostrating attacks.  For these reasons, the Board finds that a compensable evaluation is not warranted for the Veteran's headaches.  

4. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for obstructive sleep apnea

The Veteran claims an increased rating for his sleep apnea.

The Veteran's sleep apnea is evaluated under?38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847.  Under this code, a noncompensable rating is warranted for asymptomatic sleep apnea with documented sleep disorder breathing.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for sleep apnea requiring the use of a breathing assistance device such as a continuous positive airway pressure machine (CPAP).  A 100 percent rating is warranted for?chronic respiratory failure?with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or for sleep apnea requiring a tracheostomy. 

In his November 2023 pre-discharge claim, the Veteran reported that he was told that he wakes himself up from snoring while in service.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2024.  There were no current findings, signs, or symptoms attributable to sleep apnea.  He did not require medication or use of a CPAP.  After the initial examination, he underwent a March 2024 sleep study.  Prior to the study, he reported that he was told that he snored, gasped, and stopped breathing during sleep.  He reported trouble getting to sleep or staying asleep more than three nights per week.  His Epworth sleepiness score indicated moderate excessive daytime sleepiness.  He was diagnosed with mild obstructive sleep apnea.

The Board finds that a 30 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's sleep apnea.  Such a rating is warranted for persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  The evidence is at least in equipoise as to such a finding.  While the February 2024 VA examiner found that he did not experience such symptoms in the examination report, his consultation prior to the March 2024 sleep study included an Epworth sleepiness score indicating moderate excessive daytime sleepiness.  This finding meets the criteria for a rating of 30 percent.  Higher ratings are available for sleep apnea requiring the use of a breathing assistance device such as a CPAP, for chronic respiratory failure?with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or for sleep apnea requiring a tracheostomy.  The evidence persuasively weighs against such findings.  There is no indication that the Veteran has been prescribed a CPAP or other treatment, and there is no evidence of chronic respiratory failure or tracheostomy.  For these reasons, the Board finds that a 30 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's sleep apnea.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Gallagher, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.