Citation Nr: A25033792
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250306-526028
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

From November 8, 2021, an initial 20 percent rating, but no higher, for low back disability is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

FINDING OF FACT

From the November 8, 2021 effective date of the grant of service connection, the symptoms of the Veteran's back disability more nearly approximated guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait, but did not more nearly approximate forward flexion of 30 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Throughout the entire appeal period starting November 8, 2021, the criteria for an initial disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for back disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, DC 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1970 to February 1971. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In that decision, the RO implemented the September 2024 Board decision that granted of service connection for a back disability, and assigned a 10 percent rating effective November 8, 2021.

In the March 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. In correspondence submitted with the March 2025 VA Form 10182, the Veteran's representative explicitly stated that the Veteran disagreed with the assigned 10 percent rating and requested a rating of at least 20 percent.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes that even though the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) has not elapsed, a docket switch waiver letter (see Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363, U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024) is not necessary as the Veteran's representative has submitted correspondence with the March 2025 VA Form 10182 in which he made aspecific arguments requesting a rating of at least 20 percent from the "undisputed effective date of November 8, 2021," based on the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 rating decision, from which the Board infers that the Veteran wishes expeditious review of the claim and forego the remaining time period during which he can switch dockets.

Higher Initial Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 ; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where service connection has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition. The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Court has emphasized that when assigning a disability rating it is necessary to consider limitation of a joint's functional ability due to flare-ups, fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, or when it is used repeatedly over a period of time, functional loss due to flare-ups, fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995); Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). In Mitchell, the Court explained that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the possible manifestations of functional loss include decreased or abnormal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance (38 C.F.R. § 4.40 ), as well as less or more movement than is normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, and pain on movement (as well as swelling, deformity, and atrophy) that affects stability, standing, and weight-bearing (38 C.F.R. § 4.45 ). Joints should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 ; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that a VA examiner must attempt to elicit information from the record and the Veteran regarding the severity, frequency, duration, or functional loss manifestations during flare-ups before determining that an estimate of motion loss in terms of degrees could not be given. It also held that any inability to furnish such an estimate must be predicated on a lack of medical knowledge among the medical community at large, rather than insufficient knowledge by the individual examiner.

An initial 20 percent rating, but no higher, for low back disability is granted

The Veteran's back disability is currently assigned a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5237, pertaining to the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries to the Spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237.

Under the General Rating Formula, the following disability ratings apply: a 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

A 30 percent rating requires forward flexion of the cervical spine 15 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 40 percent rating requires forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

The only higher schedular ratings under the General Rating Formula are 50 percent for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine and 100 percent for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. Note (5) indicates that, for VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine, is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching.

Alternatively, under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes (IVDS Formula), a 60 percent disability evaluation is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12 months. An "incapacitating episode" for purposes of totaling the cumulative time is defined as "period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician." DC 5243, Formula for Rating IVDS on Incapacitating Episodes, Note 1.

Note (2) provides that normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees.

In a letter attached to the notice of disagreement, the Veteran's representative indicated that "[t]his is not a claim for increase.  This is a timely request for review of a prior determination."  The representative cited VA's Adjudication Manual interpreting 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 to allow a request for review of a prior rating, to be handled under the specific lane of review and not as a claim for increase.  In other words, this is a "request for a corrected rating."  The representative's point appears to be that the effective date of any higher rating that the Board finds is warranted should be November 8, 2021, the date of the grant of service connection based on continuous pursuit of the claim and the "undisputed effective date."  As the Veteran continuously pursued this claim by timely and properly filing the review options listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c), the Board agrees and, in response to the request for at least a 20 percent rating, grants a 20 percent rating effective November 8, 2021, for the reasons below.

VA treatment records show that the Veteran was regularly treated for his back disability, to include chiropractic treatment and physical therapy. A July 2021 VA chiropractic consultation note shows that the Veteran had mild apparent dysfunction/antalgic gait. Similarly, August, September, and October 2021 VA chiropractic treatment records show that the Veteran continued to have mild apparent dysfunction/antalgic gait. A July 2022 VA physical therapy note shows that the Veteran's gait was slow, slightly stooped and left-antalgic. July and August 2022 VA physical therapy notes show that  the Veteran had a slow, slightly stooped reciprocal gait pattern, in no apparent distress. A September 2022 VA chiropractic treatment note shows that the Veteran had mild apparent dysfunction/antalgic gait. 

During a June 2022 VA examination, the Veteran did not report flareups. Range of motion testing revealed forward flexion limited to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees; right lateral flexion to 25 degrees, left lateral flexion to 25 degrees, right lateral rotation to 25 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 25 degrees. There was pain on all ranges of motion. Passive range of motion testing was avoided due to the Veteran's complaints of pain with passive motion. There was evidence of pain on weight-bearing, non-weight-bearing, and on active motion. There was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. Pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination did not significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over a period of time. There was no guarding, muscle spasm, or muscle atrophy. The Veteran had localized tenderness, guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine; it did not result in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. Muscle strength testing was normal. There was no ankylosis of the spine or IVDS. Arthritis was documented. The examiner found that the Veteran's back disability did not impact his ability to work. 

In a June 2023 statement, the Veteran described his back pain as aching, stabbing, throbbing, burning, shooting pain, and a pins-and-needles sensation. He stated that his back pain is an 8 out of 10 most days, and 10 when it flares up. He stated that the pain causes him to walk unevenly and his back pain makes it difficult to walk any distance, sit, climb stairs, and lay in a comfortable position. The back pain interferes with his daily functions, and makes it difficult to drive, walk up and down steps, sleep, have intercourse, and stand. His pack pain is worsened with activities such as prolonged walking, standing, sitting, running, jogging, lifting and carrying objects. He also stated that he uses a brace regularly, regularly visits a chiropractor, and uses ice and heat to treat his back pain. At the time of his statement, he had requested a walker disabled parking permit, and he was awaiting a response.

For the following reasons, an increased initial disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's back disability is warranted.

The evidence shows that throughout the appeal period, the Veteran reported back pain that caused limitation of activities such as prolonged walking standing, driving, standing, and sleeping. Additionally, the Veteran's back disability caused altered gait that VA physicians described as antalgic. As the Veteran's reports as to the severe nature of his back pain symptoms have been consistent throughout the appeal period, the Board finds them competent and credible. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).

Although range of motion testing conducted throughout the appeal period did not reflect flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees, the Veteran's statements and the June 2022 VA examination report show symptoms approximating guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait.  An initial 20 percent rating is therefore warranted.

Regardless of the competent and credible reports of pain and other functional impairments, and despite the fact that painful motion and antalgic gait has been documented, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a disability rating higher than 20 percent is warranted.  Rather, the evidence at this time weighs persuasively against approximation of the symptoms required for a disability rating higher than 20 percent.  Specifically, the above evidence of record reflects that the other functional impairments have not been so severe, frequent and/or prolonged to warrant the next higher percent disability rating. Even when considering pain and other functional factors, to include increased pain and limitations with prolonged standing or walking, no frequent stooping or kneeling, no lifting, and no repetitive climbing of stairs, the Veteran's back disability symptoms have not been shown to result in limitation of flexion more nearly approximating 30 degrees. 

Moreover, the evidence of record does not reflect that the symptoms of the Veteran's back disability more nearly approximated favorable ankylosis. The Court has noted that the rating criteria define ankylosis in terms of limitation of motion, and that ankylosis is an objective finding, not a diagnosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a , General Rating Formula, Note 5 (ankylosis is a condition in which the spine or a spinal segment is fixed in flexion or extension). Note (5) also indicates that fixation of a spinal segment in a neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

In this case, the evidence of record does not reflect that there was favorable ankylosis, or its functional equivalent, of the entire thoracolumbar spine. Rather, the evidence of record, to include the VA examination, contains either specific findings of no ankylosis or findings reflecting that there is no ankylosis. Moreover, the above evidence does not reflect that the Veteran's flareups and other functional impairments have been so severe, frequent, and or prolonged to warrant the next higher disability rating during the claim period. The evidence of record shows that when considering pain, flare-ups, and other functional factors, the Veteran's back disability symptoms have not been shown to result in symptoms more nearly approximating fixed flexion or extension of the thoracolumbar spine or a thoracolumbar spinal segment.

There is also no evidence of record of incapacitating episodes as defined in the Note to the Formula for Rating IVDS on Incapacitating Episodes. 

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's symptoms of his back disability more nearly approximated throughout the entire appeal period guarding severe enough to result in muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait.  However, an initial disability higher than 20 percent at any point during the appeal period is not warranted as the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether there was flexion limited to 30 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis.  Rather, the evidence at this time weighs persuasively against the criteria required for an initial rating higher than 20 percent, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

The Board has considered the Veteran's claim and decided entitlement based on the evidence.  Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with respect to his claim.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Hemphill, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.