Citation Nr: A25033781
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240222-420620
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for hypertension is denied. 

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a lumbar spine disability described as degenerative arthritis and intervertebral disc syndrome is denied.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right sciatic radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disability is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability (limited flexion), is remanded. 

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 0 percent for a right knee disability (limited extension), is remanded. 

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a right hip strain (limited flexion), is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation, in excess of zero percent, for a right hip strain (limited extension), is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation, in excess of zero percent, for a right hip strain (limited adduction, reduction, and/or abduction), is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's diastolic pressure is not predominantly 110 or more and systolic pressure is not predominantly 200 or more.

2. For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's lumbar spine disability has not been manifested by forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 30 degrees or less, favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, or incapacitating episodes requiring bedrest prescribed by a physician for a total duration of 4 weeks or greater.

3. The Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity has manifested in mild incomplete paralysis.

4. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevented him from obtaining and maintaining a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an increased disability rating for hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a lumbar spine disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a; Diagnostic Code 5010-5242.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity has not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

4. The criteria for the assignment of TDIU due to service-connected disabilities have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had honorable active service with the United States Navy from December 1968 to September 1970, and October 1974 to January 1993.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a July 2023 decision. In December 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior July 2023 decision. 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims related to increase in a right knee rating and a right hip rating, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board also finds that TDIU was raised as part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for a higher rating for his back disability, and the issue is properly before the Board. See Harper v Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356 (2018); Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Each service-connected disability is rated on the basis of specific criteria identified by Diagnostic Codes (DCs). 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Additionally, the evaluation of the same disability under several DCs, known as pyramiding, must be avoided. Separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991); see also 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2. As such, the Board has considered all of the evidence of record. However, the most probative evidence of the degree of impairment consists of records generated in proximity to and since the claim on appeal.

Functional loss and possible limitation of functional ability must be considered as well as whether there is additional range of motion (ROM) loss due to pain on use or during flare-ups. See Sharp v Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 33 (2017). Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part which becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. Weakened movement, excess fatigability, and incoordination must also be considered and, if feasible, be expressed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 207 (1995); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.45, 4.59. Although pain may be a cause or manifestation of functional loss, limitation of motion due to pain is not necessarily rated at the same level as functional loss where motion is impeded. See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011).

Accordingly, VA examinations for musculoskeletal issues are required to include joint testing for pain during both active and passive motion, weight bearing and non-weightbearing, and if possible, with range of motion measurement of the opposite undamaged joint, where an opposite joint exists. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

In rating cases, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings." Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). VA's determination of the present level of a disability may result in a conclusion that the disability has undergone varying and distinct levels of severity throughout the entire time period the increased rating claim has been pending and, consequently, staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss each, and every piece of evidence submitted by the Veteran or on his or her behalf. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claims and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claims. See Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

In assigning a higher disability rating, VA is responsible for determining whether there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  If there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter than the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies, but the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).   

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for hypertension

The Veteran has requested an increased rating for hypertension. He has been rated as 10 percent disabling since February 1, 1993. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

Under Diagnostic Code 7101, a 10 percent rating is assigned for hypertension with diastolic pressure (bottom number) predominantly 100 or more, or systolic pressure (top number) predominantly 160 or more. A 10 percent rating also is the minimum evaluation for an individual with a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more who requires continuous medication for control. A 20 percent rating is assigned for hypertension with diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more, or systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more. A 40 percent rating is assigned for hypertension with diastolic pressure predominantly 120 or more. The maximum 60 percent rating is assigned for hypertension with diastolic pressure predominantly 130 or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104.

The Board notes that the use of medications is explicitly contemplated in Diagnostic Code 7101 and that the Court has held that the Board did not err in failing to discount the ameliorative effects of blood pressure medication as the plain language of Diagnostic Code 7101 contemplates the effects of medications. 

Here, the Board denies the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for hypertension.  

In order for the Veteran to meet the next highest level of 20 percent for hypertension, his diastolic pressure (bottom number) would have to be predominantly over 110, or his systolic pressure (top number) would have to be predominantly 200 or more.  

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in August 2021. The Veteran's hypertension was reported to be well controlled on antihypertensive medications and lifestyle modifications. The Veteran was prescribed Losartan/HCTZ, and Amlodipine. During the examination, the Veteran's blood pressure readings were 112/78, 114/72, and 132/76. 

Then in March 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination. The Veteran reported that his condition has stayed the same since service. He reported his medications included Norvasc, HCTZ, and Losartan. During the examination, the Veteran's blood pressure readings were 151/83, 150/84, and 154/79.

VA treatment records in January 2021, noted that the Veteran's blood pressure was generally below 140/90. See CAPRI received July 2023. Private primary care records noted that his blood pressure in February 2022 was 153/88, and in November 2021 was 159/86. Other private primary care records generally show blood pressure readings below 140/90. See Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility received March 2022. 

The evidence of record does not support a disability rating greater than 10 percent for hypertension, as the Veteran's diastolic blood pressure readings have generally been below 110, and his systolic blood pressure readings have generally been below 200. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's blood pressure readings have gotten somewhat worse over time. However, his blood pressure readings have not worsened to the point where they meet the 20 percent level for hypertension.  

Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent for hypertension, and the claim is denied. 

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for a lumbar spine disability

In this case, the Veteran has contended that he is entitled to an increased evaluation for his lumbar spine disability, as well as for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy.

Disabilities of the spine are rated under the General Rating Formula for Rating Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula), under DCs 5235 to 5243. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. Both the DC for Invertebral Disc Syndrome and the General Rating Formula are to be considered by the Board, and the DC that results in the higher evaluation for the Veteran is to be used. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71(a); DCs 5235 to 5243, Note(6).

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. Combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. See Note (2) for General Rating Formula, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Additionally, in exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note (2). Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted. See Note (3) for General Rating Formula, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

In this case, the Veteran's low back degenerative arthritis and intervertebral disc syndrome is rated 20 percent disabling under DC 5010-5242.

A 20 percent rating is warranted where forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasms or guarding are severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. A 40 percent rating for the thoracolumbar spine is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. These ratings apply to diseases and injuries of the spine with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

After a thorough review of the evidence of record in this matter, the Board finds that an evaluation in excess of 20 percent disabling is not warranted. Even considering the functional loss due to pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or any flare-ups, the Veteran does not meet the next higher levels of disability.

As for the evidence, in July 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination of his lumbar spine. The examiner completed a back conditions disability benefit questionnaire (DBQ). See C&P Examination received August 2021. The Veteran reported worsening back symptoms related to his right knee. He reported that he had flares and that he avoided or limited activities like prolonged walking or standing which made his condition worse. He had flare ups about one or two times a week and used over the counter pain medications to alleviate his flares. The Veteran's thoracolumbar spine range of motion on initial testing was zero to 90 degrees flexion, zero to 15 degrees extension, zero to 30 degrees left lateral flexion, zero to 30 degrees left lateral rotation, zero to 20 degrees right lateral flexion, and zero to 30 degrees right lateral rotation. On observed repetitive use, the Veteran's thoracolumbar spine was reduced to zero to 60 degrees flexion. On repeated use over time and on flare ups, the Veteran's forward flexion was estimated as 85 degrees. He had full strength, no muscle atrophy, normal reflexes, normal sensory testing, and negative straight leg testing. Id.

Then in March 2023, the Veteran had another VA back examination. See C&P Examination received April 2023. The Veteran reported that he had back pain about two to three days a week and that he had right sided sciatica every three months or so. He reported flares of pain radiating to his right side. He also reported that due to flares he limited his walking. He also reported that he was not able to lift heavy things. 

The Veteran's thoracolumbar spine range of motion on initial testing was zero to 45 degrees flexion, zero to 30 degrees extension, zero to 30 degrees left lateral flexion, zero to 30 degrees left lateral rotation, zero to 30 degrees right lateral flexion, and zero to 30 degrees right lateral rotation. On repeated use over time and on flare ups, the Veteran's forward flexion was estimated as 35 degrees. He had full strength, no muscle atrophy, normal reflexes, normal sensory testing, and negative straight leg testing. The Veteran had no ankylosis and he did not use an assistive device like a cane. The Veteran had no periods of prescribed bed rest by a physician.   

There is no reasons or bases requirement imposed on medical examiners. An adequate medical report must rest on correct facts and reasoned medical judgment so as to inform the Board on a medical question and facilitate the Board's consideration and weighing of the report against any contrary reports. See Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 293 (2012); see also, Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding in the context of weighing one medical opinion with another that "[i]t is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion... that contributes probative value to a medical opinion"); D'Aries, 22 Vet.App. at 104 ("An opinion is adequate where it is based upon consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and examinations and also describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's 'evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one.'" (quoting Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994))); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding that a medical opinion "must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").

The VA examinations have been considered by the Board as a whole. Both examinations include various medical testing and reports. Both include estimates of the Veteran's range of motion on flares and with repeated use over time. The March 2023 examination has been found to be competent, credible, and given significant weight. 

The July 2021 VA examination reported that the Veteran's flexion was reduced to 60 degrees on three observed repetitions. However, the VA examiner reported that on repeated use over time the Veteran's estimated flexion was 85 degrees. Considering, the conflict in the flexion on observed repeated use and repeated use over time, the Board gives limited weight to the range of motion findings in the July 2021 examination. 

The Board must consider the rating based on all the evidence. If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. However, there must be some evidence to support the application of the higher rating.

Here, the evidence shows that the Veteran's forward flexion was estimated on flares to be as low as 35 degrees. Considering all of the evidence, the Veteran's forward flexion was not shown to be reduced to 30 degrees or less anytime during the relevant period. The Veteran was also not shown to have favorable ankylosis or the equivalence to ankylosis.

The Board considered the functional loss due to pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or any flare-ups, when rating the Veteran. However, the Veteran does not meet the next higher levels of disability. Even considering flares of pain, and repeated use over time, the Veteran's forward flexion was estimated to be limited to 35 degrees.

Considering all of the evidence, in the light most favorable to the Veteran, his chronic lumbar spine disability did not manifest in favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, or incapacitating episodes requiring bedrest prescribed by a physician due to the back for a total duration of four weeks or greater as contemplated by DC 5243.

Associated neurological abnormalities are rated and discussed separately in this decision.

The Board finds that VA had satisfied its duty to assist. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); and see Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991) (the duty to assist is not a one-way street).

Accordingly, the Board concludes that an evaluation of 20 percent disabling considers all of the evidence available in a light most favorable to the Veteran and that no higher rating is appropriate. Overall, any functional loss that the Veteran may have experienced in his back after repeated use of the joint or during a flare up, or any ameliorative effects of medications are adequately accounted for in the ratings assigned. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. at 206-207.

Further, the Veteran does not qualify for a higher rating under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes. The evidence of record does not show that he was ordered to bedrest for over four weeks.

The probative, credible evidence of record weighs against a finding of a rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's back disability, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply, and the appeal must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

3. Entitlement to an increased evaluation for right sciatic radiculopathy

The Veteran contends that his right sciatic radiculopathy should be rated higher. 

The Veteran's sciatic radiculopathy of the right lower extremity related to degenerative arthritis of the low back has been rated at 10 percent from July 16, 2021, under diagnosis code 8520. 

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling. Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy, is rated as 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis, when the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide ratings for peripheral neurological disorders, which are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves. The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

To clarify the meaning of the undefined subjective terms in the rating criteria as applied in this case, the Board defines mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions as follows: Mild incomplete paralysis is a disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a smaller area. A very minimal reflex or motor abnormality is also consistent with mild incomplete paralysis. Moderate incomplete paralysis is reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment, where the sensory involvement covers a larger area in the nerve distribution. Moderate disability also includes combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment). Moderately severe evaluation is when there is motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability. Atrophy may, but need not, be present for a moderately severe rating. To reach a severe degree of incomplete paralysis, motor and/or reflex impairment will be expected to reflect a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases, and marked muscular atrophy is expected for the sciatic nerve.  

Using these benchmarks for the subjective terms in DC 8520, the Board finds the Veteran's right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy symptoms and impairment to most closely approximate mild radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve.  

Turning to the evidence of record, in July 2021, the examiner reported that the Veteran had radicular pain described as mild right lower extremity intermittent pain, paresthesia and/or dysesthesias, and numbness. See C&P Examination received August 2021. He had full strength, no muscle atrophy, normal reflexes, normal sensory testing, and negative straight leg testing. Id.

Then in March 2023, the VA examiner reported that the Veteran had radicular pain described as mild right lower extremity intermittent pain. The examiner noted that there was involvement of the sciatic nerve root due to intervertebral disc syndrome. See C&P Examination received April 2023. The Veteran reported that he had back pain about two to three days a week and that he had right sided sciatica every three months or so. He reported flares of pain radiating to his right side. The Veteran had normal reflexes, normal sensation, and no trophic changes. Id. 

Here, the Board finds that the Veteran's sciatic radiculopathy is properly rated at 10 percent. The Veteran's symptoms appear most closely aligned with mild incomplete paralysis. The records generally show normal reflexes, normal muscle testing, and normal sensation. Based on the Veteran's statements and the records, his right lower extremity symptoms are characterized most by intermittent pain, but he has also reported numbness, and paresthesia and/or dysesthesias.   

Accordingly, the Board denies a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy.

4. Entitlement to TDIU

After a thorough review of the evidence, the Board concludes the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevented him from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment.

Entitlement to TDIU requires the presence of impairment so severe that it is impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. In reaching such a determination, the central inquiry is "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." See Hatlestead v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to age or to impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

Where the schedular rating is less than total, a total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, or if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

The Veteran has a combined disability rating of 70 percent since February 2, 2021, 80 percent since July 16, 2021, and 90 percent since December 29, 2022. The Veteran also has other unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder at 50 percent since December 29, 2022. Disabilities may also be combined, like the knee related disabilities, to meet the "at least one ratable at 40 percent," when the disabilities are resulting from a common etiology or single accident. Therefore, the Veteran meets the basic eligibility for TDIU since at least February 2, 2021.

Next, the Board considered whether the Veteran was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected impairments.

The evidence supports that the Veteran has been unemployed since around July 1, 2014. See VA 21-8940 received December 2022. Considering the evidence available, the Board finds the Veteran's claimed unemployment to be credible. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see also Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995).

The Veteran submitted a statement in December 2022. He stated that he believed his overall effects of all his disabilities combined resulted in his inability to work. For example, he reported that due to pain, he had trouble getting good rest. He reported irritability, poor memory, lack of concentration, difficulty performing mental tasks, and an inability to handle workplace stress or workplace decisions. See VA21-4138 received December 2022. He also stated that his mental health disability has had a negative impact on his ability to maintain work, manage his mood, manage his anger, and made it hard to connect with other people. He also lacked the motivation to complete tasks. Id.  

A private medical expert opined in December 2022, that the Veteran was unable to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment as a direct result of his service-connected disabilities. See Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility received December 2022.  

The Veteran's lumbar spine, right knee, and right hip conditions are notable to have combined to cause the Veteran difficulty with lifting, prolonged standing, and prolonged walking. The March 2023 VA examination of the hip stated that the Veteran could only walk 15 minutes at a time. See C&P Examination received April 2023. The Veteran's March 2023 examination of his back noted that he also could not lift more than 25 pounds and that he should avoid bending. Id. 

The Board finds that the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities rendered him unemployable. The VA examinations did not conclude that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities resulted in total occupational impairment; however, this does not preclude a finding that his service-connected disabilities substantially affected employment. The evidence of record shows that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, altogether, had a significant effect on his ability to work. The Veteran had difficulty lifting, standing, and walking due to back, knee, and hip pain. His mental condition would have caused the Veteran social and occupational impairment of varying levels and even if his symptoms were intermittent, they could still have affected his ability to maintain employment. Given the impairment produced by his service-connected disabilities, it appears that the Veteran would not have been capable of more than marginal employment in any type of work setting. See Ortiz-Valles v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 65, 72 (2016).

Thus, the Board will resolve reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and find that he was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 5107, 38 C.F.R. § 4.16

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability (limited flexion), is remanded. 

See section 2. 

2. Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 0 percent for a right knee disability (limited extension), is remanded.

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is necessary to fulfill a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.

The Board finds that a new examination is required to address the Veteran's right knee condition. The Veteran reported that he had symptoms in his knee including painful motion, buckling, weakness, giving out, and snapping. He also reported stiffness, trouble carrying anything heavy, trouble using stairs, running, jogging, squatting, jumping, and making side movements. See VA 21-4138 received February 2021. He stated that walking and standing were painful and that he had increasing stiffness in his knee when sitting down. He also reported that he used Aspirin to help with his symptoms. Id.

Despite these statements the Veteran's knee symptoms on flares were not discussed by examiners. Moreover, the Veteran has reported using over the counter pain medication to alleviate his knee symptoms. However, the record does not clarify how often the Veteran uses medication for his knee symptoms, and how the medication alleviates his symptoms.  

Therefore, the Board remands the knee claims for a new examination to adequately address the criteria needed to fully address the Veteran's right knee rating. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran. 

3. Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a right hip strain (limited flexion), is remanded.

See section 5. 

4. Entitlement to an increased evaluation, in excess of zero percent, for a right hip strain (limited extension), is remanded.

See section 5. 

5. Entitlement to an increased evaluation, in excess of zero percent, for a right hip strain (limited adduction, reduction, and/or abduction), is remanded.

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is necessary to fulfill a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.

The Board finds that a new examination is required to address the Veteran's hip condition. The Veteran reported when he filed his claim that yard work, long car rides, sports, and household chores that required prolonged standing were much harder for him to do without having an increase in his hip pain. See VA 21-4138 received July 2021. Then in August 2021, the VA examination stated that the Veteran reported flares of pain. However, the examination failed to estimate any reduction in right hip range of motion on flares without explanation. Then the March 2023 VA examination stated that the Veteran did not have flares and failed to provide any estimate of reduced right hip range of motions on flares without explanation. 

The Board notes that the VA examinations in 2021 and 2023 are inconsistent as to whether the Veteran has flares. Moreover, the opinions do not allow the Board to fully address the issue of the Veteran's hip range of motion. 

Therefore, the Board remands the hip claims for a new examination to adequately address the criteria needed to fully address the Veteran's right hip rating. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to fully assess the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right hip condition. All pertinent evidence of record should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. All necessary studies should be performed. The examiner should provide all information required for rating purposes, to specifically include the results of range of motion testing for pain on both active and passive motion, as well as on weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint. 

The examiner is also requested to review the VA examinations containing inconsistent reports of whether the Veteran has flares of right hip pain, and also note that the Veteran reported when he filed his claim that yard work, long car rides, sports, and household chores that required prolonged standing were much hard for him to do without having an increase in his hip pain. See VA 21-4138 received July 2021.  

In addition, the examiner must determine the extent of any additional limitation of joint motion (in degrees) due to weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, or pain during flare-ups and/or with repeated use. In doing so, the examiner must consider and discuss all procurable and assembled data such as the frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, and the severity of the flare-ups, and then provide an assessment of the functional loss during flares, if possible, in degrees of motion lost. 

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so. Furthermore, if any opinion cannot be offered without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should clearly explain why this is the case and identify any additional evidence that may allow for a more definitive opinion.

2. Afford the Veteran a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to fully assess the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right knee condition. All pertinent evidence of record should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. All necessary studies should be performed. The examiner should provide all information required for rating purposes, to specifically include the results of range of motion testing for pain on both active and passive motion, as well as on weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint. 

The examiner is also requested to review whether the Veteran has flares of right knee pain and note that the Veteran reported when he filed his claim that he had symptoms in his knee including painful motion, buckling, weakness, giving out, and snapping. He reported stiffness, trouble carrying anything heavy, trouble using stairs, running, jogging, squatting, jumping, and making side movements. See VA 21-4138 received February 2021. He stated that walking and standing were painful and that he had increasing stiffness in his knee when sitting down. He also reported that he used Aspirin to help with his symptoms. Id  

In addition, the examiner must determine the extent of any additional limitation of joint motion (in degrees) due to weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, or pain during flare-ups and/or with repeated use. In doing so, the examiner must consider and discuss all procurable and assembled data such as the frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, and the severity of the flare-ups, and then provide an assessment of the functional loss during flares, if possible, in degrees of motion lost. 

Then also provide more historical information from the Veteran about his use of over-the-counter pain medications. For example, how often does he use pain medications for his knee, or other treatments, and to what extent do these improve his symptoms. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Then note that the opinions provided should attempt to address the Veteran's knee estimated range of motion without the amelioration of medication to the extent possible. If the examiner is unable to provide this opinion or any other without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should clearly explain why this is the case and the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Parnell, C. E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.