Citation Nr: A25033555
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-438796
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral tinnitus is denied.

A disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for degenerative arthritis of the spine (back disability) is granted.

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for chronic allergic rhinitis is denied.

An initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for migraines is denied.

An initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for dyspnea on exertion is denied.

Service connection for a cervical spine disability, as secondary to the service-connected back disability, is granted.

Service connection for chronic sinusitis, to include as due to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) or due to exposure to particulate matter as a result of Persian Gulf War service, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's tinnitus has been assigned a 10 percent rating, which is the maximum schedular rating allowable for this disability.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, during the current period on appeal, the evidence reveals muscle spasm severe enough to result in an abnormal gait; however, his back disability was not manifested by forward flexion greater than 30 degrees, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups, without ankylosis, incapacitating episodes due to intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), or other neurologic abnormalities. 

3. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran has not had nasal polyps associated with his chronic allergic rhinitis disability. 

4. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's migraine headaches did not approximate very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

5. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's dyspnea did not more nearly approximate as FEV-1 of 40 to 55 percent predicted, FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least three per year) course of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

6. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his cervical spine disability is secondary to his service-connected back disability.

7. The Veteran is presumed exposed to fine, particulate matter during service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War.

8. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, he has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis that is presumed related to his exposure to fine, particulate matter during his service in Southwest Asia. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral tinnitus are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.87, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6260.

2. The criteria for a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for degenerative arthritis of the spine are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5237.

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.97, DC 6522.

4. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.124a, DC 8100. 

5. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for dyspnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.14, 4.40, 4.56, 4.97, DC 6602.

6. The criteria for service connection for a cervical spine disability, as secondary to a service-connected back disability, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

7. The criteria to establish service connection for chronic sinusitis on a presumptive basis due to exposure to particulate matter are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317, 3.320.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from January 1997 to August 2003, including service in Southwest Asia. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 12, 2024, March 28, 2024, and April 2024 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 12, 2024 (service connection for sinusitis and increased ratings for back and migraines), March 28, 2024 (service connection for cervical spine and increased rating for bilateral tinnitus), and April 2024 (increased ratings for allergic rhinitis and dyspnea) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the increased rating claims for bilateral tinnitus, back, allergic rhinitis, migraines, and dyspnea disabilities, and the claims for service connection for cervical spine and chronic sinusitis disabilities, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU has been raised as part of the increased rating claims on appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Specifically, at a January 2024 VA examination for headaches, the examiner noted that the headache condition impacts the Veteran's ability to work, explaining that the Veteran lost one to two weeks of work in the last 12 months, and that the Veteran must call out or leave work early due to symptoms related to migraines. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran lost time in the last 12 months for his back condition, due to increased pain, stating that the Veteran reported problems with prolonged sitting, standing, and walking, which aggravate his pain. The Veteran reported that bending or squatting to lift or carry items, as well as climbing stairs, aggravate the pain. These reports raise the issue of entitlement to a TDIU. Id.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Staged ratings are appropriate when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); see also Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

In evaluating a disability, the current examination reports are considered in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the disorder's severity. The medical and industrial history are to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; however, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one disorder is not duplicative of the symptomatology of the other disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied. 

The Veteran's service-connected bilateral tinnitus is currently assigned a 10 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260. He is presumed to be seeking a higher rating but has provided no supportive argument. Nevertheless, the Board notes that he has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available for tinnitus under 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260. A single rating for recurrent tinnitus is assigned whether tinnitus is present in one or both ears, or whether it is constant versus recurrent. Id. at Note 2; Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006). As tinnitus is specifically listed in the rating schedule, it may not be evaluated by analogy under a different diagnostic code. Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336-37 (2015). The claim for a schedular rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected bilateral tinnitus must be denied as lacking legal merit. Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

As to whether the Veteran is entitled to a higher rating on an extraschedular basis, the applicable diagnostic criteria adequately account for the severity of his symptoms. There is also no evidence of frequent occupational impairment or frequent hospitalization due to this disability. He has also provided no argument for an extraschedular rating. Referral for consideration of an extraschedular rating is therefore not warranted. Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008).

A disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for degenerative arthritis of the spine is granted.

The Veteran has been in receipt of a 10 percent rating for his back disability as of May 18, 2016. He filed his claim for a higher rating in November 2023.

Here, the Veteran's back disability is evaluated under DC 5237, lumbosacral strain. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. Under the General Rating Formula for Disease and Injuries of the Spine (Diagnostic Codes 5235-5242), a 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted where forward thoracolumbar flexion is limited to 30 degrees or less, or there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, while a 100 percent evaluation contemplates unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula of Disease and Injuries of the Spine.

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id. at Note 1.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("It is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion and in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint."

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

Effective February 7, 2021, the DCs pertaining to the thoracolumbar spine were amended. For purposes of this decision, the applicable rating criteria for those DCs did not materially change. See 85 Fed. Reg. 76453 (Nov. 30, 2020) (as corrected at 85 Fed. Reg. 85523 (Dec. 29, 2020), as corrected at 86 Fed. Reg. 8142 (Feb. 4, 2021)).

Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching." Id. at Note 5. Additionally, fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis. Id. 

Under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes, intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least two weeks but less than four weeks during the past 12 months warrants the assignment of a 20 percent rating. Intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks but less than six weeks during the past 12 months is assigned a 40 percent rating. A 60 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12 months.

Note (1): For purposes of evaluations under DC 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.

Note (2): If intervertebral disc syndrome is present in more than one spinal segment provided that the effects in each spinal segment are clearly distinct, evaluate each segment based on incapacitating episodes or under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, whichever method results in a higher evaluation for that segment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the record does not show, and the Veteran does not contend, that he ever had IVDS, to include incapacitating episodes. Thus, the IVDS Rating Formula would not allow for higher ratings for the Veteran's back disability at any point during the appellate period.

The Veteran's treatment records generally reflect complaints of chronic back pain. However, there are no range of motion measurements that fall within the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent.

In an opinion obtained from a private physician in November 2023, and dated in October 2023, it was noted that the Veteran's lumbar spine is chronic and has worsened over time, limiting the Veteran's daily activities and physical capabilities, especially during exacerbations. The physician noted increased pain and decreased range of motion; however, range of motion measurements were not provided. The physician also stated that the Veteran has paraspinal muscle spasms and an altered gait, putting pressure and causing injury in surrounding muscles and joints. He explained that a compensatory type of gait occurs where movement of the center of gravity is such that there is an accomodation in gait pattern to minimize muscle effort by the lumbar spine and pain in it.

At a January 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported worsening symptoms; he explained that both his lower and mid back hurt, all the way up to his neck. He stated that his entire back throbs daily, and that he has trouble sleeping due to back pain. He further complained of tingling and numbness down to his legs. The Veteran stated that he takes 200mg of Motrin as needed, does home stretches, and uses Icy-Hot for the pain. He also reported flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine, described as sharp spasms and stabbing pain which occur three to four times a month. He explained that his back flare-ups last a few hours, are precipitated by overuse, and are alleviated with rest, medication, and heat. He stated that the flare-ups are about 9/10 in severity. The Veteran reported functional loss or functional impairment of the lumbar spine as problems with prolonged sitting, standing, walking, bending, or squatting to lift or carry items, and climbing stairs, which all aggravate the pain. 

On examination, range of motion measurements revealed forward flexion to 70 degrees; and extension, right lateral flexion, left lateral flexion, right lateral rotation, and left lateral rotation, each, to 30 degrees; with forward flexion exhibiting pain. Passive range of motion testing revealed the same measurements as active range of motion. There was evidence of pain with weight-bearing, on active motion, and on passive motion, resulting in functional loss, described as problems with prolonged sitting, standing, walking, bending, or squatting to lift or carry items, and climbing stairs, which all aggravate the pain. There was no objective evidence of crepitus or of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue.

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing after three repetitions, with no additional loss of function or range of motion. He was not examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up. The examiner noted that procured evidence (statements from the Veteran) did suggest that pain, fatigability, and weakness (with flare-ups) significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and during a flare-up. Estimated range of motion measurements noted forward flexion further limited to 65 degrees; extension, right lateral flexion, right lateral rotation, and left lateral rotation, each, to 25 degrees; and left lateral flexion was reduced to 25 degrees for repeated use over time and to 20 degrees for flare-ups. It was noted that the Veteran did not have localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine. He also did not have muscle atrophy or ankylosis. There was no evidence of radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy. No other neurologic abnormalities or findings related to the thoracolumbar spine were documented. IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine was not present. The examiner indicated that the Veteran lost time off work in the last 12 months for his back condition due to lumbar pain, explaining that the Veteran reported problems with prolonged sitting, standing, and walking, which aggravated the pain. The Veteran also reported that bending or squatting down to lift or carry items can also hurt, as well as climbing stairs, which aggravated the pain. The examiner remarked that she was unable to objectively confirm any radiculopathy, and that the examination was negative for any sensory deficits and negative straight leg raise bilaterally.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, is warranted for his back disability. Notably, the private physician opined, in an opinion dated in October 2023 and submitted in November 2023, that the Veteran's back disability caused him to have paraspinal muscle spasms and an altered gait. Pursuant to DC 5237, a 20 percent rating is warranted for muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. As such, the Board assigns the Veteran an increased 20 percent rating for the entire appeal period for his back disability. 

However, a disability rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's back disability at any time during the appellate period. As previously stated, to warrant the next-higher 40 percent disability rating under the General Rating Formula, forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine must be limited to 30 degrees or less, or there must be favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

Here, a review of the evidence does not reveal symptomatology consistent with a 40 percent or higher rating. Specifically, range of motion testing conducted at the VA examination revealed forward flexion, at worst, to 65 degrees. Although the VA examination reflected additional functional loss due to pain, lack of endurance, and weakness during flare-ups, the additional functional loss did not reflect forward flexion to at least 30 degrees. There was also no evidence of ankylosis-either favorable or unfavorable. Thus, the evidence did not more nearly approximate the criteria for the next-higher 40 percent rating under the General Rating Formula.

The Board has also considered whether separate ratings for associated objective neurologic abnormalities are warranted at any time throughout the appeal period, pursuant to Note (1) of the General Rating Formula. However, the evidence does not show that there are other neurologic abnormalities associated with the Veteran's back disability, to warrant separate ratings.

The Board notes that, on March 12, 2025, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) issued a precedential decision in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, which applies to this case. The Court decided that, in light of the holding in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012), which applies when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities if the relevant DC does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of this disability, as DC 5237 does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication. Here, the Board notes that the Veteran reported at the January 2024 VA examination that he takes 200mg of Motrin as needed, did home stretches, and used Icy-Hot for flare-ups of his back pain. He also reported that his back flare-ups last a few hours, are precipitated by overuse, and are alleviated with rest, medication, and heat. However, despite the holdings in Ingram and Jones, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent is still not warranted under DC 5237. There is no evidence of ankylosis, which is not impacted by any medications the Veteran takes for his lumbar spine disability. Further, the examiner estimated range of motion to be no worse than 65 degrees when considering repeated use over time and flare-ups. In so doing, the examiner noted that statements were obtained from the Veteran. However, there is no indication that, in estimating range of motion measurements, the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of any medication on Veteran's back disability. In other words, the evidence does not suggest, in accurately assessing the Veteran's disability picture or the severity of his condition, that the VA examiner discounted any improvement that may have resulted from medication the Veteran takes for his back condition. As such, a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted.

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's sincerely held belief that his back disability warrants a higher rating, and notes he is competent to describe his symptoms and their effects on his daily life. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). However, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). The Board finds instead that the medical evidence, in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran, completed necessary testing, considered his reported symptoms, and described the manifestation of his disability in light of the rating criteria, is more persuasive than the Veteran's own reports regarding the severity of such condition.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Hart, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected back disability; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appellate period.

In sum, a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the spine. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for his back disability at any point throughout the appellate period. Accordingly, the criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for the service-connected degenerative arthritis of the spine are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021). Finally, except for the issue of entitlement to a TDIU, which will be addressed herein, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 69-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for chronic allergic rhinitis is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his allergic rhinitis. He has been service-connected for allergic rhinitis as of October 25, 2022, and has been in receipt of a 10 percent rating since that date. 

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is evaluated under DC 6522. Under DC 6522, a 10 percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passages on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. A 30 percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis with polyps. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

At a January 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he was prescribed medication for his condition-Flonase and Claritin. However, he reported that the symptoms have continued, to include stuffiness, congestion, and post-nasal drip.  The examiner indicated that there was no greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis. There was also no complete obstruction on the left or right side due to rhinitis, nor any permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates. The examiner further indicated that there were no nasal polyps. Additionally, the Veteran does not have granulomatous rhinitis, rhinoscleroma, Wegener's granulomatosis, lethal midline granuloma, or other granulomatous infection.

After reviewing the relevant evidence of record, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis have not been met at any time during the period on appeal. Specifically, the persuasive evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has nasal polyps, which is required for the next-higher 30 percent rating. See DC 6522, 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent for his allergic rhinitis. The Veteran is competent to report on factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing rhinitis symptomatology. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005); see also Layno, supra. However, he is not competent to report that his symptoms are of sufficient severity to warrant a higher rating under the rating criteria, as such an opinion requires specialized medical expertise which falls outside the realm of the common knowledge of a layperson. See Jandreau, supra.

Accordingly, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so, to warrant a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such finding. As the persuasive evidence weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application as to this claim, and the claim must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch, supra.

An initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for migraines is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his migraine headaches. He is currently in receipt of a 30 percent rating, as of October 25, 2023.  

The Veteran's migraine headaches are evaluated under DC 8100. Under DC 8100, a 30 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. A 50 percent rating is warranted for very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. Id.

The rating criteria contained in DC 8100 are successive. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 247 (2018). "Successive" rating criteria is where the evaluation for each higher disability rating includes the criteria of each lower disability rating, such that if a component is not met at any one level, the Veteran can only be rated at the level that does not require the missing component. Id.; see also Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 156 (2008).

"Frequent" is defined as common or usual, or happening at short intervals, often repeated or occurring. MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 500 (11th ed. 2003). "Very" means to a high or great degree. Id. at 1391; THE MERRIAM-WEBSTER THESAURUS 1117 (2005). Synonyms for "very" include especially, exceedingly, extremely, and particularly. THE MERRIAM-WEBSTER THESAURUS 1117 (2005). Thus, headaches which are "very frequent" in nature are headaches which occur at particularly or especially short or common intervals.

Neither the rating criteria nor the Court has defined the term "prostrating." The term "prostrate," which includes "prostrating," is defined as "to reduce to submission, helplessness, or exhaustion." MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 998 (11 ed. 2003). A very similar definition is found in Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY 1367 (32d ed. 2012).

"Inadaptability" is not defined in DC 8100, nor can a definition be found elsewhere in Title 38 of the Code of Federal Regulations. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 446 (2004). Further, it has been held that nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Id.

In a statement signed and dated in August 2023, the Veteran's spouse indicated that the Veteran complains of migraines frequently, almost weekly. In September 2023 statements, the Veteran reported that he experiences painful migraines, for which he takes prescribed medications. 

In an opinion obtained from a private physician in November 2023, and dated in October 2023, it was noted that the Veteran was prescribed 10mg of Maxalt to help control his headache symptoms. It was also noted that the Veteran's headache condition is chronic and progressive in nature. 

At a January 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his headache symptoms have worsened. He reported taking Maxalt and Nortriptyline to help alleviate the symptoms. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking medication for his headaches. It was noted that the Veteran experiences pulsating or throbbing head pain, localized to one side of the head, and worsens with physical activity. It was also noted that the Veteran experiences non-headache symptoms associated with his headaches, described as sensitivity to light and sound. The duration of the typical head pain is less than one day, on the right side of the head. The examiner noted that the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine and non-migraine headache pain. It was also noted that the Veteran has completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines and non-migraine pain once every month. The examiner indicated that the headache condition impacts the Veteran's ability to work, explaining that the Veteran lost one to two weeks of work in the last 12 months, and that the Veteran must call out or leave work early due to symptoms related to migraines.

Based on the evidence above, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's migraine headaches disability at any time during the appeal period. Despite the Veteran's subjective accounts of his symptoms, the evidence of record does not support a finding that he has had migraine headaches resulting in very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, to warrant a higher rating. Indeed, the VA examiner noted that the frequency of the Veteran's prostrating headaches occurs, on average, once a month. The examiner's assessment of the Veteran's headaches was based both on the medical evidence and the Veteran's own reports of his symptoms. As such, the Board finds that the examination report is entitled to significant probative weight as to the severity of the Veteran's migraine headaches disability. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

Although the Veteran reported to the VA examiner that he must call out or leave work early due to symptoms related to migraines, this does not constitute prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. In any event, as noted herein, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the Veteran be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating. See Pierce, supra.  The Board notes that the Veteran's complaints do not translate to his headaches resulting in prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. As such, the criteria for a 50 percent evaluation for the Veteran's migraine headaches have not been shown, pursuant to the rating criteria under DC 8100.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of his headaches, but not to identify a specific level of disability. The medical findings in this case directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated, and this evidence is accorded greater weight than his subjective complaints of being entitled to an increased evaluation. Without very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, a 50 percent evaluation is not warranted.

In sum, the Board finds that the 30 percent assigned rating contemplates the Veteran's current symptoms throughout the appeal period, including those outlined above, and that even taking into consideration the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, and 4.21, a rating higher than 30 percent is not warranted at any point during the appeal period. The Board does not doubt that the Veteran has frequent headaches. However, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence does not support that those headaches are prolonged, completely prostrating, or otherwise capable of producing economic inadaptability. As all the Veteran's symptoms are contemplated by the assigned rating, referral for extraschedular consideration is not warranted. Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008). Consequently, a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraines is not warranted at any point during the appeal period.

An initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for dyspnea on exertion is denied.

The Veteran is seeking an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for dyspnea. He has not presented any contentions as to why a higher rating is warranted.

The Veteran's dyspnea disability has been evaluated as 30 percent disabling as of October 25, 2022, under the General Rating Formula for the Respiratory System, Diseases of the Trachea and Bronchi, DC 6602. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for FEV-1 of 56 to 70 percent predicted, FEV-1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, daily inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy, or inhalational anti-inflammatory medication.

A 60 percent disability rating is assigned for an FEV-1 of 40 to 55 percent predicted, FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least 3 times per year) course of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

A maximum 100 percent rating is assigned under DC 6602 for bronchial asthma with an FEV-1 of less than 40 percent predicted, FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high-dose corticosteroids or immunosuppressive medications. See id.

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for respiratory conditions to evaluate his dyspnea. He reported that his current treatment includes taking a Singulair tablet daily and albuterol as needed. It was noted that the Veteran's respiratory condition does not require the use of oral or parenteral corticosteroid medications. However, it requires the Veteran taking inhaled medications-intermittent inhalational bronchodilator therapy. The Veteran's respiratory condition also requires the daily use of oral bronchodilators. He is not required to take antibiotics. He also does not require outpatient oxygen therapy for his respiratory condition. It was noted that pulmonary function testing (PFT) was performed. The PFT pre-bronchodilator results revealed FVC as 67 percent predicted, FEV-1 as 66 percent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC as 98 percent predicted. Post-bronchodilator PFT results revealed FVC as 66 percent predicted, FEV-1 as 69 percent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC as 104 percent predicted. It was noted that FEV-1 predicted results most accurately reflect the Veteran's level of disability. The examiner indicated that diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide by the single breath method (DLCO) testing was not completed because it was not indicated for the Veteran's condition. Exercise capacity testing was not performed. No other significant diagnostic test findings or results were noted. The examiner indicated that the respiratory condition impacted the Veteran's ability to work, as the Veteran stated that he must take breaks at times to "catch his breath."  

The Board finds that the pertinent evidence does not support a rating in excess of 30 percent. The Veteran's PFT results do not warrant a higher rating as the FEV-1 was no worse than 66 percent predicted; FVC was no worse than 66 percent predicted; and FEV-1/FVC was no worse than 98 percent predicted. Each of these measurements is consistent with no more than a 30 percent rating under the DC 6602 rating criteria. As such, the PFT results do not support an increased evaluation.

Furthermore, the pertinent evidence does not reflect that the Veteran made monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations or required intermittent (at least three times a year) courses of systemic corticosteroids as contemplated by the 60 percent rating criteria. Neither private nor VA outpatient records reflect such visits.

Review of the schedular rating criteria also does not indicate that there is another DC more analogous to the service-connected dyspnea. Additionally, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues regarding the rating for the service-connected dyspnea; nor have any related issues been reasonably raised by the record.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's service-connected dyspnea have not been met at any time during the relevant appeal period. The Board therefore concludes that the evidence for and against the claim is not in approximate balance, but rather weighs against the claim. Because there is not an approximate balance in the weight of the evidence, the doctrine of reasonable doubt is not for application, and the claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Lynch, supra. 

Service Connection

The law provides that service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Generally, establishing service connection requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Additionally, service connection may be granted where a disability is proximately due to, or the result of, an already service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Secondary service connection for a disability requires: (1) a current disability (for which secondary service connection is sought); (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) evidence that the current disability for which service connection is sought was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by the service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

Lay statements may serve to support a claim for service connection by supporting the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, there are medical issues that fall outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011); see also Jandreau, supra (lay persons not competent to diagnose cancer).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra. 

Service connection for a cervical spine disability, as secondary to the service-connected back disability, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his cervical spine disability is secondary to his service-connected back condition. See November 2023 Claim. Specifically, he asserts that the pain from his service-connected lumbar spine disability has spread all throughout his back and up his spine. Id. He believes it is partly due to having an altered gait resulting from his back condition. Id.  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran does not allege that his cervical spine disability is directly caused by his active service. Instead, he maintains that his cervical spine disability was caused by his service-connected back condition. As such, the issue of direct service connection regarding the claim for his cervical spine disability will not be discussed.

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of cervical strain. See January 2024 VA Cervical Spine Examination Report. As there is evidence of a current disability, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's cervical spine condition was caused or aggravated by his service-connected back condition.

In this regard, service treatment records (STRs), dated in April 1997, note complaints of both neck and back pain at the same time, for three days. The Veteran has been service-connected for degenerative arthritis of the spine since May 2016.

As to whether the Veteran's cervical spine disability was caused by the degenerative arthritis of the spine, there is evidence both for, and against, the claim.

Evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim includes a medical opinion obtained from the Veteran's private physician in November 2023. The physician concluded that the Veteran's cervical spine condition is more likely than not secondary to the service-connected lumbar spine. The physician explained that, especially during exacerbations of the lumbar spine, the Veteran experiences an altered gait, and that it has been shown that an altered gait, over time, can put pressure and cause injury in surrounding muscles and joints. He stated that abnormal movements, due to lumbar spine pain, influence the motion of the body's center of gravity. He also stated that a compensatory type of gait occurs where movement of the center of gravity is such that there is an accomodation in gait pattern to minimize muscle effort by the lumbar spine and related pain. The physician explained that the lumbar spine pain and altered gait caused the Veteran to develop cervical spine pain. He reiterated that the Veteran's cervical spine condition is secondary to the service-connected back condition. He also explained that neck pain and low back pain often go together, but that even if one is present without the other, they are always related. He further explained that the relationship between the lower back and the neck is such that the misalignment of one always affects the other, and that the lower back and the neck are mirror images of each other from a functional standpoint.  

Evidence against the claim includes a March 2024 opinion from a VA examiner, who opined that the Veteran's cervical spine condition is not related to degenerative arthritis of the spine, explaining that there is no sufficient empirical evidence, in the records made available for review, of any objective nexus between the chronic lower back condition and the neck condition. The examiner concluded that there is insufficient evidence in the medical records to establish a chronic spine diagnosis of the neck, and that no imaging could be identified to substantiate a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis of the neck. The examiner further stated that any musculoskeletal symptoms of pain at the cervical spine level would not necessarily be chronic in nature or secondary to low back pain.

Additionally, in January 2024, a VA examiner negatively opined that the Veteran's cervical spine is not directly related to active service, stating that, based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service, as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of cervical strain and military service. The examiner further stated that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is a more likely etiology. As stated herein, the Board notes that the Veteran's primary contention is that his cervical spine disability was caused or aggravated by his back condition. Further, the Veteran reported at the January 2024 VA examination that his neck started hurting around 2017. He stated that the more he aggravated his back, he noticed that his neck started hurting. At a January 2024 VA examination for back conditions, the Veteran explained that his back hurt all the way up to his neck.    

As there is evidence both for and against the Veteran's claim, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that his cervical spine condition was caused by his degenerative arthritis of the spine. The Board assigns probative weight to the medical opinion of the Veteran's private physician, received in November 2023, as it is based on an accurate medical history and provides explanations that contain clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

While the Board cannot ignore or disregard the VA examiner's medical conclusions [Willis v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 66 (1991)], the Board is free to assess medical evidence and is not compelled to accept a medical opinion. Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992). Here, the examiners' negative opinions failed to consider the Veteran's lay reports regarding the severity and continuity of symptomatology related to his cervical spine condition, by concluding that chronicity is absent. 

Further, the record indicates that the Veteran has frequently and continuously complained of neck and back pains simultaneously, to include complaints documented in his private treatment records. This was also shown in his service treatment records and was confirmed by the private physician. Thus, the VA examiners' negative opinions are afforded minimal probative weight.

Accordingly, in resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence supports a finding that his cervical spine disability is secondary to his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the spine. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310. Thus, service connection for a cervical spine disability is granted.

Service connection for chronic sinusitis is granted.

The Veteran claims he has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis that is related to his active service, to include his confirmed service in Southwest Asia.

Service connection may be established for a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness which manifests either during active service in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317; 86 Fed. Reg. 51,001 (September 14, 2021).

The term "Persian Gulf Veteran" means a veteran who served on active military, naval, or air service in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (d)(1). The Southwest Asia Theater of operations includes Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (d)(2).

A 'qualifying chronic disability' means a chronic disability resulting from any of the following (or any combination of any of the following): an undiagnosed illness; a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) (such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome) that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms; and any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1)(i).

Objective indications of a chronic disability include both "signs," in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification. Disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic. The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest. A chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness shall be rated using evaluation criteria from the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities for a disease or injury in which the functions affected, anatomical localization, or symptomatology are similar. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a) (2-5).

Compensation shall not be paid if: (1) there is affirmative evidence that an undiagnosed illness was not incurred during active military, naval, or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War; (2) if there is affirmative evidence that an undiagnosed illness was caused by a supervening condition or event that occurred between the Veteran's most recent departure from active duty in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War and the onset of the illness; or (3) if there is affirmative evidence that the illness is the result of the Veteran's own willful misconduct or the abuse of alcohol or drugs. See 38 C.F.R. §§, 3.317.

Additionally, effective August 5, 2021, VA added 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 which, in relevant part, allows for a presumption of exposure to fine, particulate matter if a disease listed in paragraph (a)(2) becomes manifest to any degree (including non-compensable) within 10 years from the date of separation from service, that includes a qualifying period of service as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 (a)(4). The chronic diseases associated with exposure to particulate matter are: (i) asthma, (ii) rhinitis, and (iii) sinusitis, to include rhinosinusitis.

The presumption of exposure includes a Veteran who has a qualifying period of service as defined as any period of active military, naval, or air service in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations, as defined in § 3.317(e)(2), during the Persian Gulf War as defined in § 3.2(i).

The Board acknowledges that on September 1, 2023, VA issued a final rule revising 38 C.F.R. § 3.320, Presumptive Service Connection for Respiratory Conditions Due to Exposure to Fine Particulate Matter. See 88 Fed. Reg. 60336 (September 1, 2023). The amendment eases the evidentiary burden of Gulf War Veterans who file claims with VA for asthma, rhinitis, and sinusitis, to include rhinosinusitis. Specifically, the revised regulation 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 removes the 10-year manifestation requirements for asthma, rhinitis, and sinusitis (to include rhinosinusitis), now indicating that they can manifest to any degree "at any time following" separation from a qualifying period of military service. However, these revisions are only effective on October 31, 2023.

Here, the Veteran contends he has sinusitis that was caused by his exposure to particulate matter while serving in Southwest Asia. Specifically, he is seeking service connection for sinusitis due to an undiagnosed illness, and/or MUCMI, and/or due to exposure to particulate matter during his Persian Gulf War Service.

VA confirmed the Veteran's Southwest Asia service, to include his exposure to environmental hazards. See March 2024 Rating Decision. In addition, a November 2023 VA Toxic Exposure Memorandum states that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations between August 24, 2003, and August 1, 2004. Therefore, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to fine, particulate matter, based on his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the relevant timeframe. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 (a)(4).

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of sinusitis. Notably, in a medical opinion obtained from the Veteran's private physician in November 2023, it was noted that the Veteran has a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis, secondary to burn pit exposure during deployment. It was further noted that the Veteran suffers from the condition continually. The physician explained that the Veteran's chronic sinusitis is manifested by consistent inflammation in the sinuses and multiple sinus infections throughout the year. He emphasized that the Veteran's sinusitis is chronic and progressive in nature. The Veteran's service treatment records also note that he has had upper respiratory infections since at least June 1999, in service. See March 2024 Rating Decision. 

In lay statements submitted from the Veteran's spouse, in August 2023, it was indicated that the Veteran has had breathing and sinus problems since service until the present. In September 2023, the Veteran also reported that he has sinus problems all year, which suggests a chronic sinus problem. 

According to favorable findings noted in the March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran performed service in Afghanistan. It notes that the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to the Veteran's military service, and that sinusitis is a chronic disease that may be presumptively linked. It was also noted that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, that he has a period of service from January 24, 1997, to August 13, 2003, and that he was exposed to Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERAs) and burn pits during his military service. Participation in a TERA was conceded. It was further indicated that the Veteran's sinusitis had its onset in service, as his service treatment records reveal he had a diagnosis of allergic rhinitis and upper respiratory infections in June 1999. The Board acknowledges that it is bound by these favorable findings.

Therefore, based on the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the Veteran's sinusitis was incurred in service, and has persisted until the present. There is also no evidence indicating that sinusitis was caused by a supervening condition or event, or the result of the Veteran's willful misconduct.

As the Veteran's sinusitis manifested to a degree within 10 years of his qualifying period of service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War, and he is presumed to have been exposed to particulate matter based on his service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War, presumptive service connection for sinusitis is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.320.

The Board acknowledges the opinion of a VA examiner, who, in April 2024, concluded that the Veteran's diagnosis is acute sinusitis, and that there was no chronicity. While the Board cannot ignore or disregard the VA examiner's medical conclusions [see Willis v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 66 (1991)], the Board is free to assess medical evidence and is not compelled to accept a medical opinion. Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992). In this case, the Veteran presented evidence that is contrary to the VA examiner's conclusion. As such, the Board finds that there is at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence with respect to whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis that is related to his service in Southwest Asia.  See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-782.  Accordingly, having resolved doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for chronic sinusitis is warranted, and the claim is granted. 38?U.S.C. §?5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The Board notes that a TDIU will be considered to have been raised by the record as "part and parcel" of the underlying increased rating claims, as in this case. See Rice, supra. Therefore, the Board finds that the AOJ not adjudicating the claim is an error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

As previously noted, at a January 2024 VA examination for headaches, the VA examiner noted that the service-connected headache condition impacts the Veteran's ability to work, explaining that the Veteran lost one to two weeks of work in the last 12 months, and that the Veteran must call out or leave work early due to symptoms related to migraines. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran lost time in the last 12 months for his back condition, due to lumbar pain, explaining that the Veteran reported problems with prolonged sitting, standing, and walking, which aggravate his pain. The Veteran also reported that bending or squatting to lift or carry items, and climbing stairs, aggravate the pain. These reports raise the issue of entitlement to a TDIU. Id.

However, additional development is necessary to confirm the Veteran's educational background and to obtain information on his current employment status, as that information is not known to the Board, based on evidence presented during the relevant evidentiary window. Specifically, it is necessary to obtain a completed Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (VA Form 21-8940) from the Veteran, and a Request for Employment Information (VA Form 21-4192) from his former employer(s). This matter is therefore remanded to the AOJ to obtain these forms.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send the Veteran an Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (VA Form 21-8940) and request that he complete and return the form.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete and submit a VA Form 21-4192, Request for Employment Information, to allow VA to attempt to request employment verification information from his employers.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.