Citation Nr: A25033541
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-469992
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a permanent and total disability rating for lung cancer, for accrued benefits purposes is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in relative equipoise that the Veteran's metastatic lung cancer had no more than a remote possibility of permanent improvement prior to the Veteran's death.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a permanent and total disability rating for lung cancer, for accrued benefits purposes have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 1502, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.15, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6819.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from March 1986 to March 1990.  Sadly, the Veteran passed away in April 2023.  The Appellant in this case is the Veteran's surviving spouse, who has been approved as a valid substitute. 

As a matter of background, prior to his death, the Veteran filed a November 2022 claim of entitlement to service connection for bladder cancer.  Along with this claim, the Veteran submitted medical evidence which, in addition to discussion of bladder cancer, demonstrated findings of lung cancer.  As a result, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) expanded the claim to include service connection for lung cancer.  In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for lung cancer.  In doing so, the AOJ established an initial 100 percent rating.  However, the AOJ determined that the award was subject to revision, as the regulation required re-examination at six months following the cessation of treatment.  The Veteran, in fact, died one day following the issuance of the letter notifying him of the rating decision.  

In March 2024, the Appellant submitted a request for a higher-level review of the April 2023 rating decision.  The Appellant argued that, as the Veteran had died only 13 days after he attended a VA examination, the rating for lung cancer should have been considered permanent and total.  In a June 2024 higher-level review rating decision, the AOJ continued the 100 percent rating for accrued benefits purposes, but denied the request to make the rating permanent and total.  

In July 2024, the Appellant submitted a VA Form 10182 to appeal the June 2024 rating decision to the Board.  In doing so, the Appellant elected to have the appeal adjudicated under the Direct Review docket.  Accordingly, the Board may consider only the evidence that was of record at the time of the June 2024 rating decision.  The Board may consider argument raised at any time.   

1. Entitlement to a permanent and total disability rating for lung cancer, for accrued benefits purposes

At the time he was granted service connection for lung cancer, the Veteran was awarded a 100 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6819, which addresses malignant neoplasms of the respiratory system.  Diagnostic Code 6819 awards a 100 percent rating.  However, the Note to Diagnostic Code 6819 dictates that a 100 percent rating shall continue beyond the cessation of any surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy, or other therapeutic procedure.  Six months after the discontinuance of such treatment, the appropriate disability rating shall be determined by mandatory VA examination.  If there has been no local recurrence or metastasis, the disability should be evaluated based on residuals.  

Entitlement to a permanent total disability rating requires a Veteran's disability to be both permanent and total.  38 C.F.R. § 3.340.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.340(b), permanence of total disability will be taken to exist when such impairment is reasonably certain to continue throughout the life of the disabled person.  The permanent loss or loss of use of both hands, or of both feet, or of one hand and one foot, or of the sight of the eyes, or becoming permanently helpless or bedridden constitutes permanent total disability.  Diseases and injuries of longstanding, which are actually totally incapacitating, will be regarded as permanently and totally disabling when the probability of permanent improvement under treatment is remote.  

Permanent total disability ratings may not be granted as a result of any incapacity from acute infectious disease, accident, or injury, unless there is present one of the recognized combinations or permanent loss of use of extremities or sight, or the person is in the strict sense permanently helpless or bedridden, or when it is reasonably certain that a subsidence of the acute or temporary symptoms will be followed by irreducible totality of disability by way of residuals.  The age of the disabled person may be considered in determining permanence.  Id.  Other factors to consider include failure to pursue treatment and whether the disability has been shown to be of longstanding duration, actually totally incapacitating, or of such a nature as to render the probability of permanent improvement remote.  See KL v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 205, 208 (1993).

In this case, the Veteran underwent a VA respiratory conditions examination in March 2023.  At that time, the examiner observed that the Veteran's diagnosis of new bilateral pulmonary nodules was made during the process of evaluating service-connected kidney and bladder cancers.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's newly discovered lung cancer was metastasized from the kidney and bladder cancer disabilities.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was undergoing chemotherapy at the time of the examination, having started treatment in November 2022.  

The Veteran's death certificate reports that the Veteran's primary cause of death was metastatic urothelial carcinoma.  The death certificate does not list any other causes of death.  In other words, the Veteran died as a result of service-connected kidney and bladder cancer as it continued to metastasize.  

(continued on next page)

?

Based solely on a strict reading of Diagnostic Code 6819, a permanent and total rating for lung cancer is not available, as the Veteran would have been required to attend an examination following the cessation of chemotherapy treatment had he not died.  However, given the indication of the March 2023 VA examiner that the Veteran's lung cancer was metastatic, and the fact that the metastatic nature of the Veteran's cancers resulted in his death, the Board finds the evidence is at least in relative equipoise that the probability of permanent improvement of lung cancer was remote.  Based on the remote probability of permanent improvement, classification of the Veteran's lung cancer disability as permanent and total is warranted throughout the period on appeal.  The appeal is therefore granted. 

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Giaquinto

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.