Citation Nr: A25033123
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-471005
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to service-connected disability, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran obstructive sleep apnea is due to, the result of, or caused by a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, caused by a service-connected disability, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2003 to February 2008.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In September 2024, the Veteran requested direct review of the appeal by the Board on VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).

As the current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket by a Veterans Law Judge, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based upon the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the previous RO decision on the issue on appeal, only evidence of record on the date of the October 2023 rating decision will be considered.  VA will not seek additional evidence on behalf of the Veteran as part of the review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that an injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active service or, if pre-existing service, was aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), 3.304, 3.310.

To establish service connection for a disability, a veteran must show (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship, or nexus, between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection may be established for a disability that is due to, the result of, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

While the Board must provide reasons and bases supporting a decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the evidence submitted by or on behalf of the Veteran.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence of record.  The Veteran should not assume that the Board has overlooked evidence that is not explicitly discussed.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000).

The Veteran contends that currently diagnosed sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected chronic tendonitis of the right ankle.  Alternatively, the Veteran states that diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is the result of service.  The Veteran reports trouble sleeping, frequent awakening, snoring, and pauses in breath while sleeping. 

An October 2023 rating decision found that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea and the Veteran's claimed primary disability, chronic tendonitis of the right ankle, was service connected.  The rating decision also found that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  The Board is bound by those favorable findings.

The service medical records show no reports of difficulty sleeping.  The Veteran reported that he did not have frequent trouble sleeping at an October 2002 entrance examination.  In October 2007, the Veteran reported that he did not feel tired after sleeping during a post-deployment health assessment.  

In an April 2023 medical opinion, a certified physician assistant, opined that it was at least as likely as not (a 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by chronic tendonitis of the right ankle, in conjunction with subsequent weight gain and obesity.  The examiner included the excerpts of the medical literature which were cited throughout the April 2023 opinion.

The examiner concluded that the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal disability was a major reason that he gained weight because the Veteran was unable to be active as a result of the ankle disability.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's progressive weight gain and current obesity began after the Veteran developed musculoskeletal symptoms related to service-connected chronic tendonitis of the right ankle.  The examiner determined that without the Veteran's weight gain and obesity, the obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred.  The examiner referred to medical literature and studies throughout the April 2023 medical opinion.  Specifically, the examiner stated that obesity and weight gain were the number one risk factor for developing obstructive sleep apnea and that medical studies showed a relationship between chronic pain and chronic sleep impairment.  

An October 2023 VA examiner stated that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected chronic tendonitis of the right ankle disability.  The examiner did not provide an opinion concerning any aggravation of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea by the service-connected disability.  The October 2023 VA examiner also determined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) during service.  Although the examiner stated that medical and scientific evidence did not support a relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and the Veteran's TERA, the examiner did not refer to specific medical literature through the report.  In reaching those conclusions, the examiner stated that the Veteran's file was reviewed.  The October 2023 VA examiner stated that the Veteran's service medical records were silent regarding sleep disturbances, but acknowledged that the Veteran reported a long history of snoring and daytime hypersomnolence.  

The Board notes that, although obesity is not a disability for which VA may establish service connection, it may act as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

While the Board appreciates the analysis and discussion of the VA examiner, the examinations are inadequate.  When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  A medical opinion that does not address whether a service-connected disability aggravated the claimed disability is inadequate to inform the Board on the issue of secondary service connection.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

Although the October 2023 VA examiner provided an opinion regarding the lack of causation of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea disability by service-connected chronic tendonitis of the right ankle, the examiner did not offer an opinion regarding whether the obstructive sleep apnea disability was aggravated by his service-connected disability.  Both are opinions are needed.

Additionally, both VA opinions are conclusory because they do not provide an adequate rationale to support the opinions.  A mere conclusion without an underlying rationale is of no probative value.  Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998).  The examiner stated that medical or scientific evidence did not support a causal relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and chronic tendonitis of the right ankle or the Veteran's TERA, but provided no explanation or discussion concerning the Veteran's specific circumstances, claimed disability, potential causation or aggravation by a service-connected disability or the TERA.

Although the VA medical opinions are inadequate concerning the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea, the Board finds that is it not necessary to obtain a new VA medical opinion.  The Board finds the private examiner's medical opinion to be credible and persuasive.  The Board assigns great probative weight to the April 2023 private medical opinion in conjunction with the January 2014 VA Medical Center sleep study because of the training, experience, and thoroughness of the reports.  Among the factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the provider's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60 (1993) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility and weight to be given the evidence); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1992).  The probative value of medical evidence is based on the provider's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the ultimate medical conclusion reached.  As is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).

The April 2023 private opinion is consistent with the evidence in the case and provides adequate reasons and bases in support of the conclusion.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was more likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected disability.  The private examiner's opinion is highly probative because it is supported by rationale and provided by a trained medical professional.  The examiner specifically identified and discussed the Veteran's contention that obstructive sleep apnea was caused by chronic tendonitis of the right ankle.  Thus, the Board finds the private April 2023 medical opinion to be competent and credible.

The Board cannot ignore the medical evidence opining that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to service-connected disabilities.  Because of the private medical opinion, the Board finds the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether a current obstructive sleep apnea disability is related to active service.

The Board acknowledges that there may be contradictory evidence of record, such as the VA medical opinions from October 2023 that found that obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced of nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability or a TERA.  However, the Board cannot ignore the medical evidence finding that the Veteran's sleep apnea is due to his service-connected disability.  Because of the detail and thoroughness of the April 2023 private opinion and citation to medical research, the Board finds that the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether obstructive sleep apnea is related to the service-connected disabilities.

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the competent medical evidence supports a finding that a current obstructive sleep apnea disability is due to, the result of, or caused by chronic tendonitis of the right ankle.  Therefore, service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to chronic tendonitis of the right ankle is warranted and granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.  Service connection is being granted based on causation of sleep apnea by obesity, which was caused by a service-connected disability and not based  aggravation of the nonservice-connected disability by the service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marissa R. Harper, Associate Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.