Citation Nr: A25033492
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 210816-179583
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a right hand injury, to include a scar, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1972 to December 1976. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in July 2021 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), which, after performing a higher level review of an April 2021 rating decision, denied service connection for a right hand scar. 

In August 2021, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decisions by filing a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested a Board hearing, which was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in March 2025. A transcript of the hearing is associated with the record. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2021 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative, at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). 

If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, at the March 2025 Board hearing, the Veteran waived the 90-day post-hearing evidence submission period. Furthermore, as the Board is remanding the instant claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final initial matter, the Board observes that, while the AOJ has characterized the issue on appeal as entitlement to service connection for a right hand scar, the Veteran's statements throughout the appeal period reflect his report of multiple right hand injuries, to include a laceration resulting in a scar and a crush injury resulting in deformity. Thus, the Veteran's claim has been recharacterized as entitlement to service connection for residuals of a right hand injury, to include a scar. Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79 (2009) (when a claimant makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled).

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a right hand injury, to include a scar. 

The Veteran contends that he has residuals of a right hand injury, to include a scar, that he sustained during service. In this regard, he has reported two separate in-service injuries to his right hand in 1974 or 1975 while stationed at Brawdy, Wales, Royal Air Base (RAB) in the United Kingdom, to include when (1) he crushed his right hand between a door and concrete, and (2) he sliced his thumb while removing a radio from a car, which resulted in one stitch. 

In this regard, the Veteran indicated that, while he sought treatment at the time of such injuries from the local facility, he has not received any post-service treatment. Nonetheless, he indicates that he has a scar on his right thumb, which has been present since service, and developed a deformity, weakness, and numbness in his right hand over time.

While the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any reference to the aforementioned injuries reflect that, in January 1974, while still stationed in the United States, he complained of a sore hand with a large amount of swelling and tenderness over his right second finger proximal joint, which was diagnosed as a contusion with a notation of a possible small hairline fracture or bursal injury. Additionally, his service personnel records reflect that he was stationed Brawdy, Wales, RAB from February 1975 to December 1976, and his military occupational specialty was electronics mechanic.

Upon review, the Board finds that it is unclear whether all STRs from Brawdy, Wales, RAB have been obtained. In this regard, while the Veteran's STRs include a handful of notations of treatment provided at such facility, it is unclear whether there are any available outstanding STRs. Furthermore, despite the nature of the Veteran's reported injuries, documentation in his STRs of a right hand injury, and his current reports of right hand symptomatology, to include a scar, he has not been provided with a VA examination so as to determine the nature and etiology of his alleged right hand disorder. 

Consequently, the Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to cure such pre-decisional duty to assist errors by obtaining any outstanding STRs and affording him a VA examination so as to address the nature and etiology of his claimed right hand disorder. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ensure that the Veteran's complete STRs from his period of service from February 1972 to December 1976 have been obtained, to include all records from Brawdy, Wales, RAB, where he was stationed from February 1975 to December 1976. 

All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination so as to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed right hand disorder, to include a scar. Following a review of the record and conducting all indicated testing, the examiner should address the below inquiries:

(A) Identify all current right hand disorders, to include orthopedic and/or neurologic disorders, and a scar.

(B) For each right hand disorder identified, offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that such had its onset in, or is related to the Veteran's military service, to include his documented in-service treatment for a sore hand with a large amount of swelling and tenderness over his right second finger proximal joint, which was diagnosed as a contusion with a notation of a possible small hairline fracture or bursal injury, in January 1974, and/or his reported injuries where he crushed his right hand between a door and concrete, and he sliced his thumb while removing a radio from a car, which resulted in one stitch, in approximately 1975/1976.

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner is advised that the sole basis of a negative opinion cannot be the fact that the Veteran's STRs are silent as to a right hand disorder and/or injury, or complaints thereof, or the lack of post-service treatment records demonstrating a continuity of care.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Sharrocks-Marchione

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.