Citation Nr: A25033251
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240504-438231
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to restoration of a 70 percent rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In an April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's rating for PTSD from 70 percent to 30 percent, effective April 10, 2024, based on improvement in mental health symptoms.

2. At the time of the effective date of reduction, the 70 percent rating for the Veteran's PTSD had been in effect for less than five years.

3. The evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision did not indicate that the service-connected PTSD had undergone a material improvement to the point that the Veteran was better able to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for restoration of a 70 percent evaluation for PTSD are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.105(e), 3.344, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from August 1999 to May 2008.  This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), which reduced the evaluation for PTSD from 70 percent to 30 percent, effective April 10, 2024.

In a May 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected an appeal to the Board, using the direct review docket.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  Under direct review, no development may be undertaken; the Board considers the same record as the AOJ in rendering a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under Diagnostic Code 9411 as 30 percent disabling, effective December 10, 2014, 50 percent disabling, effective June 5, 2020, 70 percent disabling, effective May 20, 2022, and 30 percent disabling, effective April 10, 2024.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In rating reductions, when VA contemplates reducing an evaluation for a Veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, it must follow specific procedural steps prior to such discontinuance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).  As enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), "[w]here the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability or employability status is considered warranted and the lower evaluation would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, a rating proposing the reduction or discontinuance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons."  Id.  In addition, "[t]he beneficiary will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore, and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level."  Id.  The beneficiary also will receive notification that "he or she will have an opportunity for a pre-determination hearing," 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i), and thereafter, a "final rating action will be taken and the award will be reduced or discontinued effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires."  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e); 3.500(r).

A Veteran's disability will not be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  In this regard, not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, but also that the improvement actually reflects an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420-21 (1993); Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).

In addition to satisfying the procedures outlined above, the AOJ must gather evidence to establish that a rating reduction is proper.  Pertinent to the instant case, according to 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c), where a rating or ratings have been in effect for less than five years, as here, "[r]eexaminations disclosing improvement, physical or mental, in these disabilities will warrant reduction in rating."  38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c); see also Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 417 (1993) (holding that five-year period in § 3.344(c) is to be measured from effective date of rating not from date of AOJ decision assigning that rating).

In considering the propriety of a reduction, the Board must focus on the evidence available to the AOJ at the time that it effectuated the reduction, although the Board may consider post-reduction medical evidence in the context of evaluating whether the condition had demonstrated actual improvement.  Cf. Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-82 (1992).  Where the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability is considered warranted, and the lower evaluation would result in a net reduction of compensation payments currently being made, a rating proposing the reduction will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons.  The beneficiary will be notified at his proper address of record of the contemplated action, furnished detailed reasons therefore, and given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level.  38 U.S.C. § 5112(b)(6); 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).

The Veteran has not argued, and the evidence of record does not show, a failure of compliance with the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).  The reduction to a 70 percent rating in an April 2024 rating decision for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD did not change the overall combined evaluation currently being paid. Consequently, a predetermination rating was not required as directed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).  Therefore, the Board will proceed with its decision on the merits.

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under Diagnostic Code 9411 and evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.30.  The General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders provides that a 30 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The Federal Circuit has found that § 4.130 requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in "most areas" for a 70 percent rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms. However, the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a Veteran's condition of similar type and degree that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.  Id.

The current appeal arises from a claim for increase in a Fully Developed Claim (VA 21-526EZ), which was received by the AOJ on November 3, 2023.  The Board, in consideration of 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2) and Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979 (Fed. Cir. 2010), has considered the evidence in the one year prior to the date of receipt of the increased rating claim.  

The record reflects that the Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in March 2023.  The examination report referenced a diagnosis of PTSD.  The Veteran noted that he lived in Caldwell, Idaho, was divorced, and had no children.  He indicated that he received mental health treatment thought VA and was prescribed Amitriptyline for associated symptoms.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  On mental status examination, the Veteran appeared friendly, cooperative, casually dressed, calm, and fully oriented.  He displayed clear, goal directed speech, and good eye contact.  It was reported that the Veteran denied and did not display any signs of psychotic symptoms or thought processes, and further denied any current suicidal or homicidal ideation.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran had an occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and or mood.  

VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran called the National Call Center for Homeless Veterans (NCCHV) in December 2023 regarding housing problems.  It was reported that the Veteran planned to leave Caldwell, Idaho that evening to Indiana, where he had family.  It was noted that his family sent him $350 for gas money.  The Veteran reportedly requested if there was any financial assistance available such that he could pay for food or other items along the way.  He noted that he may stop at a Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) facility along the way in Cheyenne, Wyoming to see if they could assist him with a small amount of money.  It was subsequently noted that the Veteran arrived in Indiana and in January 2024, the Veteran established care at his new location.  

VA treatment records subsequently indicate that the Veteran established mental health care in January 2024.  Treatment notes from this date reflect that the Veteran had moderate anxiety and moderate depression and PTSD.  The Veteran reported that his PTSD symptoms began in 2004, following his first deployment to Iraq, while his anxiety and depression symptoms began in 2021 due to ongoing volatile relationship issues with his girlfriend.  He noted that his girlfriend and her family expected him to do everything for them, including general care, and ignored his own personal needs.  The Veteran reported that the anxiety and depression symptoms caused by the relationship exacerbated his PTSD symptoms.  He stated that he was uncomfortable around large crowds, was hypervigilant, and isolated himself other than occasional interactions with his family.  The Veteran noted that he hoped his symptoms would be manageable now that he separated from his girlfriend.  Upon mental status examination, the Veteran appeared cooperative and pleasant, and displayed full-ranged and reactive affect, normal eye contact and psychomotor function, normal speech, good mood, normal attention and concentration, logical, linear, and goal-oriented thought process, appropriate thought content, intact judgment, and adequate insight.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in April 2024.  The examination report referenced the Veteran's diagnosis of PTSD.  The Veteran reported that he recently broke up with his girlfriend of five years and in December 2023, moved approximately 2,000 miles away from home in Idaho to Indiana in an effort to get away from her.  He noted that his life with his ex-girlfriend was stressful as they lived in a camper with two large dogs and two children.  The Veteran further noted that he had no children of his own.  The Veteran reported that most of his family lived in Indiana and that he did not leave his home often but would visit his parents and brother for game night.  He stated that when he had to shop, he avoided crowded places and places with not easily visible exits.  The Veteran further stated that he was prescribed Fluoxetine for associated mental health symptoms.  The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Upon mental status examination, the Veteran appeared casually and appropriately dressed, and appropriately groomed.  The Veteran was fully oriented and exhibited an anxious mood with congruent affect, cooperative behavior, logical, linear, and goal directed thought process, and normal thought content, speech, memory, and attention span.  It was reported that had intact insight and judgment and no hallucinations.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran has an occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence reflects that the reduction of the Veteran's PTSD rating from 70 to 30 percent disabling, effective April 10, 2024, was not proper.  Competent and credible reports reveal that the Veteran did not experience improvement in the ordinary conditions of life, meaning his actual functional capacity did not improve.  Based upon the evidence of record, the Board finds that the disability picture continues to more nearly approximate the level of severity contemplated by a 70 percent rating, which contemplates impairment in most areas.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  There is probative evidence, including VA examination reports, and the Veteran's lay statements, to suggest that actual, sustained improvement in the Veteran's PTSD under the ordinary conditions of life did not occur.  38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a).  While the rating reduction was predicated upon the findings of the April 2024 VA examination, the Veteran had unstable housing arrangements, reached out to the NCCHV and VFW for financial assistance, and had moderate mental health symptoms when he reestablished mental health treatment upon his relocation during the appellate period.  Thus, the nature of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms has not improved to a degree that shows sustained, material improvement in his overall condition.  Given the consistency of symptoms, and their impact on his overall condition, there has been no actual functional change.  Restoration of the 70 percent rating for PTSD is therefore warranted.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.A. Ong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.