Citation Nr: A25033243
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240602-444840
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied.  

A 70 percent (but no higher) rating for persistent depressive disorder is granted, throughout, from (the original effective date of) October 9, 2023, subject to regulations governing payment of monetary awards.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by right hip pain is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by left hip pain is remanded.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the period on appeal, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has bilateral ear hearing loss as defined by VA regulations.  

2. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome.  

3. Throughout, from (the original effective date of) October 9, 2023, the Veteran's peristent depressive disorder is reasonably best characterized as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment is not shown.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted.  38 U.S.C.           §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.  

2. Service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is not warranted.  38 U.S.C.     §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.  

3. A 70 percent (but no higher) rating for persistent depressive disorder is warranted, throughout, from (the original effective date of) October 9, 2023.        38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (Code) 9433.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from March 2018 to April 2020.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 2024 rating decision.  In his June 2024 appeal to the Board (on VA Form 10182), the Veteran selected the direct review option.  Therefore, the Board's review is limited to evidence on record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision.  

1. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss, which he contends is related to noise exposure during his military service.  

The Board notes that the Veteran served in the infantry, therefore, it is plausible that he was exposed to some level of hazardous noise during his service.  

Service connection may be granted for disability due to disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) a disease, injury, or event in service; and (3) a nexus or causal relationship between the claimed disability and the disease, injury, or event in service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

In addition, certain listed chronic diseases, such as sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus, as a disease of the nervous system, may be presumed to have been incurred during service if the disease becomes manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation from qualifying military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 (a)(3), 3.309(a); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015).  

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits.     38 U.S.C. §5107(b).  When the evidence persuasively favors against the claims of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits.  38 U.S.C. §5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

Service connection for hearing loss may be granted where there is credible evidence of acoustic trauma in service, post-service audiometric findings meeting the regulatory requirements for hearing loss disability for VA purposes, and a medically sound basis upon which to attribute the post-service findings to the injury in service (as opposed to intercurrent causes).  Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993).  

Impaired hearing will be considered a disability for VA purposes when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, when a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a), (b).  However, when the examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a reopened claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  Id.  When entitlement to a benefit cannot be established without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination or reexamination, action shall be taken in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) or (c) as appropriate.         38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).  

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has held that the burden is upon VA to demonstrate that notice of examination was sent to a claimant's last address of record and that the claimant lacked adequate reason or good cause for failing to report for a scheduled examination.  See Hyson v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 262, 265 (1993); see also Connolly v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 566 (1991).  Notification for VA purposes is a written notice sent to the claimant's last address of record.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(q).  The Board notes that notification for VA purposes was satisfied because the examination notice was sent to the Veteran's last address of record.  

A February 15, 2024, VA letter to the Veteran informed him that he had a hearing loss examination scheduled for March 12, 2024, and a March 2024 VA examination request notes that his hearing loss examination was cancelled because he failed to appear.  The Board notes that the Veteran failed to appear for his scheduled examination, has not attempted to reschedule, and has not demonstrated good cause for failing to report.  The Board recognizes that the Veteran appeared for his scheduled VA examinations in March 2024 for the other issues on appeal; however, on his June 2024 VA Form 10182, he merely indicated that he did not get a chance to reschedule his appointment for the hearing loss examination.  No details were provided, and no further explanation has been received.  As such, the Board finds that good cause has not been shown the Veteran's failure to appear at the VA examination.  

The only audiometry in the claims file is from the Veteran's active-duty service, and as noted below, the audiometry does not show that he had a hearing loss for VA purposes during service.  While such is not fatal to his claim, as discussed in more detail below, there is no post-service audiometry which shows that the Veteran has a current hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  

A March 2018 service treatment record (STR) notes that audiometry revealed that Puretone thresholds, in decibels, were:

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

R	5	0	-5	5	0

L	0	0	0	5	10

A January 2020 STR notes that audiometry revealed that Puretone thresholds, in decibels, were:

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

R	5	0	0	5	0

L	5	-5	0	5	5

The Veteran's February 2020 separation report of medical examination notes that his ears were normal on clinical evaluation.  Audiometry revealed that Puretone thresholds, in decibels, were:

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

R	5	0	0	5	0

L	5	-5	0	5	5

The Board notes that the in-service and post-service evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has hearing loss for VA purposes in either ear.  As noted, above, the Veteran was scheduled for a VA hearing loss examination, failed to appear, and failed to provide good cause for failing to appear.  Additionally, he has not submitted any medical records related to his claimed hearing loss and no VA treatments show that he has a current hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  As such, there is no information of record to reflect any hearing impairment in either ear.  In order to be considered for service connection, a claimant must first have a disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); see also Palczewski v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 174, 178-80 (2007) (specifically upholding the validity of 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 to define hearing loss for VA compensation purposes).  Additionally, a hearing disability for VA purposes is not a simple medical condition capable of lay observation or diagnosis, and the Veteran is not shown to be qualified through specialized education, training, or experience to diagnose a hearing loss disability.  Further, the record reflects that the Veteran does not have bilateral hearing loss that meets the criteria of a disability for VA purposes.  

Although disabilities of the nervous system, including sensorineural hearing loss, are subject to presumptive service connection; service connection would not be warranted unless the conditions manifested to a compensable degree within a year of the Veteran's release from active service or if he exhibited continuity of symptomatology since that time.  In this case, there is no probative evidence of bilateral hearing loss manifested to a compensable degree within one year from discharge, nor is there probative evidence showing continuity of symptomatology.  Indeed, STRs demonstrate no complaints or a diagnosis of hearing loss for VA purposes during service and the record does not reflect complaints regarding these conditions until the October 2023 claim for benefits.  

Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence of record is persuasively against the Veteran's claim seeking entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  Reasonable doubt does not arise, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply, and the Veteran's claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

2. Service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied.  

The Veteran asserts that he has irritable bowel syndrome related to toxic exposures during service.  

A November 2023 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had diagnoses of GERD without esophagitis and irregular bowel pattern with questionable irritable bowel syndrome.  The Veteran was directed to take Polyethylene Glycol, 1 cap full, mixed into 4-6 ounces of liquid by mouth daily.  

Subsequently, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine if he had a diagnosis of an intestinal conditions.  On February 2024 VA intestinal conditions examination, an intestinal condition was not diagnosed.  The Veteran reported that he had stomach pain in 2020 and had to make constant trips to the bathroom.  He related that he currently has stomach pains and takes fiber.  The Veteran reported that he has difficulty eating at work because he has to run to the bathroom often.  The examiner noted that continuous medication was not required for control of an intestinal condition and that the Veteran has not had surgical treatment for a stomach condition.  It was noted that he did not have signs or symptoms attributable to any non-surgical non-infectious intestinal condition, and he did not have episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress or exacerbations or attacks of an intestinal condition.  The Veteran did not have weight loss attributable to an intestinal condition, and he did not have malnutrition, serious complications, or other general health effects attributable to an intestinal condition.  It was also noted that the Veteran did not currently have, or has had, a benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases related to any condition in the diagnosis section.  

Regarding the first element of service connection, a current disability, the Board notes that the Veteran was afforded a VA intestinal conditions examination in February 2024.  The VA examiner considered the Veteran's report that he had stomach pain, took fiber, and had to make constant trips to the bathroom and determined that he did not have a diagnosed intestinal condition.  The examiner also considered the signs or symptoms that might support a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome and indicated that there was no objective evidence to support a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome.  

Upon review of the claims file, there is no further evidence of record, VA or private, indicating that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome.  The Board notes that a November 2023 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran had "questionable irritable bowel syndrome."  However, on subsequent VA examination, a VA examiner, after considering the record and the Veteran's statements, determined that he did not have a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome or another intestinal condition.  In the absence of such evidence, the Board must find that the first element of service connection has not been met and therefore the claim is denied.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992) (holding that a current diagnosis is the cornerstone of a claim for service connection).  Accordingly, service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is not warranted.  

3. A 70 percent (but no higher) rating for persistent depressive disorder is granted, throughout, from (the original effective date of) October 9, 2023.  

When the appeal is from the initial rating assigned with a grant of service connection, the severity of the disability during the entire period from the grant of service connection to the present is to be considered.  "Staged" ratings may be assigned for distinct periods when different levels of impairment are shown.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder has been assigned a 50 percent rating under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Code 9433.  

Ratings for psychiatric disability are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment from a psychiatric disorder under 38 C.F.R.    § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect occupational and social function.  When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).  

A November 15, 2023, VA treatment record indicates that although the suicide screen was reported as negative, the Veteran related that over the past month he has wished he was dead or wished he could go to sleep and not wake up, he had a history of suicidal ideation, and he attempted suicide in April 2023.  He indicated that his guns were locked up and that his dad had them.  The Veteran scored 20 on a PHQ-9 depression screen, which suggests severe depression, and he scored a 19 on a GAD-7 screen, which suggests severe anxiety.  

A November 27, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported that he had a history of depressive symptoms and that in the past he has had suicidal ideations when his stress level went up.  

A January 2024 VA treatment record notes that Veteran had a diagnosis of depressive disorder.  He denied suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, delusions, and hallucinations.  

On March 2024 VA mental disorders examination, mild persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress and major depressive disorder, recurrent episode, in partial remission, with anxious distress, were diagnosed.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder caused occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  The Veteran reported that he and his wife divorced in July 2023 and that they have three children, of whom he shares joint custody.  He related that he has been involved in a significant relationship since July and that he and his girlfriend get along well.  The Veteran reported that he lives with his parents and that he has good relationships with them and his siblings.  He related that he has some friends and that he was not involved in any groups, clubs, or religious organizations.  The Veteran reported that he has been working as a train conductor for the past two years and that he has had some problems with attendance due to his mental health issues and parenting responsibilities.  He related that he had suicidal ideation in 2020 and that during the episode he had a gun to his head when his wife walked in and stopped him.  The Veteran reported that he has experienced depressive episodes which lasted at least two weeks per episode, multiple times since 2018/2019, with the most recent episode in January 2024.  The examiner indicated that his mental disorder symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, and suicidal ideation.  

On mental status evaluation, the Veteran was dressed appropriately and was oriented in all spheres.  His concentration, social appropriateness, language, recent memory, remote memory, thought content, and thought process, were within normal limits.  The Veteran denied hallucinations, delusions, and homicidal ideation.  His judgment was within normal limits, his mood was good, and his affect was full range.  The Veteran reported the following current symptoms: depressed mood 20 out of 30 days, anxiety, irritability, mildly diminished interest in activities, appetite disturbance, feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness, and guilt, low self-esteem, decreased concentration, restlessness/feeling on edge, and variable ability to handle stress.  He related that he experienced current passive suicidal ideation and had a history of active suicidal ideation (most recently in November 2023 when he had a plan to shoot himself with his pistol).  He denied current active suicidal ideation, plan, or intent.  The Veteran indicated that his energy level was okay, and he denied any problems with memory or decision-making.  The suicide risk level was low acute.  The following actions were taken: the Veteran has the number to the Veterans' Crisis Line and indicated that he will talk with his mother if he experiences active suicidal ideation.  He reported that his father has his pistol at this time.  

The Board finds that from October 9, 2023, the original date of service connection for persistent depressive disorder, the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder most closely approximated a disability picture consistent with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas as contemplated by the criteria for a 70 percent rating.  VA treatment records note the Veteran's report of a suicide attempt in April 2023, just prior to the period on appeal and ongoing reports of passive suicidal ideation.  A November 15, 2023, VA treatment record indicates that although the suicide screen was reported as negative, the Veteran related that over the past month he has wished he was dead or wished he could go to sleep and not wake up.  On March 2024 VA mental disorders examination, the Veteran reported that although he got along well with his parents and girlfriend, he also experienced a depressed mood 20 out of 30 days, feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness, and guilt, low self-esteem, decreased concentration, restlessness/feeling on edge, and variable ability to handle stress.  He also related that he experienced current passive suicidal ideation and had a history of active suicidal ideation (most recently in November 2023 when he had a plan to shoot himself with his pistol).  The Veteran additionally noted that he had given his pistol to his father for safekeeping.  The Board has considered the Veteran's reported passive suicidal ideation in accordance with the holding of Bankhead and acknowledges that the 70 percent criteria for suicidal ideation does not require active, rather than "just" passive suicidal ideation.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).  As noted in Bankhead, it is not the presence of any one symptom or even all listed symptoms, but the level of occupational and social impairment which is the basis for the ultimate conclusion as to the level of disability warranted.  Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. 10, citing Vazquez-Claudio at 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The Veteran's reports suggest that although he has good familial relationships and has made efforts to lower the risk of taking any harmful actions during a moment of active suicidal ideation by giving his pistol to his father for safekeeping, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran has continued to deal with passive suicidal ideation throughout the period on appeal.  Additionally, his mental health symptoms, in addition to his parental responsibilities, have caused him to have attendance problems at work.  Such symptoms and impairment reflect deficiencies in most areas and warrant a 70 percent rating, throughout, from October 9, 2023.  Therefore, a 70 percent, but no higher, rating for the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder is granted from October 9, 2023.  

The analysis progresses to whether a 100 percent schedular rating is warranted for any period of time under consideration.  A psychiatric disability picture of less that total impairment is strongly suggested by the level of functioning related to employment and social relations.  Throughout, the Veteran had a stable relationship with his girlfriend and decent relationships with his parents and siblings.  He has maintained employment, and it was noted on examination that he maintained good hygiene, was oriented in all spheres, and denied hallucinations.  Significantly, symptoms noted during the evaluation period also do not suggest total impairment.  Gross impairment in thought process or persistent delusions and hallucinations were not clinically noted.  Nor has he displayed grossly inappropriate behavior, inability to tend to minimal hygiene, or substantial memory loss.  While he reported instances of suicidal ideation, such ideation does not appear to have resulted in him being considered a persistent danger to himself or others.  The Veteran's persistent depressive disorder disability picture does not show total occupational and social impairment during the period on appeal, and a schedular 100 percent rating is not warranted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

One of the effects of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

4. Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by right hip pain.  

5. Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by left hip pain.  

The Veteran asserts that he has right and left hip disabilities related to his activities during service.  

An October 2018 STR notes that the Veteran reported that he had been experiencing left hip pain for the past three months.  On evaluation, he had pain with internal rotation, end flexion, and extension.  Left hip X-rays showed normal mineralization and alignment without fracture, dislocation, or significant degenerative change.  The impression was normal left hip.  

A November 2018 STR notes that the Veteran had physical therapy for left hip pain.  

A December 2019 STR notes that the Veteran sought treatment for right hip pain that he had been experiencing for the past month.  He reported that running, squatting, and deadlifting caused the symptoms to worsen.  

A January 2020 STR notes a diagnosis of chronic hip pain.  

An additional January 2020 STR notes that the Veteran reported ongoing right hip pain which had not shown improvement with conservative therapy.  

A February 2020 report of medical history notes that the Veteran reported that he was not currently in good health and was about to start physical therapy for his hip.  

On February 2024 VA hip and thigh conditions examination, the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis associated with any claimed condition of the right and/or left hip.  The Veteran reported that his hip pain began during service in 2018 when he fell while attending airborne school.  He related that he had to constantly run and that he was not treated at that time for the fall or hip pain.  The Veteran reported that his hip pain has impacted his occupational functioning because he has to walk a lot for his job with the railroad and his hip pain causes him to not be as productive because it hampers his ability to walk effectively.  Regarding right and left hip flare-ups, the Veteran reported that flare-ups of each hip occur a few times a week, are moderate in severity, last 12 hours per episode, and are precipitated by running, walking on uneven ground, and sitting for an extended period of time.  Then either the examiner or the Veteran (it is unclear which one) notes that there is no functional impairment of the right or left hip due to flare-ups.  

Right and left hip range of motion (ROM) testing was normal, and pain was not noted on examination.  Regarding the right hip, the Veteran could perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions, and there was additional loss of function or ROM after three repetitions.  The examiner indicated that the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up and that procured evidence (statements from the Veteran) did not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination significantly limited functional ability with flare-ups in either hip.  The examiner did not provide estimated ranges of motion for either hip during flare-ups.  The Veteran reported that his hip pain has impacted his occupational functioning because he has to walk a lot for his job with the railroad and his hip pain causes him to not be as productive because it hampers his ability to walk effectively.  

In March 2024 VA right and left hip opinions, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed right and left hip disabilities were related to his service because there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis for either hip.  

The Veteran's claims of service connection for right and left hip disabilities have been denied because he did not have a current diagnosis for either of the disabilities.  However, as noted above, on February 2024 VA hip examination, the Veteran reported that he experienced flare-ups of each hip a few times a week which were moderate in severity, lasted 12 hours per episode, and were precipitated by running, walking on uneven ground, and sitting for an extended period of time.  The examiner, while noting that the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up, instead of estimating the potential loss of ROM in each hip during a flare-up simply noted that procured evidence (statements from the Veteran) did not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination significantly limited functional ability with flare-ups in either hip.  Although such findings are normally only considered by the Board when a disability is being evaluated for a higher rating, the Board notes that pain may, in the absence of a diagnosis or underlying pathology, itself can be considered a current disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1110 if it results in functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  In this instance the Board finds that the failure to take into account the Veteran's reports of his functional limitations (i.e., his reports of flare-ups and his reports that his bilateral hip pain caused some limitations at work because his job required a lot of walking and his hip pain impacted his ability to walk) in light of Saunders before determining that he did not have a right or left hip diagnosis, renders the examination inadequate and is a pre-decisional duty to assist error because an informed decision regarding service connection cannot be made by the Board with the current evidence of record.  Therefore, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical advisory opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed right and left hip disabilities.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following:

Arrange for the record to be forwarded to an appropriate clinician for review and an addendum opinion to determine the nature and likely etiology of the Veteran's right and left hip disabilities, specifically whether they are directly related to (were incurred during) his service.  The provider should review the entire claims file, and the opinion should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  [If the provider determines that an examination is needed, such should be provided.]  On review of the record, to include the numerous reports of treatment he received during service for both hips, the provider should:

(a) Identify (by diagnosis) any right and/or left hip disability (to include one due to pain causing functional impairment) entity found/shown by the record during the pendency of the instant claim.  

(b) If a right and/or left hip disability (with underlying pathology) is not found, note the area of each hip in which the Veteran reports pain, and if so, indicate whether the pain results in functional impairment.  The examiner must consider the Veteran's reports of pain during flare-ups and his reports of hip pain at work.  

(c) If a right and/or left hip disability is determined to not have been incurred in service, identify the etiology for the right and left hip that is considered to be more likely, and explain why that is so.  

The provider must include rationale with all opinions, citing to supporting factual data as deemed appropriate.  

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bayles, James J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.