Citation Nr: A25033697
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 221118-297165
DATE: April 10, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $13,045.26.

ORDER

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $13,045.26 is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The overpayment of VA compensation benefits in the amount of $13,045.26 was not due to the Veteran's fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith.

2. The Veteran's was at fault for the creation of the overpayment debt, due to his failure to timely notify VA of his return to active duty in November 2021, resulting in his receipt of active duty pay while concurrently receiving VA compensation benefits, which is prohibited.

3. The balance of fault lies with the Veteran for the creation of the overpayment debt, as opposed to VA.

4. Recovery of the overpayment would not result in undue hardship against the Veteran, in that the Veteran would not be deprived of his essential living expenses.

5. Recovery of the overpayment would not defeat the intended purpose of the benefit.

6. Waiver of recovery of the overpayment would result in unjust enrichment of the Veteran at government expense.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The recovery of the overpayment of VA compensation benefits in the amount of $13,045.26 would not be against the principles of equity and good conscience and, therefore, the overpayment indebtedness is not waived. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5302(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.962, 1.963, 1.965, 3.654, 3.700.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from June 1989 to December 1989, in the Marine Corps from September 1997 to July 1998, and in the Air Force from October 2015 to March 2016, from August 2019 to February 2020, from November 2020 to March 2021, from October 2021 to April 2022, and from October 2022 to January 2023.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2022 decision, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC).

Following the November 2022 COWC decision, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 COWC decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received after the November 2022 COWC decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Veteran has only claimed entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits. The Veteran has not disputed, nor challenged, the validity of the debt. Thus, the claim on appeal has been characterized to reflect the waiver request, only.

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $13,045.26.

The Veteran has requested a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits, in the amount of $13,045.26. The overpayment on appeal stems from a retroactive termination of his compensation benefits, following the Veteran's return to active duty, and therefore his receipt of military pay.

In general, there is a prohibition on the concurrent payment of VA disability compensation and active service pay. 38 U.S.C. § 5304 (c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.654, 3.700. Active service pay includes drill pay. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.654, 3.700. Reservists may waive their pension, compensation, or retirement pay for periods of field training, instruction, other duty, or drills. 38 C.F.R. § 3.700 (a)(iii). A waiver may include prospective periods and contain a right of recoupment for the days for which the reservist did not receive payment for duty by reason of failure to report for duty. Id.

By way of background, the Veteran had been in receipt of VA compensation benefits from February 2015. He has also completed various periods of drill pay days. See for example, VA Form 21-8951, Notice of Waiver of VA Compensation/Pension to Receive Military Pay and Allowances, May 2017, August 2017, December 2018, January 2019, June 2019, September 2019, June 2020, September 2020, and December 2020.

In relevant part, in February 2022, VA received information from the Department of Defense that the Veteran had returned to active duty with the Air Force, with a start date of November 1, 2021. As a result, the Veteran was informed that VA proposed to terminate the Veteran's compensation benefits retroactively to that date, as it was prohibited that he receive VA compensation and military pay concurrently. The Veteran was given 60 days to respond.

The Veteran did not respond, and so in April 2022, VA sent the Veteran another letter, informing him that his VA compensation benefits would be terminated, effective November 1, 2021. The Veteran was informed that this retroactive adjustment had created an overpayment in his name.

An internal award print screen noted that a debt was calculated at $13,045.26, based on the retroactive termination of benefits to November 1, 2021.

In May 2022, the Veteran was sent a letter from the Debt Management Center (DMC), informing him that an overpayment had been created in the amount of $13,045.26. The Veteran was informed of his rights to dispute the debt and/or to request a waiver of recovery of the debt.

In response, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), through which he requested a "debt waiver." The Veteran wrote that he was currently married, with other dependents ages 21, 17, 15 and 75. The Veteran was presently employed by the Air Force Reserve, and his spouse was working for the U.S. Federal government. The Veteran did not report his salary, nor his spouse's salary, but noted take home pay in the "retirement" portion of the income section. The Veteran listed expenses, including $500.00 for food and utilities/heat. He listed a rent/mortgage payment of $6,278.87, along with other expenses of "pool maintenance, yard maintenance, [and] house cleaning." The Veteran's income exceeded his expenses by $200.21 per month. Installment contracts were included at $1,234.86 per month. The Veteran listed $145.91 cash in the bank, $100.00 cash on hand, that he had $650,000.00 worth of real estate, and that he owned three separate Mercedes Benz vehicles, collectively worth about $60,000.00. The Veteran reported one personal loan with no amount past due but wrote that he had declared bankruptcy in September 1999.

In November 2022, a VA representative contacted the Veteran regarding the FSR and clarified his income. The Veteran wrote that he was no longer receiving VA compensation, due to his return to active duty, but that his military pay was $4,270.54 per month. During the phone call, the Veteran stated that he followed active-duty protocol when returning, and that he "submitted his [Air Force] Form 1962 to the Air Force ... [and that] the Air Force in turn was to advise VA of his active-duty status."

The clarified FSR was forwarded to the COWC, and in a Decision from November 2022, the COWC denied the wavier request. The COWC reasoned that there was no evidence that the Veteran informed VA of his return to active duty, and therefore he was at fault for failing to inform VA to terminate his compensation, which led to the overpayment being created. The COWC determined the Veteran was not facing undue financial hardship, and that he was unjustly enriched due to the concurrent receipt of VA compensation benefits and military pay.

The Veteran then submitted his VA Form 10182, NOD in response. The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, and he wrote that he was appealing the finding of "fault," because the "[Air Force] Form 1962 was submitted to [Air Force] on October 31, 2022." The Veteran has thus argued that he is not at fault for the overpayment because he informed the Air Force, and they were supposed to inform VA of the Veteran's return to active duty.

In December 2022, the Veteran's Representative submitted an Appellate Brief, through which they argued generally in favor of granting the Veteran a waiver of recovery of the debt.

The Veteran's claim is now before the Board.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that there has been no evidence of fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith in the present case.

In cases where fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith on the Veteran's part with respect to the creation of the overpayment at issue have not been demonstrated, and, therefore, waiver is not precluded pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5302 (a), the Board must determine whether recovery of the indebtedness would be against equity and good conscience, thereby permitting waiver under 38 U.S.C. § 5302 (a) and 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.963 (a), 1.965(a).

The standards of "equity and good conscience" will be applied when the facts and circumstances in a particular case indicate a need for reasonableness and moderation in the exercise of the Government's rights. The decision reached should not be unduly favorable or adverse to either side. The phrase "equity and good conscience" means arriving at a fair decision between the obligor and the Government. In making this determination, consideration will be given to the following elements, which are not intended to be all-inclusive:

1. Fault of debtor. Where actions of the debtor contribute to creation of the debt.

2. Balancing of faults. Weighing faults of the debtor against VA fault.

3. Undue hardship. Whether collection would deprive debtor or family of basic necessities.

4. Defeat the purpose. Whether withholding of benefits or recovery would nullify the objective for which the VA benefits were intended.

5. Unjust enrichment. Failure to make restitution would result in unfair gain to the debtor.

6. Changing position to one's detriment. Reliance on VA benefits results in relinquishment of a valuable right or incurrence of a legal obligation.

38 C.F.R. § 1.965(a).

Turning to the first factor, the Board finds the Veteran at fault for the creation of the debt. The crux of the Veteran's argument in favor of a waiver is that he informed the Air Force when he returned to active duty, and they were supposed to advise VA of his return to active duty, thus stopping his VA compensation and thereby preventing an overpayment. The Board has reviewed the Veteran's claims file and finds that there is no evidence that the Veteran informed VA of his return to active duty or that he requested his VA compensation be stopped. There is also no evidence from the Air Force to VA that the Veteran had returned to active duty, until the Department of Defense contacted VA in February 2022 to inform them that the Veteran had returned to active duty. At this point however, the Veteran had still been receiving VA compensation for a number of months, so a retroactive termination of benefits legally had to take place. Regardless, as to the Veteran's arguments, even if he did inform the Air Force about the return and expected them to, in turn, inform VA, informing the Air Force through the AF Form he specifies does not remove what is ultimately the Veteran's responsibility. The Veteran is regularly informed through correspondence that, as he is in receipt of VA compensation benefits, it is his burden to update VA about anything that would impact the receipt of those benefits, and this includes a return to active duty. Again, he had previously completed multiple periods of active duty, he was reasonably aware of the prohibition on the concurrent receipt of military pay and VA compensation benefits. Thus, because the Veteran failed to inform VA of his return to active duty, the creation of the overpayment is the fault of the Veteran.

VA comparatively is not at fault. VA was not informed of the Veteran's return to active duty until the Department of Defense notification in February 2022. At that point, VA immediately contacted the Veteran and proposed the termination of benefits, giving him 60 days to respond. He did not respond, so those benefits were terminated. The Veteran was sent the DMC letter without delay, and he was contacted to clarify information in his FSR, before that information was promptly forwarded to the COWC for a waiver decision. Thus, VA acted in accordance with its legal and regulatory obligations, and therefore does not bear any fault for the creation of the overpayment.

Turning to the third factor, the Veteran's FSR notes that the Veteran has a number of dependents to care for, that his income is very close to his expenses, that he has limited cash in hand, or in the bank, and that he has previously declared bankruptcy. Having said that, the Veteran's FSR was also clarified, and his salary income at the time he was completing active-duty service was substantially more than he listed on his FSR. The Veteran's rent/mortgage, as reported on the FSR was exceedingly high at $6,278.87, and it is unclear if this figure could actually represent multiple residences. He wrote that he owned real estate valued at $650,000.00, had a single installment contract that was not overdue, and that he had not one, but three, Mercedes Benz vehicles, which are generally considered a luxury class vehicle. Regardless, the Veteran has not indicated that recovery of the overpayment would prevent him from affording the basic financial necessities. Said another way, he has not indicated that he or his dependents would be deprived of food, rent and/or utilities if the overpayment were to be recovered. Thus, the Board finds that the financial hardship faced by the Veteran is not undue.

Fourth, the Board does not find that repayment of the debt would defeat the purpose for which it was originally intended.

Fifth, the Board is reminded that the Veteran returned to active duty - and received active duty pay - at the same time that he received VA compensation pay, which is again, prohibited. For the Board to waive recovery of the overpayment would result in unjust enrichment of the Veteran at the expense of the U.S. Government

Sixth, there is no indication that the Veteran changed his position to his detriment, nor incurred a legal liability, in reliance of the VA compensation benefits.

(Continued on next page.)

Therefore, after weighing all of the enumerated factors, the Board finds that recovery of the overpayment does not violate the principles of equity and good conscience. Each of the listed elements, when weighted, are against the Veteran's claim for a waiver of overpayment, even considering his arguments surrounding fault, as well as any possible financial hardship, which again, is not undue.

Thus, entitlement to a waiver of recovery of the overpayment of the VA compensation debt of $13,045.26 is denied.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.