Citation Nr: A25033904
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-454049
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for left ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is denied.  

Service connection for right ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is denied.   

Service connection for right foot hallux valgus is denied.  

Service connection for left foot hallux valgus is denied.  

REMANDED

Service connection for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.  

2. There is no competent evidence relating the Veteran's right foot hallux valgus to any in-service incident.

3. There is no competent evidence relating the Veteran's left foot hallux valgus to any in-service incident.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for left ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for right ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for right foot hallux valgus are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for left foot hallux valgus are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1996 to February 2003.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Army Achievement Medal.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in March 2024 by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in March 2024 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for bilateral hallux valgus and pes planus most recently addressed in a November 2022 rating decision.  In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted directly as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) The existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  

The recently passed Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that where a Veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active military service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion unless VA determines that there is no assertion that the claimed disorder is related to the TERA.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  

1. Service connection for left ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy.  

2. Service connection for right ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy.  He contends that his bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is related to his active service, to include TERA.  

As to the first element of service connection, current disability, the record indicates that the Veteran has a diagnosis of bilateral upper and lower extremity essential tremors.  Therefore, this element is met.  

As to the second element for direct service connection, in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, the Veteran served in Kuwait from December 1999 to February 2000; as such, the Veteran is presumed to have participated in TERA.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran's bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is related to his in-service TERA.  

The Veteran was afforded a March 2024 VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy.  The VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran was exposed to repetitive blasts from artillery fire, burn pits and associated toxicities.  The VA examiner held, however, that the Veteran's bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is unrelated to the Veteran's TERA considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA.  The medical literature describes cubital tunnel as a neuropathy of the ulnar nerve causing symptoms of pain, numbness and tingling.  The ulnar nerve can be irritated or trapped and compressed resulting in neuropathy symptoms.  Irritation or entrapment can be the result of overstretching the nerve, an injury to the elbow that may subsequently affect the nerve, or overuse of the elbow.  There is no known mechanism relating the Veteran's TERA to causing irritation or entrapment of the ulnar nerve; as such, the Veteran's bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy was found to be less likely than not the result of the Veteran's TERA.  

In this case, as to the issue of whether the Veteran's bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is related to his active service, the Board finds that the totality of the objective medical evidence, including the March 2024 VA addendum opinion, is adequate, as it was definitive, based upon a complete review of the Veteran's entire claims file, in consideration of the Veteran's reported history, prior physical evaluation of the Veteran, and pursuant to the Board's remand instructions.  Furthermore, the March 2024 VA examiner provided a complete and thorough rationale in support of the medical opinion.  See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-9 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  This opinion is also probative evidence against the Veteran's claim.  

The Veteran, however, has not provided details alleging any in-service event or diagnosis that could be related to his bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy.  As discussed above, the service treatment records do not support the Veteran's claim of onset of his disability during service.  In fact, the Veteran was not diagnosed until many years after service discharge.  The absence of post-service complaints, findings, diagnosis, or treatment for many years after service is one factor that tends to weigh against a finding of continuous symptoms after service separation.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (noting that the lack of contemporaneous medical records is one fact the Board can consider and weigh against the other evidence, although the lack of such medical records does not, in and of itself, render the lay evidence not credible).  Thus, any assertions that he may make as to onset during service with subsequent continuity are not supported by the objective evidence of record.  

The objective medical evidence ultimately outweighs the Veteran's lay contentions that his disabilities are related to service.  See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1372. (explaining in footnote 4 that a veteran is competent to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg, but not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994) (cautioning that lay testimony that the Veteran suffered an illness, bronchial asthma, was not competent evidence because the matter required medical expertise).  

Although the Veteran has established a current disability, the persuasive weight of the evidence weighs against a finding of an in-service event, injury, or disease, or that the Veteran's bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy is causally related to his service.  Since the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  For these reasons, service connection for bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment neuropathy are denied.

3. Service connection for right foot hallux valgus.  

4. Service connection for left foot hallux valgus.

The Veteran's private treatment records reflect a diagnosis of bilateral hallux valgus; as such, the first element of service connection, a current disability, is met.

Turning to the second element of service connection, in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, the Board notes that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that the Veteran's bilateral hallux valgus was incurred or aggravated during service.  The objective medical evidence of record fully supports that conclusion.  

Review of the Veteran's service treatment record did not reveal any diagnosis, treatment, or complaint related to bilateral hallux valgus.  

The Veteran, however, has not provided specific details alleging any in-service event or diagnosis that could be related to his claimed bilateral hallux valgus. As discussed above, the service treatment records do not support the Veteran's claim of onset of his disability during service.  In fact, the Veteran was not diagnosed with bilateral hallux valgus until nearly twenty (20) years after service discharge.  The absence of post-service complaints, findings, diagnosis, or treatment for many years after service is one factor that tends to weigh against a finding of continuous symptoms after service separation.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (noting that the lack of contemporaneous medical records is one fact the Board can consider and weigh against the other evidence, although the lack of such medical records does not, in and of itself, render the lay evidence not credible).  Thus, any assertions that he may make as to onset during service with subsequent continuity of are not supported by the objective evidence of record.  

The Veteran was not provided a VA examination in conjunction with his claim.  Absent any competent evidence relating his disability to his active service (other than the Veteran's conclusory, generalized statements), such an examination is not warranted.  Nor is there any evidence that the Veteran's bilateral hallux valgus is related to inservice TERA.  

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claims.  There is no doubt to be resolved.  Service connection for a bilateral hallux valgus is therefore denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral flatfoot disability is related to his active military service.  

Primarily, the Board notes that the Veteran's November 1994 induction examination indicated that the Veteran suffered from mild bilateral pes planus (flatfoot) was asymptomatic.  

As such, the Veteran's bilateral flatfoot condition was noted at service entrance, and the presumption of soundness does not attach.  For service connection to be granted for pes planus then, there must be an increase in disability during service that is not due to the natural progress of the disease.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1153.

To that end, the Veteran was afforded an October 2022 VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral pes planus.  The VA examiner confirmed a diagnosis of bilateral pes planus.  A December 2022 VA medical opinion indicates that a VA examiner found that the Veteran's pre-existing bilateral pes planus was not clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his active service.  The VA examiner highlighted the lack of evidence of permanent aggravation of the pre-existing right foot pes planus during active service but acknowledged the possibility that a temporary aggravation is plausible.  The Board finds that further medical guidance is needed as the examiner based the medical opinion on the lack of evidence of permanent aggravation, when the appropriate standard for aggravation in this case is any increase/worsening of the pre-existing condition is sufficient.   

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As discussed above, the incorrect standard of aggravation was applied in the December 2022 VA medical opinion.  Therefore, the Board finds that further development is needed prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim of service connection for bilateral pes planus.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion as to whether the Veteran's pre-existing bilateral pes planus was aggravated by his active service.  Whether an examination is needed prior to rendering this opinion is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state:

Whether the Veteran's bilateral pes planus which existed prior to service, at least as likely as not increase in severity during service?

If so, was the increase in severity clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) due to the natural progress of the disease?  

In providing any opinion concerning aggravation, the examiner is advised that a "permanent worsening" is not required to establish service connection based on aggravation; rather, aggravation may include temporary worsening, or flare-ups, of a disability.

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Higgins, Jeffery

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.