Citation Nr: A25033942
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250327-523257
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for unspecified attachment disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The most probative evidence of record shows the Veteran's unspecified attachment disorder was manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's disability meets the criteria for an increased rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for service-connected unspecified attachment disorder.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1956 to September 1958.

The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision in June 2024.  In the March 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran (or representative) with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  

In March 2025, the Veteran (through his representative) submitted a Motion to Advance on Docket requesting VA expediate the claim based on his age and a letter requesting that, "the Board advance this case on the docket . . .  Please expedite this veteran[']s claim and move forward in the adjudication process as soon as possible."  See March 2025 Motion to Advance on Docket and March 2025 Third Party Correspondence.  As such, the Board construes the request as a waiver of the 90 day evidentiary period.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes the Veteran's appeal for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) will be addressed in a separate decision as it is in a different docket. 

?

An increased rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for unspecified attachment disorder is granted.

The Veteran seeks a higher rating for his service-connected disability as he asserts his symptoms are more severe than contemplated by the rating assigned.  By way of background, the Veteran has had a 30 percent disability rating from October 21, 2021, forward.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where an increase in the level of a disability is at issue, the primary concern is the present level of disability.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  Where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different evaluations in the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings is appropriate.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. (2007).

If there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Psychiatric disabilities are rated based on the General Rating Formula codified in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, which provides disability ratings are based on a spectrum of symptoms.  "A veteran may qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of a similar severity, frequency, and duration."  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including (if applicable) those identified in the American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed. 1994) (DSM-IV) and (5th ed. 2013) (DSM-5).  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  VA is to engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment.  See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders per 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, a 30 percent rating is warranted if the disability is productive of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted if the disability is productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material; forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another.  38?C.F.R. § 4.3.  When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b).  When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable and the claim will be denied on its merits.  38?U.S.C. §?5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

The Veteran's medical records document the Veteran's participation in a general recreational exercise group (for the entire period on appeal) in which the Veteran was routinely described to be psychosocially pleasant and cooperative.  See March 2022, February 2023, May 2024, and June 2024 CAPRI.  The Veteran was regularly assessed to have an appropriate mood and affect and to be alert and oriented in all spheres.  Id.  The Veteran was noted to not have suicidal or homicidal ideations.  Id.  There are notes of the Veteran feeling anxiety, a depressed mood, and isolation.  Id.  He was noted to dress, toilet, and feed himself, prepare simple meals, perform light daily tasks, drive, manage his medicines, and handle his finances.  Id.

?

In the Veteran's private treatment records, he is noted to have anxiety, food hoarding behaviors, and a disorganized house.  See February 2023 MTR.  He has flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, sleep disturbances, excessive worry, depressed mood, irritability, feelings of abandonment, and anxiety.  Id.; see also April 2025 MTR.  The Veteran has confusion and disorientation when multitasking and becomes overwhelmed when his routine is disrupted.  Id.  He was noted to have good hygiene and eye contact, normal speech, adequate affect and mood, logical thought, and good judgment and insight.  Id.  The Veteran did not have a history of suicidal or homicidal ideations.  Id.  It was noted he had concerns about his memory.  Id.

The Veteran's daughter provided multiple statements outlining her father's mental health symptomatology.  She attested to her father's anxiety, control and fear issues, obsessive daily rituals, and difficulty with concepts and commands.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-4138.  On occasion, he has to be reminded to shower and brush his teeth.  Id.  The Veteran's daughter also believes the Veteran had a thought of hurting himself approximately 30 years prior, however, the VA counselor did not recognize the statements as an admission of suicidal ideation.  See October 2021 Correspondence.  Additionally, the Veteran's private and VA treatment records consistently document the Veteran to not have suicidal ideations.

The Veteran's friend, Dr. A.A., who is also a licensed physician, submitted a statement regarding the Veteran's symptomatology.  See March 2025 VA Form 21-4138.  Dr. A.A. stated the Veteran was exhibiting overwhelming and increasing anxiety and stress which was causing erratic changes in the Veteran's gait, health, and hoarding habits.

Dr. Y. H-W, the Veteran's primary care physician for twenty years, submitted a statement regarding the Veteran.  See March 2025 VA Form 21-4138.  Dr. Y. H-W noted the Veteran has had a significant increase in anxiety and a slow but discernable decline in abilities to manage stressors.  She documented the Veteran's extreme anxiety, obsessive-compulsive behavior, hoarding, poor concentration, hypervigilance, inattention to self-care, and insomnia.  Dr. Y. H-W stated, "It is my clinical opinion that Mr. Ray's anxiety disorder has dramatically increased over the past 6-12 months resulting in complete and total disability."  However, she did provide a rationale to explain the statement regarding complete and total disability to include whether total disability was assessed per VA regulations.

In a private opinion dated October 22, 2023, Dr. J.M. stated the Veteran has consistently reported a depressed mood, irritability, distraction, nightmares, avoidance, and hypervigilance.  See October 2023 MTR.  The doctor assessed these symptoms to impose severe and persistent limitations of social and occupational functioning, including ability to maintain employment.  While the examiner included notations from the Veteran's medical records, he did not provide a rationale for the assessment regarding social and occupational functioning or employment.

The Veteran was afforded two VA examinations.  In March 2023, the examiner noted the Veteran's relationship with his children and a few friends and his membership in multiple groups including his fraternity and senior bowling league.  See March 2023 C&P Exam.  The Veteran was noted to be prescribed Escitalopram and attend counseling.  It was also noted the Veteran had problems with concentration and short-term memory, hoarding food, anxiety, sleep impairment, and isolation.  He was assessed to have a normal thought process and content and not have hallucinations, delusions, or suicidal ideation.  The examiner assessed the Veteran to have occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms.

In a June 2024 VA examination, the examiner noted the Veteran had anxiety, suspiciousness, and chronic sleep impairment though no suicidal ideation or hospitalizations.  See June 2024 C&P Exam.  She assessed the Veteran to have normal eye contact, appearance, attention, language, and thought content and congruent affect and mood.  Id.  The examiner assessed the Veteran to have occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  Id.  The Veteran's daughter contends this examination was inadequate as it was conducted via video and the Veteran had a difficult time understanding and communicating with the examiner and the examiner was rude.  See March 2025 VA Form 21-4138.  

?

Therefore, daughter believes the examiner did not accurately represent the Veteran's symptomatology including intermittent issues with personal hygiene, obsessive rituals, memory, aggressive behavior, and suicidal ideation.  Id.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's daughter's concerns about the examiner's demeanor and agrees that Veterans should be treated with dignity and respect.  The examination is assessed to have a lower probative value as it did not cite to all of the Veteran's symptomatology as is included in his claims file, but concerns raised by the Veteran's daughter do not entirely invalidate the examiner's findings.

The Board finds that the Veteran's unspecified attachment disorder manifests in symptoms that more closely approximate the criteria for a 50 percent disability rating.  The record reflects difficulty understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, and impairment of memory.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms include occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, for the entire period on appeal.

The Board finds that for the entire period on appeal, the evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria for a 70 percent (or higher) disability rating.  The criteria for a 70 percent disability rating requires occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas.  The medical evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran had suicidal ideation, near-continuous panic or depression, impaired impulse control, or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Accordingly, a rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted.

The Veteran manifested the symptoms listed in the criteria demonstrating occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.?

Based on the evidence described above, the Board finds the criteria for a 50 percent evaluation, but no higher, more nearly approximated the Veteran's symptoms during the entire period on appeal.   

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Dyer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.