Citation Nr: A25033698
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 221024-288063
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with major depressive disorder, severe, and anxious distress prior to November 24, 2021, is denied.  

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) at the housebound rate prior to November 24, 2021, is denied.  

Eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 prior to November 24, 2021, is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1.  Prior to November 24, 2021, the most probative evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing that the Veteran's service connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, severe, and anxious distress manifested in a disability picture more closely approximating total occupational and social impairment.  

2.  Prior to November 24, 2021, the Veteran did not have a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent, or a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) due to a single disability, with additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more.  

3.  Prior to November 24, 2021, the Veteran did not have a permanent total service-connected disability.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  Prior to November 24, 2021, the criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with major depressive disorder, severe, and anxious distress have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 4.1, 4.2, 4.6, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

2.  Prior to November 24, 2021, the criteria for SMC at the housebound rate have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.400, 3.401. 

3.  Prior to November 24, 2021, the criteria for DEA benefits under Chapter 35 have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3510, 5110, 5113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3021.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Air Force during Peacetime and the Gulf War Era, from April 1982 to April 1992.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2022 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  This appeal has been developed under VA's Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system of review.  

The Veteran perfected this appeal by timely submitting an October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and electing the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) on December 18, 2024, and a transcript is contained within the claims file.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the RO's January 2022 Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Finally, this appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket.  38 U.S.C. § 7107(a), (b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Ratings Schedule) which is based upon average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Each service-connected disability is rated on the basis of specific criteria identified by DCs.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.

Generally, the effective date for an increase in disability compensation is the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable, based upon all evidence of record, that an increase in disability had occurred if a complete claim or intent to file a claim is received within one year from such date, otherwise, the date of receipt of the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).

A Veteran may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Thus, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based upon the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

The Board must determine whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or if there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence (i.e., relative equipoise) regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim in which case it must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; see Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with major depressive disorder, severe, and anxious distress prior to November 24, 2021, is denied.  

The Veteran seeks an effective date prior to November 24, 2021, for the assignment of a 100 percent rating for her service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, severe, and anxious distress (acquired psychiatric disorder).  According to the Veteran, the assignment of the 100 percent rating should be the "date of original claim of 5/18/2018," which she testified has "been going over and over and over and over again."    

However, while there was no such claim received on that date, an original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) was received in March 2018 that resulted in a June 2018 Rating Decision granting an increased rating of 70 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder.  After the Veteran requested reconsideration of the assigned rating, such was denied by an August 2018 Rating Decision.  

Subsequently, the Veteran submitted an original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) in September 2018 seeking a rating in excess of 70 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder, which was denied by a December 2018 Rating Decision.  Although she did not submit a timely appeal, new and material evidence (under VA's Legacy system of review) was received within one year of that decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b).  Specifically, a staff psychiatrist noted in a January 2019 VA medical record (VAMR) that the Veteran presented "more anxious, stressed, depressed over the last 2 weeks," and her dosage for Bupropion was increased accordingly.  

Under the Legacy system of review, when post-decision medical records are constructively received by VA within the one-year appeal period of a Rating Decision, that Rating Decision does not become final until a determination is made as to whether such evidence is new and material.  See Lang v. Wilkie, 971 F.3d 1348 (Fed. Cir. 2020).  However, an earlier effective date for an increased rating is not available in the present matter based upon application of 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b) and Lang.  

Notably, the RO's January 2022 Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, is an initial decision issued after enactment of the AMA and, therefore, is governed by same.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400(a), 19.2(b).  Under the AMA, 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 is not for consideration.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b) (applicable to pending claims not under the modernized review system).  Indeed, in removing 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 from the AMA, VA explained that:

Because § 3.156(b) requires automatic readjudication upon the receipt of new evidence during the one-year appeal period, it is clearly inconsistent with the statutory design of the new system.  Nevertheless, excluding § 3.156(b) from the regulations governing new system claims does not adversely impact a claimant's right to obtain a VA readjudication on new and relevant evidence.  It simply means that claimants must submit such evidence through the channels established by the AMA.  

See 84 Fed. Reg. 138, 143 (Jan. 18, 2019).  

Under the AMA, an effective date can be preserved if a claim is continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the notice of a decision was mailed.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  If an AMA claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).  Following notice of a decision on an initial claim or a supplemental claim, continuous pursuit can be established by filing a supplemental claim, request for higher-level review, or VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(1).  Following notice of a decision on a higher-level review, continuous pursuit can be established by filing either a supplemental claim or a VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(2).  A supplemental increased rating claim (VA Form 20-0995) is a request for review of a prior decision, whereas an original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) is based upon a change or worsening since the last decision and cannot establish continuous pursuit.  

Here, in order to establish continuous pursuit to support an earlier effective date as far back as 2018 for an increased rating for acquired psychiatric disorder, the Veteran would have needed to submit a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) after enactment of the AMA (i.e., February 19, 2019) as to either the August 2018 or December 2018 Rating Decision.  However, she instead submitted original increased rating claims (VA Form 21-526EZ) in September 2018 and February 2020, and her choice of original increased rating claims over supplemental claims has different consequences in that it cannot support continuous pursuit.  See Jackson v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 277 (2024) (stating that Congress separated supplemental claims and increased compensation claims for good reason: increased compensation claims allow for a one-year look back).

As noted above, on February 14, 2020, the Veteran submitted another original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) seeking a rating in excess of 70 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder, and a June 2020 Rating Decision denied the claim.  After she requested higher-level review, a December 2020 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision also denied the claim.  

In November 2021, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) seeking review of the December 2020 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision.  Thereafter, a January 2022 Rating Decision granted her a 100 percent rating for acquired psychiatric disorder effective November 24, 2021, the date VA received her VA Form 20-0995.  After the Veteran requested higher-level review of the assigned effective date for the 100 percent rating, the October 2022 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal denied a 100 percent rating prior to November 24, 2021.  As noted previously, in October 2022, she submitted a VA Form 10182 electing the Board's Hearing docket.  

Given the foregoing, the Veteran has continuously pursued an increased rating for acquired psychiatric disorder since her original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) received on February 14, 2020, by timely filing in succession her available review options under the AMA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c), (h).  As such, the rating period under review begins up to one year prior to receipt of her February 14, 2020, VA Form 21-526EZ through issuance of the January 2022 Rating Decision which was subsequently subject to higher-level review (i.e., February 2, 2022).  

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is evaluated under DC 9411 for PTSD.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Under DC 9411, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.  

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought process or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.  

When evaluating signs and symptoms to determine their effect on the level of occupational and social impairment in order to arrive at an appropriate disability rating, the Board will look to their severity, frequency, and duration; consider their impact as a whole; and make a quantitative assessment accordingly.  See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 26-27 (2017).  Because use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002); see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-24 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Prior to the rating period under review, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in May 2018.  At the time, symptoms were reported to include anxiety, panic attacks weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (e.g., forgetting names, directions, or recent events), flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work like setting, suicidal ideation (SI), and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The Veteran reported that she "doesn't feel anything [...] like an abyss," and "doesn't like people behind her or loud noises or people touching her."  She described staying in her room "for three days" a couple months prior, sleeping "3-4 hours," "difficulty concentrating and focusing," wanting to be alone, and irritability.  The Veteran indicated that she was a letter carrier but could no longer carry (due to a knee condition) so, for the last year, she answered phones and dealt with complaints which had been "stressful."  She was assessed with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.   

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in October 2018 (report received November 2018) and symptoms were reported to include depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (e.g., forgetting names, directions, or recent events), flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work like setting, SI, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  The Veteran reported that she "frequently neglects her physical appearance and does not wash her hair frequently," as well as "some SI which are more vivid but [...] she wouldn't carry it out."  She indicated that she was "having a hard time at work" including being "very stressed" and overwhelmed.  The Veteran was assessed with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  

VA medical records (VAMRs) dated October 2018 reflect that the October 2018 VA examination "triggered [the Veteran's] 'bad memories and feelings,' which are causing her to experience significant worsening anxiety/panic."  She reported that she did not leave her house or go to work the prior week.  The Veteran endorsed difficulty thinking clearly or focusing due to anxiety, as well as "persistent depression/anxiety with passive fleeting thoughts of not wanting to live" for "many years now."  She denied current SI, homicidal ideation (HI), audio hallucination (AH), or visual hallucination (VH).  The Veteran was assessed with "alteration in mood related to worsening anxiety."     

In January 2019, VAMRs reflect that the Veteran was "more anxious, stressed, depressed over the last 2 weeks," with increased (nightly) nightmares, irritability/ anger, hypervigilance, forgetfulness, and startle response, and she endorsed avoidance behavior, moderate anhedonia, and decreased energy and appetite.  She was assessed with moderately severe symptoms.    

During the rating period under review, VAMRs noted that in November 2019, "spanning over a month's time," the Veteran experienced increased symptoms such as "stress, tension [...] anxiety, depression," "hypervigilance," "exaggerated startle response," and "irritability/anger," as well as decreased focus, concentration, short-term memory, and sleep due to a coworker "playing music [...] next to her work space."  Her medications were adjusted accordingly.    

VAMRs dated February 2020 indicate the Veteran "has been much more depressed at 9/10 over the last 4 weeks" and has not been working.  She was noted as "anhedonic, has lost interest and pleasure in life," "isolative, stays in bed often," with decreased ADLs, "decreased bathing and personal grooming," "low energy," "poor appetite," sleep disturbance, "low self esteem/worthlessness/uselessness," decreased short-term memory and concentration, "loses train of thought," "fleeting SI often over the last month with plan," "increased intrusive memories," increased irritability/anger, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, and avoidance behavior.  The Veteran was noted to have "extreme difficulty working at her job/ place of employment over the last 3 years."  She was assessed as being "permanently disabled and unemployable" and warranted a "100%" rating for her acquired psychiatric disorder.  Her medications were adjusted accordingly.  

Private (i.e., non-VA) medical records from Kaiser Permanente dated February 2020 indicate that, in November 2019, the Veteran's "symptoms became more severe" and were worsened "when she returned from her knee replacement surgery" and a coworker "started playing loud music."  According to the Veteran, her symptoms were well-controlled when she was a letter carrier "because she spent most of the time alone."  She was noted to have last worked on "1/10/20."  

Another VA examination was conducted in June 2020 and symptoms were reported to include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once weekly, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (e.g., forgetting names, directions, or recent events), difficulty understanding complex commands, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work like setting, SI, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The Veteran described having "some work friends" ("does not associate with them apart from work") and coming home from work and isolating in her room.  She endorsed worsening anxiety, panic, and depression symptoms, and "feeling almost paranoid" and not trusting others, "even having problems with being with her husband or children now."  The Veteran was observed to have moderately restricted affect, mildly circumstantial thought content, and passive SI, but was fully oriented with intact memory and normal attention and concentration.  She was noted to have worsening symptoms, and her impairment level was "evaluated as high."  The Veteran was again assessed with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.   

VAMRs dated February 2021 reflect that the Veteran endorsed "a surge in anxiety and depression marked by not being able to get out of bed for a week and missing two days of work due to feeling overwhelmed."  She reported being "back at work with increased stress, pressure," as well as decreased appetite, energy/fatigue, short-term memory, concentration, and sleep.  "Current conflict with husband" was also noted and the Veteran endorsed intrusive memories, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, avoidance behavior, and irritability/anger.  

In May 2021, VAMRs noted that the Veteran was "more stressed, anxious, depressed at work at 8-9/10," and she had "conflicts with husband" including decreased communication.  She expressed that "going to work is very stressful," and endorsed anhedonia, isolating in her bedroom, "shaking/nauseated when going to work," sleep disturbance, decreased short-term memory and concentration, low energy, decreased appetite, low self-esteem, "fleeting SI without plan or intent," irritability/anger, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, and intrusive memories.  

Later in May 2021, VAMRs reflect that the Veteran presented "significantly depressed and anxious mood," including feeling hopeless/helpless, insomnia, and active SI with "multiple recent stressors such as denial of workman's compensation disability claim, severe financial burden, an ongoing hostile work place, and a history of chronic vague SI with intermittent periods of more active SI."  She was noted to have "been able to return to work yesterday and today," but her mood remained "depressed and frustrated."  According to the Veteran, she felt "very fatigued and wished that she would lay down and 'never wake up.'"  Her husband was instructed to take her to the emergency department.  In October 2021, she "continued to report a depressed and anxious mood, but indicated no longer experiencing severe SI."   

In a November 2021 statement, the Veteran reported having ongoing difficulties with coworkers and supervisors and, when she was moved to the front office, having her "first huge depressive episode" along with a panic attack followed by time off from work.  When she returned, she was able to move back to her former position in "bulk mail."  According to the Veteran, things worsened when she returned to work "in October 2019" following a left knee replacement surgery, and she had a "nervous breakdown and couldn't go back to work for a month" in 2020.  She also described being sent home by a supervisor for two weeks after an incident when he stated that she "was unstable and he feared for his life."  The Veteran indicated that October 2021 "was the worst" for her due to work and a workman's compensation claim, which resulted in worsening SI.  She reported that she "can't go to functions where there are too many people," or go to movie theaters with her family, and has difficulty sleeping, including "bad dreams," and being on "high alert" and flinching "at every touch."  The Veteran endorsed having SI daily.     

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in December 2021 and symptoms were reported to include depressed mood, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (e.g., forgetting names, directions, or recent events), impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks), impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, SI, persistent danger of hurting self or others, and intermittent inability to perform ADLs including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  The Veteran described that, "for the last year, she has not kept in touch with her family or friends, and feels misunderstood by others."  She denied any social engagement and reported that "tension between coworkers easily agitates her" and "she isolates."  The Veteran indicated that she took online college courses in the fall semester of 2021 but stopped "due to extreme emotional distress" in October 2021 when her workers' compensation was discontinued.  At that time, she endorsed SI with "a plan, intent and means to follow through," and "stayed in bed for about 2 weeks and missed work."  The Veteran reported "increased paranoid thoughts" due to the workers' compensation matter, as well as "vivid dreams" that cause "memory confusion [...] since June 2021," but denied audio/visual hallucinations.  Her impairment level was again "rated as high" and she was assessed with total occupational and social impairment.  

During the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that her current symptoms were the same as they were "back in 2020," although she also acknowledged "it has gotten worse [...] since [she] got the 100 percent" in that she is "taking different kinds of medications."  She referenced "2018" paperwork by her treating VA psychiatrist that indicated she was "100 percent disabled for PTSD."  Further, the Veteran testified that she did not believe the VA examination reports were adequate except the one conducted in December 2021, when the examiner "actually spent a whole half hour talking to me."  The Board observes that a similar argument was made by the Veteran at an informal conference during higher-level review in October 2022.    

During the post-hearing evidentiary window, the Veteran submitted a February 2023 statement from a VA psychologist, Dr. J.M.  According to Dr. J.M., the Veteran continued to report "severe" symptoms which, "although improved from treatment onset, continues to significantly impact her ability to function in the work place without accommodations."  He also noted that the Veteran's "hostile work environment" exacerbated her symptoms as "clearly evident in her report of symptoms and in objective measures [...] since 2018."  Dr. J.M. reported that, "the greater the number of people and the more intense her perception of environmental hostility, the more impaired her productivity becomes."     

The Board finds the probative evidence under review shows the Veteran's signs and symptoms of acquired psychiatric disorder more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood consistent with a 70 percent rating throughout the rating period under review prior to November 24, 2021.  38 C.F.R. 4.130, DC 9411.  During this period, the medical evidence reflects symptoms including, among others, frequent SI, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, near-continuous panic or depression affecting her ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances such as work or a work-like setting.  

However, the Board finds the probative evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing the Veteran's signs and symptoms of acquired psychiatric disorder more closely approximated total occupational and social impairment so as to warrant a 100 percent rating at any time during the rating period under review prior to November 24, 2021.  Id.  During this period, the medical evidence does not reflect such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Mental status examinations frequently reported her to be alert, fully oriented, and with normal speech, and without perceptual disturbances, psychosis, or abnormal thought processes.  Also, although frequent SI is reported, as well as the emergency department visit due to "active" SI in May 2021, the medical evidence does not indicate the Veteran was a persistent danger to herself or others, as she did not endorse prior attempts to harm or experiencing current SI/HI intent or plan to medical providers and examiners.  Further, although she was at times noted to neglect her personal appearance and hygiene, prior to the December 2021 VA examination report which formed the basis of the 100 percent increased rating effective November 24, 2021, the evidence does not indicate that she was intermittently unable to perform ADLs including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, as she was often observed by medical providers and examiners to be dressed appropriately and groomed.    

Moreover, the Veteran worked full-time for the same employer throughout the rating period under review, albeit not without difficulties.  For example, in a November 2021 statement, she reported that she had used all of her annual leave and sick leave and was taking leave without pay as a result of her acquired psychiatric disorder, but could not "afford to quit."  During the post-hearing evidentiary window, the Veteran submitted an undated and unsigned Medical Information and Restriction Assessment form related to her job at the USPS, which recommended she "be considered for a Telework position if this is an option."  While the foregoing evidence reflects occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, to include work, the evidence does not show total occupational impairment prior to the December 2021 VA examination report which formed the basis of the 100 percent increased rating effective November 24, 2021.      

Further, the Board assigns no probative weight to the VA treating psychiatrist's abbreviated and conclusory notations dated February 2020 and April 2020 that the Veteran was "permanently disabled and unemployable" and warranted a "100%" rating for her acquired psychiatric disorder.  Notably, in addition to the Veteran's continued employment throughout the rating period under review, such notations lack fully articulated and soundly reasoned medical explanations connecting supporting facts with the conclusions reached.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).    

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that her acquired psychiatric disorder was more severe prior to November 24, 2021, than the assigned 70 percent rating reflects.  Indeed, she is competent to report experiencing symptoms of an acquired psychiatric disorder as such can be observed through her senses and does not require medical expertise.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); see Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  However, given their medical education, training, and experience, the Board assigns more probative weight to the findings of the competent medical professionals contained in the treatment and examination reports under review, which did not assess total occupational and social impairment prior to the December 2021 VA examination report which formed the basis of the 100 percent increased rating effective November 24, 2021.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1).   

Based upon the foregoing, and considering the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder and its impact as a whole, the Board finds the most probative evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing that her acquired psychiatric disorder manifested in a disability picture more closely approximating total occupational and social impairment at any time during the rating period under review prior to November 24, 2021.  As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, there is no reasonable doubt to be resolved.  See Lynch, 999 F.3d 1391.  Thus, entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder for the rating period under review prior to November 24, 2021, must be denied.  

Entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate prior to November 24, 2021, is denied.  

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for SMC at the housebound rate.  The January 2022 Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, granted SMC at the housebound rate effective November 24, 2021.  The Board notes that claims for earlier effective dates for SMC are treated analogously to claims for earlier effective dates for increased ratings.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400(o), 3.401(a). 

The regulations provide additional compensation on the basis of being housebound where a Veteran has a service-connected disability rated as total (i.e., 100 percent), and (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems; or (2) by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities is permanently housebound.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  

In the present matter, the January 2022 Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, granted the Veteran a 100 percent rating for acquired psychiatric disorder effective November 24, 2021.  The Rating Decision also granted SMC effective November 24, 2021, because the criteria for statutory housebound status was met beginning that date, specifically, a service-connected disability (i.e., acquired psychiatric disorder) rated at 100 percent and additional service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more (i.e., sinusitis at 30 percent, tension headaches at 30 percent, duodenal ulcer at 20 percent, bilateral temporomandibular joint disorder at 10 percent, and hyposmia at 0 percent).  Id.   

VA regulations dictate the specific circumstances and criteria which must be met before SMC may be granted.  As such, prior to November 24, 2021, because the Veteran did not have a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent, or a TDIU due to a single disability, entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of SMC at the housebound rate must be denied. 

Eligibility to DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 prior to November 24, 2021, is denied.  

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for DEA benefits under Chapter 35.  The January 2022 Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, granted DEA effective November 24, 2021. 

For purposes of eligibility to DEA benefits under Chapter 35, the child or surviving spouse of a Veteran will have basic eligibility if the following conditions are met: (1) the Veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, or died in service; and (2) the Veteran has a permanent total service-connected disability; or (3) a permanent total service-connected disability was in existence at the date of the Veteran's death; or (4) the Veteran died as a result of a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 3510; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807(a).  The criteria pertaining to the award of educational benefits provides that effective dates assigned following the grant of benefits under Chapters 30, 31, 32, and 35 shall, to the extent feasible, correspond to the effective dates relating to awards of disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 5113.  

In the present matter, the January 2022 Rating Decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, granted the Veteran DEA benefits effective November 24, 2021, because she was found to be totally and permanently disabled as of that date.  Again, prior to November 24, 2021, the Veteran was not in receipt of a 100 percent rating or a TDIU.  Thus, the evidence under review does not show that the Veteran was totally and permanently disabled prior to November 24, 2021.  

VA regulations dictate the specific circumstances and criteria which must be met before DEA benefits may be granted.  As such, prior to November 24, 2021, because the Veteran did not have a permanent total service-connected disability, entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of DEA benefits must be denied. 

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Worsham, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.