Citation Nr: A25033132
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240524-442970
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for pulmonary embolism, to include as secondary to atherosclerotic heart disease, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 1978 to March 2004. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for pulmonary embolism is remanded.

This issue is remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the July 2023 rating decision on appeal. The Board must remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. 

First, VA's duty to assist includes making reasonable efforts to obtain relevant private medical records. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1). Here, VA was on notice of the existence of outstanding and relevant private treatment records prior to issuing the decision on appeal. In particular, a June 2023 VA treatment note reports the Veteran received ongoing private medical care for his history of pulmonary embolism and vascular disease. Because the AOJ failed to undertake reasonable efforts to identify and obtain those records prior to issuing the decision on appeal, remand is necessary to correct this error.

Second, remand is required for an adequate medical opinion. VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination and/or opinion when necessary to make a decision on a claim. See 38 C.F.R. 3.156(c). Where VA provides the veteran with an examination or opinion, there is also a duty to ensure the examination is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008). A medical opinion or conclusion is not adequate when the examiner fails to address relevant evidence. Id. Moreover, an adequate medical opinion should address all theories of entitlement.

VA obtained a medical opinion in July 2023, but it is not adequate. By way of background, VA has favorably found that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity during his Persian Gulf War service in Kuwait, which VA recognizes includes exposure to burn pits and other toxins. The Board further observes that the Veteran's DD 214 shows he received certifications related to transporting/handling hazardous materials. The July 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnosed pulmonary embolism was not due to the Veteran's period of service, to include any toxic exposure risk activities. In support of that opinion, the examiner stated that "[t]his is based upon claimed exposure(s) to unknown," "[t]he reported activity that resulted in exposure is described as unknown," "[t]he route of exposure is described as unknown," and "[t]he frequency of exposure is reported as unknown." The examiner only generally referenced the Veteran's place of exposure as being his deployment. The examiner then stated that "there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition(s) at issue and the [toxic exposure risk activity]." The examiner's rationale is inadequate because it is overly broad, does not discuss the Veteran's specific exposures that are noted in the claims file, and does not include any discussion of the medical principles involved to allow the adjudicator to reach an informed conclusion.

Next, the examiner failed to address a theory of entitlement that was raised by the record. In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a printout from an emergency department regarding the factors that are known to increase the risk of pulmonary embolism. Those factors included long term heart disease. At the time of the decision on appeal, service connection was in effect for atherosclerotic heart disease associated with hypertension. Thus, the evidence indicated that the pulmonary embolism may be etiologically related to a service-connected disability. As a result, the AOJ had a duty to secure a medical opinion on that theory of entitlement prior to the decision on appeal. Thus, remand is required to secure adequate medical opinions on the etiology of the claimed pulmonary embolism. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and afford him the opportunity to identify by name, address and dates of treatment or examination any relevant medical records related to the treatment for his pulmonary embolism. Subsequently, and after securing the proper authorizations where necessary, make arrangements to obtain all the records of treatment or examination from all the sources listed by the Veteran which are not already on file. All information obtained must be made part of the file. All attempts to secure this evidence must be documented in the claims file, and if, after making reasonable efforts to obtain named records, they are not able to be secured, provide the required notice and opportunity to respond to the Veteran and his representative.

2. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician on the etiology of the Veteran's claimed pulmonary embolism. If an examination is deemed necessary to respond to the question posed, one should be scheduled. The clinician is asked to address the following after reviewing the claims file:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's pulmonary embolism and his TERA? Please explain why or why not, specifically considering 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran; 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. In this regard, the examiner is requested to specifically address the Veteran's deployment to Kuwait, his exposure to burn pits and other toxins, and his exposure from handling/transporting hazardous materials.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(b) Is the Veteran's pulmonary embolism at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) (1) due to or the result of, or (2) aggravated by his service-connected atherosclerotic heart disease? Please explain why or why not, specifically considering and discussing the medical records submitted on June 16, 2023 noting that chronic heart disease is a risk factor for the development of pulmonary embolism.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.