Citation Nr: A25033509
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240807-462075
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance and therefore, the Veteran is afforded the benefit of the doubt that his tinnitus was caused by in-service hazardous noise exposure.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1101, 1131, 1113, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. 3.102, 3.303, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Navy from October 1977 to November 1980.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In August 2024, the Veteran timely filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and selected the Direct Review docket.

In selecting the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to Service Connection for Tinnitus

The Veteran and his representative argue that the Veteran's tinnitus was caused by in-service noise exposure associated with his military occupational specialty (MOS).

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Service connection requires evidence that shows the following three elements: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service." Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be rebuttably presumed for certain chronic diseases, such as tinnitus, if the disease manifested to a compensable degree within one year after separation from active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. An alternative method of establishing presumptive service connection is if the disease was incurred in service and the evidence demonstrates a continuity of symptomatology since service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see also Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In limited circumstances, certain diseases, such as tinnitus, may be shown through credible and competent lay observation when derived from an individual's own senses. Tinnitus, defined as a noise subjectively heard within the ears, such as ringing, buzzing, roaring, or clicking, is a disorder which can be ascertained through the Veteran's own senses. Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).

In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran currently has a diagnosed disability of tinnitus and that based on the Veteran's MOS, he was exposed to hazardous noise. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings which satisfy the first and second elements of service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the issue is whether the disability is causally connected to the in-service hazardous noise exposure.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran was first diagnosed with tinnitus in his February 2022 VA audiological examination. See February 2022 C&P Exam. Prior to the diagnosis, the Veteran initially disclosed his tinnitus after filing his claim for service connection in August 2021. See August 2021 VA 21-526EZ.

Review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and military personnel records (MPRs) are silent for complaints of tinnitus or associated symptoms. The Veteran's entrance audiogram showed normal hearing with the exception of mild bilateral hearing loss at 500 Hertz (35 decibels). See September 2015 STR - Medical. On the Veteran's separation exam, his audiogram showed normal hearing with no significant threshold shifts when compared to the entrance audiogram. See September 2015 STR - Medical. See also February 2022 and January 2023 C&P Exam. In-service medical treatment entries/notes do not reflect complaints, concerns, referrals, or evaluations for associated tinnitus symptoms. Additionally, the Veteran's MPRs are silent as to any incident reports related to tinnitus symptoms including referral for a fitness for duty evaluation.

Review of the Veteran's post-service VA treatment records reflect complaints of mild hearing loss in May and December 2017 however, no other complaints or concerns related to tinnitus or other hearing loss symptomatology were reported or endorsed during previous or subsequent medical encounters. See January 2021 and January 2023 CAPRI.

The absence of any evidence of tinnitus for at least 27 years after the Veteran's separation from active service in November 1980 is one factor weighing against a finding that his current tinnitus was present in service or in the year or years immediately after service. See Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc) (the Board may consider in its assessment of a service connection claim the passage of a lengthy period of time wherein the veteran has not complained of the malady at issue).

In February 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination conducted by a licensed audiologist (examiner) to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed hearing loss and tinnitus. See February 2022 C&P Exam. During the examination, the Veteran reported intermittent bilateral tinnitus occurring approximately twice per week with a duration of 30 minutes. The Veteran reported the onset of tinnitus beginning in service but could not identify a specific event causing the onset. The examiner opined that (1) the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not a symptom associated with hearing loss and (2) was not caused by the in-service conceded hazardous noise exposure. As part of their rationale, the examiner stated the absence of in-service audiological permanent shifts in hearing, in-service tinnitus complaints, and an identified onset event showed the tinnitus was not incurred during service. The examiner also noted that an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus could not be ascertained without speculation. While the examiner provided context to develop and formulate their opinion, the rationale does not reconcile or discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding his perceived onset of symptoms. As such, the Board finds the February 2022 VA audiological exam of little probative value.

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination conducted by a licensed audiologist (examiner) to reassess the nature and etiology of his claimed tinnitus. See January 2023 C&P Exam. The Veteran reported worsening intermittent bilateral high-pitched ringing in his ears that manifested a "few times [per] week and will last for minutes in duration." The Veteran stated that the tinnitus was present for years but could not identify the specific onset event. The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by the conceded in-service noise exposure. As a part of their rationale, the examiner noted that the Veteran's tinnitus was consistent with his hearing loss and post-military occupational and recreational noise exposure. The examiner also cited medical literature that described tinnitus as an early indicator of permanent hearing loss. While the examiner's opinion included elements necessary in formulating their opinion, the referenced medical literature is found to be irrelevant as it identifies the etiological cause of hearing loss rather than tinnitus. The Board finds the January 2023 VA examination of probative value given the examiner's expertise in hearing-related disorders and evidence considered and discussed in formulating their medical opinion. 

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted two private medical opinions from December 2022 and May 2023. In near identical opinions, the private providers opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was at least as likely as not caused or related to in-service acoustic trauma. See December 2022 and May 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. In formulating their opinions, the examiners noted general "noise exposures in various decibels" associated with "rate" and "non-rate sources while undergoing general military training and performing overall job duties while in service." The providers also cited to numerous medical literatures/studies related to tinnitus and hearing loss. The Board finds the opinions of some probative value though notes the limited expertise with which the providers are able to evaluate and opine on hearing-related etiologies. The Board acknowledges the systematic approach the examiners took in summarizing medical literature in support of their conclusions, however, such generalizations demonstrated their limitations in providing an etiological opinion particularly after reviewing the literature abstracts utilized. 

Additionally, as an integral component and factor in evaluating a claim, the Board considered the Veteran's lay statements that his tinnitus is a result of hazardous noise exposure associated with his MOS. The Veteran reported exposure to ear trauma from military jets, needle guns, loud headset noises, generators, and catapult launchers and though he wore hearing protection, it proved ineffective at times due to poor fitting. See August 2021 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran described his tinnitus as onset in service that manifested in an intermittent high-pitched buzzing and ringing in both ears. The Veteran stated that his tinnitus is most noticeable in quiet environments, and he generally utilizes a fan to counter the buzzing and ringing. Generally, lay evidence is competent "so long as it remains centered upon matters within the knowledge and personal observations of the witness." See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). Knowledge and personal observations are those derived from the layperson's senses. In this regard, the Veteran is competent to attest to his tinnitus symptomatology including the onset and experiences thereafter. Additionally, the Board has no reason to question the credibility of the Veteran's lay statements. Therefore, the Board finds the Veteran's statements as highly probative.

After considering the entirety of the record, the Board finds for the following reasons, the weight of the probative value between positive and negative evidence is in an approximate balance thereby invoking the benefit of the doubt doctrine. 38 U.S.C. 5107. See also Lynch v. McDonough 21 F. 4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). First, as tinnitus is capable of lay observation to include perceptual onset ascertained through an individual's own senses, the Veteran's lay statements have established a rebuttable presumption that his tinnitus was caused by the conceded in-service hazardous noise exposure. Next, while generally in-service and post-service treatment records serve as probative evidence to assist in the establishment of service connection elements, such absence of information, with specific regard to tinnitus, may be of no probative value when accompanied by the Veteran's credible and competent lay testimony of observable onset, symptomatology, experiences, and impact. Next, the February 2022 VA examination is of little probative value due to the examiner's failure to reconcile or discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding his perceived onset of symptoms. Next, the January 2023 VA examination is of probative value as the examiner has expertise in hearing-related disorders and evidence considered and discussed in formulating their medical opinion was adequate.  Next, the December 2022 and May 2023 private medical opinions are of some probative value based on the systematic approach in summarizing medical literature, though, expertise in hearing-related disorders significantly impair the provider's competency in the ability to provide an adequate etiological opinion. Lastly, as previously stated, the Veteran's lay statements, including observable symptomatology ascertained by the Veteran's sense of hearing and purported onset in service, are of significant probative value as tinnitus is a disorder capable of such observations. 

Overall, as the evidence is in approximate balance, the Veteran is afforded the benefit of the doubt in establishing that his tinnitus is directly causally connected to his in-service hazardous noise exposure. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for service connection for tinnitus is granted.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Klemm-Kafel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.