Citation Nr: A25033306
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432458
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for chronic adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (hereafter adjustment disorder) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period stemming from October 5, 2022, the date service connection was established, the Veteran's adjustment disorder was manifested by symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and irritability, without more severe manifestations.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for adjustment disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1982 to August 1985. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in March 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the underlying May 2023 rating decision that was subject of the request for Higher Level Review (HLR) addressed in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued this May 2023 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for adjustment disorder.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history, and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id. 

The appeal period before the Board begins on October 5, 2022, the date of service connection for adjustment disorder.  For the entire appeal period, such disability has been rated as 50 percent disabling pursuant to DC 9440, which provides that such disability is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Although the VA Form 10182 lists this disability under the separately diagnosed service-psychiatric disabilities, the Board finds that the service-connected disability is appropriately rated under one rating for the general schedule and that the issue on appeal is a request for a higher initial rating for all symptomatology attributable to the service-connected psychiatric disability without further reference to specific diagnoses.

The General Rating Formula provides a 10 percent rating when there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  

A 30 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating."  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023, where he was diagnosed with chronic adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The Veteran reported depressed mood, anxiety, mild memory loss, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, irritability and angry outbursts, social withdrawal, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  The VA examiner made behavior observations, noting the Veteran arrived on time for the examination, was appropriately groomed and dressed, and was oriented with congruent affect and normal responsiveness.  His memory, insight and judgment appeared adequate, and he was engaged and cooperative throughout the exam, with organized and logical speech. The VA examiner concluded the Veteran's symptomatology is not severe enough to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.     

With respect to social impairment, the evidence of record shows the Veteran reported he maintains few friendships and does not feel socially supported due to his social withdrawal.  He contends he does not have significant contact with his family of origin.

As for occupational impairment, the Veteran separated from active duty in 1985.  He earned a bachelor's and master's degree in information systems after service and is currently employed full time with the same company he has been with for 11 years.  He reported that he gets along with coworkers and denied significant missed work due to mental health issues.

The Board must consider the totality of the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology, as well as both the occupational and social impairment resulting therefrom.  In this regard, the Board affords the medical evidence of record and the VA examiner's findings significant probative value as such were based on evaluation of the Veteran and consideration of his own lay reports of his symptoms in light of the rating criteria.  

Upon review, the Board finds a rating of 50 percent is warranted during the appeal period.  With respect to the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology and VA examination report, the documented symptomatology most nearly approximates the criteria for a 50 percent rating disability.  Although the Veteran experiences some social and occupational impairment, he generally functions satisfactorily.  He reported experiencing depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and irritability with angry outbursts.  The Board has considered the lay and medical evidence regarding the Veteran's symptomatology, and the frequency, severity, and duration of these psychiatric symptoms, whether specifically listed in the rating schedule or not, and finds they do not indicate a greater level of impairment than reflected by the current 50 percent rating.

To warrant a higher rating for the period on appeal, the evidence must demonstrate the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision did not indicate the Veteran experienced suicidal ideations, obsessional rituals, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, or impaired impulse control.  Additionally, although the Veteran reports he has difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective relationships, the Veteran has been employed with the same company for 11 years, and he reports that he gets along with his coworkers. 

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his mental disorder is severe enough to warrant a higher disability rating.  In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule.  While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which a professional with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities in light of the rating criteria to be probative.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected mental disorder during the appeal period; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  Furthermore, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

In sum, the Board concludes that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 50 percent for the symptomatology of the Veteran's adjustment disorder under DC 9440.  In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine, however, the weight of the probative evidence is against a higher rating.  Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard and his increased rating claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Scherba, Heather L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.