Citation Nr: A25033663
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240916-473678
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1982 to June 2004.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of [list claims], any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records.  Required notice and information were provided in the claim form which the Veteran signed, certifying to the fact that such notice was received and further than they have included or identified relevant evidence. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release and/or adequately identified. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If a Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension to include as secondary to service connected adjustment disorder is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR REGIONAL OFFICE ADJUDICATOR (RO):

(a)	The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for hypertension. The Veteran has argued that service connection is warranted based on the PACT act or in the alternative, secondary to his service connected adjustment disorder. Evidence of record including June 2023 VA treatment records establishes that the Veteran has a current disability of hypertension. A November 2023 VA memo confirms that the Veteran was involved in toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on his service in the southwest asia theater of operations. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. An Addendum opinion was obtained in July 2024.  The examiners opined that the Veteran's hypertension is not caused by his service connected adjustment disorder.  However, the examiner failed to opine whether the Veteran's hypertension is aggravated by his service connected adjustment disorder. Notably, the Veteran submitted a medical article which notes that depression increases the risk of hypertension. This medical article was not addressed in any of the opinions of record. Additionally, the record does not contain a TERA opinion for the Veteran's hypertension.  Remand is warranted for addendum opinion. 

(b)	Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's hypertension.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by his service connected adjustment disorder?  Why or why not?

"	In rendering an opinion, the examiner should consider all evidence of record including medical literature/articles provided by the Veteran which indicates a relationship between depression and hypertension. 

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension was caused by the combined synergistic effects of his TERA, to include the toxic exposure activities identified on the Veteran's individual longitudinal exposure record (ILER)?  Why or why not?

All opinions must be based on a review of all evidence and supported by adequate rationale. 

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

3. Provide the Veteran and the representative notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

4. Readjudicate. 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Wimbish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.