Citation Nr: A25033055
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-471388
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to a 70 percent disability rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from October 5, 2018, forward is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas from October 5, 2018, forward.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent for PTSD from October 5, 2018, forward have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty for training from July 1982 to December 1982 and on active duty from January 1986 to December 1988.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a December 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final adjudication, or a claim for increase of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).  Generally, the effective date of an evaluation and award of service-connected compensation is the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  However, in a claim for increased compensation, the effective date may date back as much as one year before the date of the application for increase if it is factually "ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred" within that one year.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

The Veteran claims that she is entitled to a 70 percent disability rating from the date of her original claim in October 2018.

On October 5, 2018, the Veteran filed an intent to file a claim with a claim for entitlement to service connection for night terrors following in November 2018.  See Notification Letter, October 2018.  She has continuously pursued this claim since her intent to file a claim.

A claim encompasses all current diagnoses that are reasonably contemplated by the description of the claim and symptoms, as well as medical information submitted or obtained.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009); Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79 (2009).  Thus, the Veteran's claim for night terrors was construed as a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, which eventually evolved into a claim service connection for PTSD.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent for the entire period on appeal.

Resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating for the entire period on appeal. 

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Treatment records document symptoms of irritability, negative cognitions, psychological reactivity to cues, avoidance symptoms, sleep disturbance, difficulty concentrating, decreased interest in previously pleasurable things, verbal disputes with her wife, a history of domestic violence, nightmares, anxiety, increased anger including punching a wall, and increased feelings of frustration.  See CAPRI, December 2020.

In January 2021, the Veteran submitted a statement from a colleague of ten years.  The colleague witnessed the Veteran be late for work and leave early, have problems with alcohol, argue with her wife and son, and observe her crying, screaming, and experiencing nightmares.  The colleague witnessed mood swings in the Veteran, from being in a great mood to quiet and disinterested.  In addition, the colleague observed the Veteran gain and lose a noticeable amount of weight, leading to concerns.  See Buddy / Lay Statement, January 2021.  

Additionally, the Veteran's mother submitted a statement reporting that at times the Veteran would not shower, would sleep for days, have nightmares, drink excessively, and lost a lot of weight.  See Buddy / Lay Statement, January 2021.  

In December 2020, the Veteran obtained a private statement from her treating physician.  The physician stated that the Veteran suffered from anxiety, depression, anhedonia, irritability, emotional detachment, distressing trauma-related memories, avoidance behavior, hypervigilance, impaired sleep, nightmares, and impaired concentration.  The physician stated that the Veteran's PTSD impacted her ability to function in social and occupational roles.  See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility, January 2021.

In January 2021, the Veteran submitted a lay statement addressing her symptoms.  She reported extreme weight loss or gain, withdrawal from friends, unexplained social behavior changes, episodes of depression, panic attacks or anxiety without an identifiable cause, obsessive behaviors, hypervigilance, increased fear of surroundings, inability to go to certain areas, increased use of leave, changes in performance and performance evaluations, the inability to go to crowded areas, agitation and being easily frustrated, and difficulty controlling anger to the point of destroying property.  See VA  21-0781a, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD Secondary to Sexual Personal Assault, January 2021.

Additionally, the Veteran's wife recounted the Veteran's symptoms of nightmares, sleep paralysis, mood swings, destructive behavior for over 20 years, verbal abuse, being confrontational, heavy use of alcohol, withdrawn, avoiding bathing, staying in bed for days, being easily agitated, and being suspicious.  See Buddy / Lay Statement, January 2021.

In July 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination where the examiner stated that a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.  The Veteran reported being married with a stepson, enjoying time with her grandchildren, and was working as a teacher.  Her symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment.  See C&P Exam, July 2021. 

Next, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in March 2022 where the examiner noted occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  She reported living with her wife, her stepson was incarcerated, and she did not have friends.  She was working but was on leave due to back surgery.   She stated she sometimes had homicidal ideation but no plan, was angry often, breaks and throws things, panic attacks once or twice a week, difficulty sleeping, poor appetite, difficulty concentrating, and was forgetful.  Her symptoms were as follows: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  See C&P Exam, March 2022.

The Veteran again underwent a VA examination in August 2022 where the examiner stated she suffered occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  She reported her marriage was "up and down," she was emotionally distance, irritable, she had nightmares, an "okay" relationship with stepson but was combative with him, difficulty focusing, and had no friends.  She was still on medical leave but was returning to work in a week, her symptoms impacted her motivation, and due to sleep issues, she was often late or overtired at work.  Her symptoms were as follows: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, impaired impulse control, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  See C&P Exam, August 2022.

Finally, the Veteran submitted a lay statement recounting that she suffered from the following symptoms since at least 2017: nightmares, insomnia, hypervigilance, suspiciousness, anxiety, alcoholism, depression, anger, inability to communicate, inability to express emotions, memory issues, hygiene neglect, difficulty adapting to a worklike setting, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, impaired impulse control, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, near-continuous depression affecting the ability to function independently, unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, disturbances of motivation and mood, forgetting to complete tasks, impaired judgment, impaired short-and long-term memory, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting directions, names, and recent events, and panic attacks.  See Statement in Support of Claim, August 2023.

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating for the entire period on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

While the Veteran did experience symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating, including intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating.  As noted above, the Veteran was not totally socially impaired as she continued to work as a teacher during the appeal period.  While VA examinations show the Veteran reported perceived inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, the Veteran maintained a relationship with her wife, stepson, and grandchildren, although these relationships were reported to suffer difficulties.  

Resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran suffered occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas for the entire period on appeal.  As such, entitlement to a 70 percent disability rating for the entire period on appeal from October 5, 2018, forward is warranted. 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.H., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.