Citation Nr: A25033411
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240303-421754
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for bilateral pes planus is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is denied.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for periostitis of the right lower tibia is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period from August 8, 2021, to December 15, 2022, the Veteran's bilateral pes planus manifested in intermittent pain on use, decreased longitudinal arch height on weight-bearing, and no functional loss.

2. At the time of the rating decision on appeal, there was no evidence of any current acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.

3. The evidence of record does not reflect the Veteran has lost the use of a creative organ or that any reported loss is due to a service-connected disability.

4. The Veteran does not have a current hearing loss disability as defined by VA's regulations.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent prior from August 8, 2021, to December 15, 2022, for bilateral pes planus have not been met.  38 U.S.C.  §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5269-5276.

2. The criteria for establishing service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for establishing entitlement to special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a).

4. The criteria for establishing service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.385.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from March 2009 to March 2012.

There are several rating decisions on appeal which were issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ); to maintain clarity, the Board will discuss the procedural history of each issue below as necessary.  In a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) received in March 2024, the Veteran elected the Direct Review option for this appeal; therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence in the record at the time of the initial AOJ decisions, respective to each claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that in June 2024 the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for increased ratings for bilateral pes planus and for periostitis of the right tibia; for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and for hearing loss; and for special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ.  These are the issues currently on appeal before the Board.  As the June 2024 claim was developed by the AOJ, additional evidence relevant to these issues has been generated.  As the Board is remanding the claim for increased evaluation for periostitis of the right tibia for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  However, the Board is unable to consider the evidence pertaining to the claims for increased evaluation for bilateral pes planus, service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and for hearing loss, and for special monthly compensation, as it was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed under the Direct Review option.  See id.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim for these issues and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  When there is a question as to which of two ratings apply, VA will assign the higher of the two where the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

Disabilities must be viewed in relation to their entire history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  VA is required to interpret reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  VA is also required to evaluate functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness and the effects of the disabilities upon the claimant's ordinary activity.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10; see generally Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for bilateral pes planus

This issue came before the Board from a December 2022 rating decision.  In December 2022, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review of the evaluation assigned for his bilateral pes planus.  In March 2023, the AOJ issued a Higher-Level Review decision that continued the 10 percent evaluation assigned in the December 2022 rating decision.  

In June 2023, the Veteran filed a new claim for an increased evaluation for bilateral pes planus; in October 2023, the AOJ granted a 30 percent rating for the bilateral pes planus.  However, when the Veteran initiated this appeal, he specified that he was contesting the 10 percent rating assigned in the March 2023 Higher-Level Review decision.  Therefore, the Board finds the period on appeal is only the period during which the Veteran was assigned a 10 percent evaluation for bilateral pes planus, from August 8, 2021 to the date the record closed in this appeal, which is the date of the December 15, 2022 rating decision.  In considering the appropriate rating for this period, the Board may only consider evidence that was present in the record at the time of the initial rating decision on appeal, in December 2022.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

For the period from August 8, 2021, to December 15, 2022, the Veteran was in receipt of a 10 percent evaluation for bilateral pes planus under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5276.  

Under DC 5276, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate flatfoot, whether bilateral or unilateral, with weight-bearing line over or medial to the great toe, inward bowing of the tendo achillis, pain on manipulation and use of the feet.  A 20 percent (unilateral disability) or 30 percent (bilateral disability) evaluation is warranted for severe flatfoot, with objective evidence of marked deformity (pronation, abduction, etc.), accentuated pain on manipulation and use, indication of swelling on use, characteristic callosities.  A 30 percent (unilateral disability) or 50 percent (bilateral disability) evaluation is warranted for pronounced flatfoot, with marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement, and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation, that is not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

The words "mild," "moderate," "severe," and "pronounced" are not defined in the rating schedule.  The use of these terms by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

Here, in March 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA foot examination, at which he reported intermittent pain in his heels after prolonged ambulation.  For example, he reported that after four to five days of work on his feet, he felt a sharp pain beneath each heel.  The Veteran also reported that his VA doctor informed him his feet had become flat.  He denied any functional loss due to the pain.  The examiner noted accentuated pain on use of both feet; the examiner also noted no pain on manipulation, no indications of swelling on use, and no characteristic calluses on either foot.  The examiner noted decreased longitudinal arch height of both feet on weight-bearing.  The examiner noted no extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces, no objective evidence of marked deformity, no marked pronation, no weight-bearing over or medial to the great toe, no lower extremity deformity other than pes planus causing alteration of the weight-bearing line, no inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, and no marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon on manipulation.  The examiner did not identify a diagnosis of any foot disability other than pes planus.  The examiner noted there was no pain on examination in passive or active motion, in weight-bearing or non-weight-bearing, or at rest.  The Veteran denied using any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion, denied use of arch supports or built-up shoes, and denied any surgical history of his feet.  

In June 2022, the Veteran reported at a Higher-Level Review informal conference that he is on his feet at work for 12-hour shifts, which results in increased pain and limping.  He reported that his symptoms have worsened over the past three years.

The Veteran's VA treatment records during this period are silent for complaints of foot pain or other symptoms affecting the feet.  The Veteran did not identify any private treatment records in relation to this disability.  

After careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds an increased evaluation for bilateral pes planus for the period prior to December 15, 2022, is not warranted in this case.  

First, the Board finds the record to be complete.  Although the Veteran reported at the examination that his VA doctor informed him that his feet had become flat, there is no notation of this in his VA treatment records.  The Board further notes there is a gap in time from October 2020 to January 2024 during which his VA treatment records show no treatment.  However, there is no indication in the record that the VA treatment records are incomplete.  The Veteran's address remained the same during this period, and there are no reports within the VA records that he was preparing for a move to a different location such that he might attend a different VA medical center.  Finally, in the September 2022 claim for an increased evaluation for bilateral pes planus, the Veteran reported the VA medical center from which the treatment records present in the record are from as the only location where he received treatment for the claimed disabilities.  As VA obtained the records from this location in association with this claim, the Board finds the VA treatment records to be complete, and no remand is necessary to complete further records development.

Next, the Board finds the evidence during the period on appeal best corresponds to no greater than a 10 percent rating under DC 5276.  The VA examiner noted no objective evidence of marked deformity, no indication of swelling on use, and no characteristic callosities.  Although the examiner noted accentuated pain on use of the feet, there was no pain on manipulation of the feet.  Therefore, the Board finds the criteria for a 30 percent evaluation do not describe the Veteran's bilateral pes planus.  Likewise, the Board finds the 50 percent criteria do not describe the nature of the Veteran's bilateral pes planus, as there was no evidence of pronounced flatfoot, no marked pronation, no extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces, no marked inward displacement, and no spasm of the Achilles' tendon on manipulation.  

Rather, the evidence reflects intermittent pain after several days of prolonged ambulation with no or little functional loss, and decreased longitudinal arch height on weight-bearing.  Considering the criteria of DC 5276, this manifestation of bilateral pes planus corresponds to no greater than the 10 percent evaluation already assigned for the period on appeal.  

Other rating criteria applicable to the feet include DC 5277 for weak foot; DC 5278 for claw foot; DC 5279 for metatarsalgia, anterior (Morton's Disease); DC 5280 for hallux valgus; DC 5281 for hallux rigidus; DC 5282 for hammer toe; and DC 5283 for malunion or nonunion of tarsal or metatarsal bones.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  As none of these conditions have been identified as part of or manifestations of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus disability, these DCs are not for application here.

For these reasons, the Board finds that an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for the bilateral pes planus is not warranted in this case.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 252-53 (1999).  Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328 (1997); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD

As an initial matter, the Board notes the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for PTSD; however, he also filed claims for major mood disorder, anxiety, and a stress condition.  As the Veteran is not expected to possess the medical knowledge to describe the universe of his claim, the Board has recharacterized his claim as one of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).

Here, the Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder; however, he has not submitted any statements describing treatment for or assessment of any mental health disorder.  The AOJ attempted to elicit information related to an in-service stressor, private treatment records, Vet Center treatment, and other possible sources of information from the Veteran in June 2023 and in September 2023, but no response was received.  Similarly, the Veteran filed a VA form tailored to service connection claims for PTSD based on personal assault, but only indicated, "see uploaded statement in a few days;" no such statement was received by VA.  On this form, the Veteran endorsed several psychiatric symptoms and behavioral changes he experienced, but did not report any diagnosis, treatment, or in-service stressor.

The Veteran's VA treatment records do not contain any diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder, reports of psychiatric symptoms, or negative depression screenings in the period prior to the rating decision on appeal, which was issued in October 2023.  The Veteran did not identify or submit any private treatment records.

Finally, the Board also notes the Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any complaints of or treatment for psychiatric symptoms.  Every psychiatric screening is entirely negative, and none of the in-service evaluations or routing physical examinations contain endorsements of any psychiatric symptoms.  As there are no indications in service of any psychiatric symptoms, the Board finds there is no indication any current psychiatric disorder is related to service, and the AOJ did not err in declining to obtain a VA examination for this issue at the time of the rating decision on appeal.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006) (VA is obliged to provide an examination where there is insufficient information to decide the claim and there is an indication the current disability may be associated with service).

In summary, at the time of the October 2023 rating decision, there was no competent evidence suggesting that any current psychiatric symptoms are related to the Veteran's military service.  Therefore, the Board finds service connection is not warranted for an acquired psychiatric disorder based on the evidence in the record at the time of the rating decision on appeal.  

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ

Special monthly compensation is payable for the loss of use of one or more creative organs as the result of service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).

In his November 2021 claim for service connection for erectile dysfunction and for special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ, the Veteran reported that he experiences erectile dysfunction due to stress.  He did not submit any other statements in support of the claim.

The Veteran's VA treatment records contain no complaints of or treatment for erectile dysfunction.  The Veteran did not submit or identify any private treatment records.

The Board finds special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ is not warranted in this case, as the medical evidence of record does not reflect a current diagnosis of erectile dysfunction or that the Veteran has otherwise lost the use of a creative organ.  Further, the Board notes the Veteran is not service-connected for any stress disorder.  For these reasons, the appeal is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss

VA defines impaired hearing as a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies of 500, 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 and 4,000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the thresholds for at least three of these frequencies are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

Certain chronic diseases, including hearing loss and tinnitus, will be granted service connection on a presumptive basis if there is evidence they manifested within a year of separation from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a).  Alternatively, for such chronic diseases shown in service, the second and third elements of service connection may be established through demonstrating chronicity or continuity of symptomatology.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (section 3.303(b) only applies to the chronic disabilities listed in 38 U.S.C. § 1101(3) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a)).

Procedurally, the Veteran filed this claim in November 2021, and it was denied in an April 2022 rating decision.  In July 2022, he filed a VA Form 10182 to contest the April 2022 rating decision, but withdrew that appeal in August 2022.  In December 2022, still within a year of the April 2022 rating decision, the Veteran filed a Higher-Level Review request for the hearing loss claim.  The Higher-Level Review decision was issued in March 2023, and this appeal followed in a timely manner.

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss, but has not submitted any statements in support of this claim.

The AOJ has conceded in-service exposure to hazardous noise based on the Veteran's military occupational specialty.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Veteran has attended three VA audiological examinations; however, only two were of record at the time the rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2022.  

At the first examination, in December 2019, the Veteran denied experiencing any hearing loss.  The audiologist did not perform an audiogram.

In November 2021, at the second examination, the Veteran reported occasional difficulty hearing his clients at work.  The audiogram returned the following results, in decibels:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 	

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000	Average

RIGHT	10	10	10	15	10	11.25

LEFT	10	5	10	15	10	10

The Maryland CNC test results were 98 percent in the right ear and 96 percent in the left ear.

The Veteran's VA treatment records contain no audiograms, and no complaints of hearing loss.  The Veteran did not identify or submit any private treatment records.

After review of the evidence of record, the Board finds there is no current hearing loss disability under VA's definition.  The only evidence available for review indicates the auditory thresholds do not exceed 26 decibels at three frequencies or 40 decibels at one frequency.  Likewise, the results of the Maryland CNC speech discrimination test are not less than 94 percent.

Because no current hearing loss disability, as defined by VA regulations, is shown during the pendency of this claim, the criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss are not met.  See Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225.  Accordingly, service connection for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted.

(Continued on next page.)

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for periostitis of the right lower tibia is remanded.

The right tibia evaluation was considered in both the March 2023 Higher-Level Review decision and the October 2023 rating decision, and the Veteran listed both decisions when he appealed the continued award of a 10 percent evaluation for the right tibia.  To allow for consideration of the greatest amount of evidence, the Board finds the rating decision on appeal is the October 2023 rating decision.  

During the period on appeal, the Veteran is in receipt of a 10 percent evaluation for periostitis of the right lower tibia under DC 5262-5260.  Under DC 5262, ratings are provided for malunion of the tibia and fibula, nonunion of the tibia and fibula, and medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS) or shin splints.  In this case, the Veteran is service-connected for periostitis of the right lower tibia, which is also known as MTSS or shin splints.

In a June 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported tibia symptoms as well as right knee symptoms; the Board notes the Veteran is service-connected only for the right tibia disability.  The examiner failed to elicit information from the Veteran about symptoms during flare-ups of the tibia disability.  Further, the examiner indicated a finding of localized tenderness on the patella, a part of the knee joint, noting its relationship to the condition being examined as "knee condition: periostitis right tibia" but did not clarify this remark or provide any context for it.  Finally, the examiner opined that the diagnosis of the service-connected condition had not changed but the symptoms had worsened, but did not make any findings relating to MTSS.  

For these reasons, the Board finds this examination to be inadequate.  The Board further finds it was an error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist to rely on this examination in making the October 2023 determination that no increase in evaluation was warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes to provide an examination, it must provide an adequate one).  

Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate examination regarding the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right tibia disability.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected right tibia disability.

The claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner and all necessary tests should be performed.  All findings should be reported in detail.

The joints involved should be tested in both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

The examiner should describe any pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, instability of station and incoordination present. 

The examiner should also state whether the examination is taking place during a period of flare-up.  If not, the examiner should ask the Veteran to describe the flare-ups he experiences, including:  frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, severity and/or extent of functional impairment he experiences during a flare-up of symptoms and/or after repeated use over time. 

Based on the Veteran's lay statements and the other evidence of record, the examiner should provide an opinion estimating any additional degrees of limited motion caused by functional loss during a flare-up or after repeated use over time.  The examiner should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

If the examiner cannot estimate the degrees of additional range of motion loss during flare-ups or after repetitive use without resorting to speculation, the examiner should state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e. no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e. additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training).

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Josey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.