Citation Nr: A25033782
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-433894
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

A rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbago is denied.

REMANDED

1. A separate rating for a right lower extremity neurologic disorder.

2. A separate rating for a left lower extremity neurologic disorder.

3. A rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome.

4. Special monthly compensation (SMC) based on being housebound or the need for aid and attendance.

?

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's lumbago has not resulted in unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or incapacitating episodes of IVDS having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during a 12 month period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbago are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.655, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2008 to December 2011.

The case is on appeal from February 2024 and March 2024 rating decisions.

In the April 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD) on appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 and March 2024 rating decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

?

A rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbago.

Legal Criteria

Ratings are based on a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or combination of injuries.  The ratings shall be based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairments of earning capacity resulting from such injuries in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Disabilities of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or inflammation in parts of the system, to perform normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination and endurance.  The functional loss may be due to absence of part or all of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective innervation, or other pathology, or may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.  Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part which becomes painful on use must be regarded as disabled.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 4.40; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.45, 4.59.  Although pain may be a cause or manifestation of functional loss, limitation of motion due to pain is not necessarily rated at the same level as functional loss where motion is impeded.  See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011).

The Veteran's thoracolumbar spine disability is rated under DC 5243, which is rated according to The General Rating Formula for evaluating the spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  The General Rating Formula provides for a 10 percent disability rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent disability rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent disability rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent disability rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  

Following the rating criteria, Note 1 states: evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate DC.

Under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes, a 10 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 1 week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months; a 20 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least two weeks but less than four weeks during the past 12 months; a 40 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks but less than six weeks during the past 12 months; and a 60 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Analysis

In September 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for an increased back rating.  He submitted copies of VA treatment records showing imaging reports of his back.  The VA treatment records submitted by the Veteran do not include reports of or findings that he has ever experienced ankylosis or IVDS.

During VA treatment in January 2023, the Veteran was seen by a primary care provider to establish care.  The treatment provider reported that the Veteran has back pain, but that he remains functional in performing activities of daily living and instrumental activities of daily living.  These records do not indicate the presence of ankylosis or IVDS.

In September 2023 and October 2023, the Veteran submitted disability benefit questionnaires (DBQs) completed by a VA physician at his request.  The VA physician claimed that the Veteran has low back pain, thoracic back pain, and psychiatric conditions that result in the need for assistance with bathing, walking within his home, medication management, chores, and meal preparation.  The physician did not provide a rationale for these conclusions beyond stating the Veteran has back pain.  The physician did not indicate that the Veteran experiences ankylosis or IVDS.

The Veteran's VA treatment records include treatment for back pain in September 2023.  The treatment provider reported that the Veteran had full range of motion in his back.  The provider also noted that he experiences pain radiating into his right and left hips.

The RO attempted to schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for this claim in September 2023.  On September 28, 2023, the RO mailed the Veteran notice of a VA examination scheduled for October 16, 2023 to his then address of record.  The Veteran did not report for this examination or provide any indication why he did not attend the examination.

The Board finds that a rating in excess of 40 percent for the back disability is not warranted.  The Veteran has not claimed and there is no evidence indicating that he has ever experienced IVDS.  In addition, the Veteran has not claimed and the September 2023 and October 2023 VA physician DBQs do not indicate that he experiences ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  In this regard, if the Veteran was experiencing ankylosis at the time the VA physician completed the DBQs, the VA physician would have mentioned this in assessing the functional limitations caused by the back disability.  Furthermore, the VA treatment records indicate that he retains range of motion in his thoracolumbar spine.  A VA treatment provider reported that the Veteran had full range of motion during treatment for back pain in September 2023.  Therefore, while the Veteran has reported experiencing pain and other functional limitations, the current 40 percent rating fully contemplates all functional loss due to pain, weakness, fatigability, lack of endurance, or incoordination, including during flare-ups or in the absence of medication, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59.  The Board notes that a scheduled VA examination for this claim did not occur because the Veteran failed to attend.  However, as the evidence of record is sufficient to establish that he has not experienced ankylosis or functional ankylosis of the lumbar spine, a remand for a VA examination is not necessary to determine whether entitlement to an increased rating is warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).  

The Board also notes that the September 2023 VA treatment record indicated the presence of back radiating into his lower extremities.  Therefore, the issues of whether separate ratings for right and left lower extremity neurologic disorders is remanded herein for additional development.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Note 1.

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and an increased rating for lumbago is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. A separate rating for a right lower extremity neurologic disorder.

2. A separate rating for a left lower extremity neurologic disorder.

As noted above, a September 2023 VA treatment record indicated the presence of back pain radiating into his lower extremities.  The Veteran has not been service connected for a right or left lower extremity neurologic disorder.  Therefore, a remand is required to afford the Veteran a peripheral nerve examination to determine if separate ratings for right and left lower extremity neurologic disorders is warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Note 1.

3. A rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome.

In October 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for this disability.

The claims file shows that the RO found the Veteran failed to report for a VA examination for this disability in October 2023.  However, there is no indication that the Veteran was notified of the scheduled examination.

The Board finds that another remand is necessary for a VA examination to assess the severity of the Veteran's left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome.  In this regard, the Board finds that the file indicates good cause for the failure to report for the October 2023 examination as there is no documentation that notice was provided for the scheduled examination.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

4. SMC based on being housebound or the need for aid and attendance.

During VA treatment in January 2023, the Veteran was seen by a primary care provider to establish care.  The treatment provider reported that the Veteran has back pain, but that he remains functional in performing activities of daily living and instrumental activities of daily living.  In February 2023, a VA treatment provider performed a functional assessment.  The treatment provider found that the Veteran has limitations in bathing due to shoulder and back pain, but indicated that he could bath independently with devices such as a handheld shower nozzle and a scrub sponge on a stick.  The treatment provider also found that the Veteran is able to eat, use the toilet, walk indoors for 15 minutes, and climb four steps independently.  The treatment provider further found that the Veteran can manage his medication with the assistance of visual reminders.  The Veteran reported being able to put on shirts, underwear, pants, socks, and slip on shoes.  The treatment provider concluded that the Veteran does not require the intervention of a care provider.

As noted above, in September 2023 and October 2023, the Veteran submitted DBQs completed by a VA physician at his request.  The VA physician claimed that the Veteran has low back pain, thoracic back pain, and psychiatric conditions that result in the need for assistance with bathing, walking within his home, medication management, chores, and meal preparation.  The physician did not provide a rationale for these conclusions beyond stating that the Veteran has back pain.

The Board notes that the February 2024 rating decision on appeal found that the Veteran requires aid and attendance based on the DBQs provided by the VA physician at the Veteran's request.  However, the September 2023 and October 2023 DBQs do not include a rationale for the conclusions reached.  In addition, the February 2023 VA treatment provider detailed the Veteran's limitations and denied the need for the intervention of a care provider.  Therefore, the Board does not find that the need for aid and attendance has been established.

The Board finds that there was a duty to assist error in failing to afford the Veteran an examination to determine whether he is housebound or requires aid and attendance due to his service-connected disabilities.  Therefore, a remand is required to remedy this error.

These claims are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a peripheral nerve examination to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed right and left lower extremity neurologic disorders.  The entire claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.  Thereafter, the examiner is asked to:

Identify all of the Veteran's right and left lower extremity neurologic disorders associated with the Veteran's service-connected lumbago.

A rationale should be provided for opinions offered.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to assess the severity of the service-connected left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to address whether the Veteran is housebound or requires aid and attendance.  The examiner should state what medical condition(s) cause each identified functional impairment.

A rationale should be provided for opinions offered.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jimerfield, David

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.