Citation Nr: A25033049
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241226-504366
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from February 1953 to February 1955. 

K.K., is the Veteran's son.  He submitted the underlying joint application with the Veteran and is interested in serving as the Primary Family Caregiver.  38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a); 38 C.F.R. § 71.25.

In November 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied entitlement to benefits under PCAFC.  In December 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, as the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Eligibility for benefits under the PCAFC is remanded.   

Generally, the Veteran and K.K., his son, contend that the Veteran was eligible for a Family Caregiver and his son met the applicant requirements to serve as Primary Family Caregiver.  The November 2024 determination explained that the Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) review found the Veteran did not meet the eligibility criteria for PCAFC because the evidence did not support a finding that the Veteran needed continuous personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months for activities of daily living or a need for regular or extensive supervision, protection, or instruction.  The November 2024 CEAT review is not adequate to inform a decision on the merits.  An August 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument states the Veteran is in need of set-up or clean up assistance with grooming; set-up or clean-up assistance with bathing and showering; partial/moderate assistance with mobility to include positioning and transfers, and dependent with walking and going up and down stairs.  The Veteran Functional Assessment states the Veteran "needs visual or verbal reminders" with medication management and administration.  The Veteran Functional Assessment states the Veteran is at "risk of self-neglect" including impairment of orientation, memory, reasoning, and/or judgment.  The November 2024 CEAT review failed to address the August 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument reflecting the Veteran requires some assistance completing activities of daily living including grooming, bathing and showering, mobility, and a need for supervision.  That is a pre decisional error.  

VA should obtain all relevant private treatment records which could potentially be helpful in resolving the Veteran's claim.  Murphy v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 78 (1990); Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611 (1992).  

The Board observes that the VA clinical documentation of record notes private cardiology, and primary care treatment at TriHealth.  Clinical documentation of the cited treatment has not been requested.  That is a pre-decisional error.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete VA Form 21-4142 for TriHealth as to the reported private cardiology, and primary care.  Make two requests for the authorized records from all identified healthcare providers unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.  

2. Obtain a medical opinion from CEAT as to whether the Veteran is in need of personal care services due to:

(a) An inability to perform an activity of daily living including: 1. Dressing or undressing oneself; 2. Bathing; 3. Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable;    4. Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.);           5. Toileting or attending to toileting; 6. Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 7. Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.) 

(b) A need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or

(c) A need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.

The clinician should consider the August 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument evaluation reflecting that the Veteran requires at least some assistance in grooming, bathing and showering, mobility, and a need for supervision.  In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion, as well as an explanation of any such terms as partial or moderate assistance, or supervision or touching assistance from a caregiver for the completion of an activity of daily living, must be articulated.  CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.R. Kardian, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.