Citation Nr: A25033027
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-458393
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as major depressive disorder, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his major depressive disorder had its onset during service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder are met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.159, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from July 2009 to December 2022. Favorable findings of record recognize service in Bahrain, Egypt, Oman, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2024 rating decision that denied service connection for a mental health condition.

In July 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board by submitting a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, selected the Direct Review Docket and disagreed with the denial of the claim for a psychiatric condition in the July 2024 rating decision.

As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of issuance of the decision on appeal, namely the July 2024 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 20.301.

The Board acknowledges that the period to switch Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not yet elapsed. However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) is not necessary because this decision represents a full grant of the issue on appeal and therefore, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with adjudication. 

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric condition is granted

The Veteran contends that he has a mental health condition, to include depression and anxiety, that began during military service. See Statement in Support of Claim, received August 2, 2023.

Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38?C.F.R. §§?3.303(d).

In the July 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Regional Office made several favorable findings that are binding on the Board in the absence of clear and unmistakable error. 

First, the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability. Specifically, December 2023 and May 2024 VA examinations diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified personality disorder and major depressive disorder, recurrent episode, moderate, with anxious distress, mild. As to this, the Board notes that under VA regulations, personality disorders are considered defects, and not "diseases or injuries" within the meaning of applicable legislation for VA disability compensation purposes. Therefore, personality disorders cannot be service connected either directly or on the basis of secondary causation or aggravation. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (c), 4.9, 4.127. However, major depressive disorder is a mental health condition that can be service connected, and the Board finds the first element necessary to grant service connection is met.

Second, the Regional Office favorably found that the evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service. Specifically, the Veteran was seen for complaints of anxiety and depression while in service. As to this, the Veteran's entrance examination is silent for psychiatric concerns or diagnoses. As such, the presumption of soundness applies in this case. Additionally, the Veteran's service treatment records show significant mental health treatment. Accordingly, Board finds the second element necessary to grant service connection is met.

Therefore, the remaining question for the Board to consider is whether there is a nexus between the symptomatology that onset during his service and his present diagnosis of major depressive disorder. The Board finds that the evidence is sufficient to find in the Veteran's favor on this point without further development.

Review of the record shows that the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for a mental health condition, to include depression and anxiety, in August 2023, 8 months after separation from a 23-year period of active-duty service. He averred that his condition "started during his military service." See August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. Indeed, his initial treatment for depression and anxiety was during and after his deployment to Bahrain while on active duty. Statements from his mother and his wife confirm that his mental health concerns that led to hospitalization for suicidal ideation while in service did not pre-date his years in the military.

In September 2023, the Veteran presented for a VA examination. The examiner indicated that speculation would be required regarding etiology because there was a suggestion in the record that the Veteran may have had psychiatric treatment as an adolescent, although it was not noted at enlistment. Following this speculative opinion and subsequent denial of service connection, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim with a statement in support from his mother who indicated that prior to service, the Veteran did not show signs of depression and that she recalled specific incidents during his service after which he started showing signs of depression and anxiety. In addition, the Veteran's wife, who met him during service in Bahrain, submitted a statement. She stated that when he came to the command, he was outgoing and always first to volunteer if anyone needed help. However, during the deployment, she witnessed him go "from always being around to help and have fun to isolating himself from everyone and not doing anything." The Veteran also submitted a statement he wrote in support of his claim describing a happy childhood and that during and since service he deals with depression, anxiety, anger and irritability.

In May 2024, the Veteran presented for a second VA examination. The examiner recognized that the Veteran's STRs indicate that the Veteran's presentation met the criteria for unspecified personality disorder and major depressive disorder. The examiner noted periods of decompensating mental health during service, as evidenced by multiple inpatient hospitalizations, periods of LIMIDU (limited duty based on recommendation of a medical board), being sent to captain's mast multiple times and being ADSEP (administratively separated) for mental health. Despite this, the examiner concluded that it was not clear that these decompensations were due to military service. The examiner rationalized this by finding the Veteran an inconsistent historian and that his inpatient treatments during service were due to personal issues, fraternization and demotion which the examiner classified as "relational and ego-dystonic, not related to military service."

The Board finds both the September 2023 and May 2024 opinions to be unpersuasive. Here, the question is whether the Veteran's major depressive disorder had onset during the Veteran's service, not whether the treatment he got during service specifically pertained to his military duties or experiences. Here, the record is clear that the Veteran met the DSM-5 criteria for major depressive disorder during service and that he still meets the criteria for that diagnosis. That, in itself, provides the nexus necessary to grant service connection. The Board could remand to attempt to obtain an adequate opinion in this case but finds such delay unnecessary as the criteria for service connection are met based on the evidence presently before the Board.

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the claim for service connection is granted.

 

 

C.B. Iwanowski

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Imber, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.