Citation Nr: A25033766
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452805
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1978 to July 1984.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2024 (OSA) and July 2024 (sinusitis) rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 and July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  In this regard, the Board notes that the one-year period in which the Veteran may switch docket lanes has yet to expire in connection with the issue of service connection for sinusitis.  However, the Board finds there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with such limited appellate review for the sole purpose of remanding the issue at this time.

1. Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

The Veteran contends he has a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis as secondary to his OSA.  See February 2024 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

The Veteran's service treatment records and post-service medical records are silent for a diagnosis of sinusitis.  Concurrent with his February 2024 claim, he submitted medical treatment records that diagnosed him with unspecified epistaxis (nosebleeds) and hypertension.  See February 2024 Medical Treatment Records - Non-Government Facility.

On November 22, 2023, a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memo was associated with the file, showing that the Veteran participated in TERA.  See November 2023 other (TERA Memo).

On February 28, 2024, the RO requested a TERA opinion.  The opinion request specifically noted that the "Veteran does not need to report for all examinations for the following contention: chronic sinusitis."  Furthermore, the RO indicated that it expected a results package, at a minimum, to include a disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) for ENT sinusitis, rhinitis, and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx and a medical opinion DBQ.  On February 29, 2024, however, the RO cancelled the VA examination for sinusitis, indicating that the Veteran was unavailable.  

On February 29, 2024, the Veteran contacted the RO and requested to reschedule his VA examination in connection with his sinusitis claim.  The Veteran was scheduled for X-rays and a medical examination at different locations and dates.  He reported he was unable to attend both due to his job and requested they be consolidated into one day and location.  The Veteran was advised to contact the VA facility and stated he would make it to the rescheduled examination.  He contacted the RO again on May 28, 2024, requesting for his examination to be rescheduled.  See February 2024 and May 2024 VA 27-0820 Report of General Information.

On June 20, 2024, the Veteran's VA examination was cancelled due to unavailability and a rating decision was issued in July 2024 denying the Veteran's claim. 

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is warranted in order to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  The Veteran had contacted the RO twice to reschedule his examination before missing the June 2024 VA examination.  In this regard, it does not appear that the Veteran was alerted that a VA examination for his claim of sinusitis was rescheduled. Specifically, the record does not include a notification letter informing the Veteran of his rescheduled examination following his May 2024 request to reschedule.

Furthermore, remand is required to obtain a medical examination and/or opinion pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  The PACT Act requires that, when a Veteran whose active service subjected the Veteran to participation in a TERA files a claim to service connect a disability and there is evidence of such disability, VA must provide the Veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

Here, even with the Veteran's absence at a VA examination, the Board notes that a TERA opinion was requested by the RO, and the RO indicated that the Veteran did not need to report to the examination.  Nevertheless, the RO prematurely ended development in that no opinion was obtained based on a review of the file.  Accordingly, because the Board is unable to grant the claim at this time, and because no medical opinion has not yet been obtained, a remand is needed for VA to obtain one.

2. Entitlement to service connection for OSA is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his May 2017 diagnosed OSA is due to his service.  He stated that engine noise, the ventilation system, lighting, drills, announcement indicators, snoring, and constant fellow crew member noises often kept him awake, leading to insomnia.  He also had nightmares of faulty equipment, explosions, etc., which contributed to a reduced quality of sleep and obstructed sleep apnea.  Following his marriage in March 2001, the Veteran stated his wife noticed his snoring and that he stopped breathing at times.  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's OSA claim was previously denied in February 2018.  Following an October 2023 Fully Developed Claim, an October 2023 notification letter instructed the Veteran to file his claim on the proper form.  The Veteran filed his claim on the proper supplemental claim form later in October 2023.  

Service treatment records indicate that a July 1978 report of medical examination noted the Veteran was 70 inches tall, weighed 186 pounds, and was obese.  A September 1979 medical notation indicated the Veteran needed to lose weight after measuring 69 inches tall and 202 pounds.  An April 1984 report of medical examination indicated the Veteran was 70 inches tall and weighed 176 pounds.  He did not report trouble sleeping at any time. 

The Veteran was not previously afforded a VA examination nor was an opinion obtained.  On November 22, 2023, the RO requested a TERA opinion.  The opinion request specifically noted that the "Veteran does not need to report for all examinations for the following contention: sleep apnea."  Furthermore, the RO indicated that it expected a results package, at a minimum, to include a sleep apnea DBQ and a medical opinion DBQ.  

On November 22, 2023, a TERA memo was associated with the file, showing that the Veteran participated in TERA.  

On November 24, 2023, a letter was sent to the Veteran, notifying him that an examination was being scheduled for his OSA claim.  

On November 27, 2023, the Veteran contacted the VA, asking about the examination that was scheduled for his OSA and wondering what would be different with a new VA examination versus what was already on file.  He stated that no one could provide him with information or transparency.  He was being treated for OSA at VA and believed VA had all the medical records it needed for a determination.

On November 28, 2023, the RO contacted the Veteran to verify his refusal for a VA examination.  The Veteran stated he already had a diagnosis of OSA and would like the current information on file to be used to determine his claim.  

On November 28, 2023, the RO cancelled the pending OSA examination, noting that the Veteran requested that the examination be cancelled and for his case to be returned to VA.  

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is warranted in order to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  In this regard, the Board notes that while the Veteran refused a VA examination, the RO prematurely ended development in that no opinion was obtained based on a review of the file.  The Veteran has a current diagnosis and reports that his OSA had its onset in service.  However, no nexus opinion has been obtained.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Moreover, as noted above, a remand is required to obtain an opinion pursuant to the PACT Act.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

Accordingly, because the Board is unable to grant the claim at this time, and because no medical opinion has not yet been obtained, a remand is needed for VA to obtain one.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of his sinusitis.  If the Veteran fails to report for the examination, the record must reflect proper notice of the examination sent to him and any response received.  Even if the Veteran does not report for the examination, the clinician must perform a review of the claims file and address the following:

Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed sinus disability had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to his military service, include in-service exposure to any verified TERA or other toxin.  

In rendering this opinion, the clinician is asked to address the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered.

2. Forward the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA.  After a review of the claims file, the clinician should provide an opinion for the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed OSA had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to his military service, to include in-service exposure to any verified TERA or other toxin.

In rendering this opinion, the clinician is asked to address the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

 

 

M. M. CELLI

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Garey

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.