Citation Nr: A25033725
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-464077
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left trapezius muscle spasm (left shoulder disability) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's cervical strain is related to in-service injury.

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left shoulder disability is related to in-service injury.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for cervical strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for left shoulder disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1994 to July 2008.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In that decision, the RO denied service connection for the Veteran's cervical strain and left shoulder disability.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service disease or injury; and (3) a relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain.

As favorably found by the AOJ, the August 2023 VA examination report contains a diagnosis of cervical strain.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c), and the current disability requirement has thus been met.

In its September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury or disease was incurred during the Veteran's service as his service treatment records indicate a report of neck pain.  The Board is also bound by this favorable finding and the in-service injury element has thus been met.

The remaining issue is thus whether there is a relationship between the current cervical strain and the in-service injury.  

The Veteran began receiving VA medical treatment in November 2019.  During his first VA primary care appointment, the Veteran reported pain in the back of his neck that began in active duty service.  The Veteran is competent to report that his discernable neck pain began during active duty service, and that the symptoms and pain have been ongoing in nature and continuing through the present.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a veteran is competent to testify regarding observable symptoms); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  The Veteran continued to report his cervical neck pain through 2020 and filed his claim for service connection for his neck condition in March 2023.  

During his August 2023 neck condition (cervical spine) VA examination, the Veteran reported that his neck pain began in 2003 during active duty service.  Specifically, the Veteran stated that he experienced a stiff neck and that after going to sick call, he was prescribed a muscle relaxer that helped with his neck pain.  The Veteran reported that he did not have to return to sick call and that he did not see a doctor for his neck pain again until 2018.  In the accompanying medical opinion, the examiner noted that the service records do not indicate that a neck condition developed during service or soon after separation from service, and therefore opined that the claimed cervical neck condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the in-service injury. 

Even though the August 2023 examiner reported the Veteran's competent, consistent, and credible accounts of his in-service injury and the ongoing nature of his cervical neck pain, the VA examiner appears to have discounted this credible lay evidence based on her observation of service records not indicating that a neck condition developed during service or soon after separation from service.  However, as the RO favorably found, service treatment records dated April 23, 2007 show that the Veteran sought medical treatment for his reported neck stiffness and pain.  As the VA examiner disregarded the service treatment records containing the same symptoms of neck pain and stiffness, relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, and "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that his claim for service connection could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence," this negative etiological opinion is inadequate.  Buchanan, 451 F. 3d 1331.  

While the Board could remand the claim for another medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's cervical strain, such a request as to this disability could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is unallowable.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

For the reasons above, the evidence is sufficient to decide the Veteran's service connection claim, as it is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's cervical strain had its onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cervical strain is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability.

As favorably found by the AOJ, the August 2023 VA examination report contains a diagnosis of muscle spasm left trapezius muscle.  The current disability requirement has thus been met.

In its September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease was incurred during the Veteran's service as his service treatment records indicate a report of left shoulder pain.  The in-service injury element has thus been met.

The remaining issue is thus whether there is a relationship between the current left shoulder disability and the in-service injury.  

In a December 2019 VA appointment, the Veteran reported chronic pain in his left shoulder. 

During his August 2023 shoulder and arm condition VA examination, the Veteran reported that he started experiencing a tightening sensation in the left lateral neck and left shoulder in the trapezius muscle during service.  He went to sick call and was treated for left shoulder pain and prescribed a muscle relaxer that helped relieve the pain.  Following service, the Veteran reported that he continued to experience pain and tightening in his left shoulder.  The Veteran recalled that he saw a private provider in 2013 who also prescribed muscle relaxers for the pain.  In the August 2023 medical opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran's 2007 service treatment records show a diagnosis of a left shoulder trapezius muscle strain.  The examiner further observed that the Veteran reported that the symptoms in his left shoulder were similar to those that he experienced in a high school football game after his left shoulder was struck.  The examiner noted that the 2007 service treatment records did not indicate that the Veteran's shoulder was re-injured; instead, the 2007 treatment note provided that the Veteran "woke up and the shoulder was hurting" and a left shoulder x-ray showed no abnormalities.  Finally, the examiner observed that the first medical records indicating a complaint of left shoulder pain were approximately twelve years after the service treatment records.  Based on the foregoing, the examiner opined that the Veteran's left shoulder condition is less likely due to or caused by the left shoulder pain in service because while the service records indicate that the Veteran experienced pain in his left shoulder, the service treatment record and medical records did not indicate that the left shoulder condition required continuity in treatments during service or soon after separation from service.  

The Veteran has provided competent, consistent, and credible accounts of his in-service shoulder tightness and pain, and the ongoing nature of his chronic left shoulder pain following separation from service.  See Buchanan, 451 F. 3d at 1337.  Despite records showing in-service symptoms and treatment of the Veteran's left shoulder disability, the examiner appears to have disregarded this credible lay and medical evidence in reaching her negative nexus opinion because of the lack of medical evidence showing a continuity in treatments during service or soon after separation from service.  As the "symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology," Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997), and the examiner disregarded the Veteran's competent accounts of ongoing left shoulder pain and related symptoms since their onset in service, this negative etiological opinion is inadequate.  See Buchanan, 451 F. 3d 1331.

Again, the Board could remand the claim for another medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's left shoulder disability or request private medical records related to his 2013 treatment, such requests as to this disability could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is unallowable.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c); Andrews, 34 Vet. App. at 225. The evidence is sufficient to decide the claim, as it shows left shoulder pain from the time of the in-service injury until the post-service diagnosis.

(Continued on the next page)

?

For the reasons above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left shoulder disability had its onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's left shoulder disability is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. T. Mowell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.