Citation Nr: A25033956
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-455088
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for right knee total joint replacement currently rated 30 percent disabling prior to August 4, 2022, and 60 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for left knee total joint replacement currently rated 30 percent disabling prior to August 4, 2022, and 60 percent thereafter is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1993 to June 2003.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2022 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which was later reviewed and continued in a February 2024 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.

The Veteran appealed the decision in a July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for right knee total joint replacement currently rated 30 percent disabling prior to August 4, 2022, and 60 percent thereafter is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for left knee total joint replacement currently rated 30 percent disabling prior to August 4, 2022, and 60 percent thereafter is remanded.

The Veteran contends his bilateral knee disabilities should be assigned a higher disability rating throughout the period on appeal.  Upon review, the Board finds remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors by attempting to obtain any outstanding nonVA treatment records regarding the bilateral knees and obtaining clarification from a VA examiner regarding the Veteran's surgical history for the bilateral knees.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2022 to determine the current severity of his bilateral knee disabilities.  During the examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran underwent bilateral knee surgery in 2022 at Alvarado Hospital.  Notably, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2022 during which he denied any recent surgeries.  Thereafter, however, he filed a June 2022 Supplemental Claim seeking a higher disability rating for the bilateral knees suggesting a possible worsening.  The Board notes the pre-decisional record contains medical evidence of bilateral total knee replacements in 2017 at Alvarado Hospital.  Since then, however, the AOJ has not attempted to obtain any additional outstanding nonVA treatment records from Alvarado Hospital, including in 2022, a duty to assist error.  While it is possible that the August 2022 VA examiner mistakenly noted 2022 as the record references bilateral knee surgery in 2017 only, it is otherwise unclear from the record.  Thus, the AOJ should have obtained clarification from the examiner regarding the Veteran's bilateral knee surgical history, including whether he had a surgical procedure in 2022, and should have attempted to obtain any additional outstanding treatment records from Alvarado Hospital, both of which were duty to assist errors.  Without this clarification, the Board is unable to ensure the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities are properly rated throughout the appeal period.

Accordingly, these claims are remanded for corrective action.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the appellant to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for the Veteran's private treatment records pertaining to his bilateral knee disabilities, including specifically any treatment at Alvarado Hospital in 2022.  Make two requests for any facility where authorized records forms are received unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.  All efforts to obtain authorizations and / or private treatment records should be documented in the claims file.

2. Only after the above development, return the entire claims file and this remand to an appropriate VA examiner to render an opinion, including rationale, clarifying the Veteran's bilateral knee surgical history, including specifically whether the Veteran underwent surgery in 2022.  If so, the examiner is directed to specify the procedure and date.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the examiner's discretion. 

NOTE: The examiner is directed to address and reconcile the 2022 VA examiner's notation that the Veteran underwent bilateral knee surgery in 2022 at Alvarado Hospital. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

3. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Allen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.