Citation Nr: A25033170
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240804-466904
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches, to include as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), with major depressive disorder and anxious disorder (psychiatric disability), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1991 to November 2003.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran submitted an August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, identifying the July 2024 rating decision.  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300.  As the Board is remanding the matter on appeal, if this additional evidence is present, it will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of these matters.

The Veteran contends that his migraine headaches are related to service.  Specifically, he claims he was knocked unconscious during a motor vehicle accident in service.  He added that the headaches started shortly after the accident in 1992, and he continues to manage the condition with Tylenol.  See February 2024 VA Examination.  Alternatively, he asserts that the condition is caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disability.  The Veteran has also alternatively asserted that his migraine headaches may be related to his traumatic brain injury (TBI).  See October 2024 Appellate Brief.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran is not currently service connected for a TBI.      

The Veteran was afforded a VA headaches disability examination in February 2024. Upon examination, the examiner determined that the Veteran does not currently have and has never been diagnosed with a headache condition.  The examiner concluded that the there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis.

However, the VA examiner did not consider the relevant private treatment records from November 2011 and January 2015 noting he was assessed with headaches and the Veteran's report that he had been having migraines on a regular basis.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) (stating that it is incumbent on the VA examiner to consider all of the relevant evidence before forming an opinion).

The RO requested an addendum VA medical opinion, which was provided in June 2024.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of migraine headaches.  However, the examiner rendered a negative opinion finding that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner explained that the Veteran's condition was not identified in his service treatment records (STRs) or exit examination and the condition has only been confirmed to exist post-service.

However, STRs from November 1993, December 1995, and July 1996 noted the Veteran complained of having headaches.  In addition, his December 1990 entrance examination noted that he was taking aspirin for headaches.  However, the Veteran's entrance examination was normal and did not note a migraine headache disability.  It does not appear that the examiner considered these treatment records when formulating the opinion.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate or incomplete factual premise is not probative).  Moreover, the Veteran reported that his headaches started during service in 1992, and he continues to manage the condition with Tylenol.  See February 2024 VA Examination.

The examiner also concluded that his migraine headache condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  He noted that local Gulf War toxins include sand, dust, particulates, airborne hazards, burn pit exposures, depleted uranium, and oil well fires.  He explained that he had reviewed the VA public health website for the previous mentioned toxins and there is no known association or presumptive diagnosis for the development of migraine headaches post toxin exposures.

The Board finds the opinion is inadequate because the examiner failed to provide a rationale beyond noting that there is no known association or presumptive diagnosis for the development of migraine headaches post toxin exposures.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that a medical opinion obtains probative weight from "factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion").

The Board acknowledges that the June 2024 TBI examination report noted that the Veteran's current complaints are related to mental health comorbidities, particularly PTSD and depression.  However, the Board does not find this opinion sufficient for service connection as it does not specifically address the Veteran's migraine headaches or indicate that the Veteran's migraine headaches are caused or aggravated by his psychiatric disability.  Moreover, it does not contain any rationale to support the conclusion that the Veteran's migraine headaches are secondary to his service-connected psychiatric disability.

However, the Board finds that the record (June 2024 VA TBI opinion) reasonably raised the theory of secondary service connection.  As VA has a duty to develop and consider all theories of entitlement reasonably raised by the record, even if unknown to the Veteran, the Board has expanded this issue to include the theory of secondary service connection.  Szemraj v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1370, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

Given the above, the Board finds the VA medical opinions are inadequate for adjudication purposes.

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

Here, the VA medical opinions mentioned above were before the AOJ at the time it issued the July 2024 rating decision on appeal.  Therefore, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not ensuring the Veteran was provided an adequate medical opinion and a remand is necessary to correct this error.  Id.          

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's migraine headaches.  An in-person examination need not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner or otherwise required by the evidence.  The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety, to include a copy of this REMAND, and the review should be noted in the examination report.

The examiner must:

a.)	Provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's migraine headache disability was incurred during or as a result of his active service, to include his conceded TERAs during his deployment to Kuwait.

When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider: 

1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments;  

2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

3) the Veteran's December 1990 entrance examination;

4) STRs from June 1993 noting that he was thrown into a large metal object and injured in an accident that took place inside a Bradley vehicle;

5) STRs from November 1993, December 1995, and July 1996 noting the Veteran complained of having headaches;

6) VA treatment records from January 2015 noting that he had been having migraines on a regular basis;

7) The Veteran's report that his migraine headaches may be due to operating loud machinery during service.  See February 2024 VA 21-526EZ;

8) VA treatment records from March 2024 noting that he was diagnosed with chronic headaches; and

9) The Veteran's June 2024 VA examination noting his report that he was knocked unconscious after being in a motor vehicle accident.  His headaches started shortly after the accident in 1992 and overtime the headaches increased in intensity.  He manages his migraine headaches with Tylenol.

b.)	Provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's migraine headache disability is caused by his psychiatric disability and explain why or why not.

c.)	Provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's migraine headache disability has been aggravated by his psychiatric disability and explain why or why not.

In this regard, the examiner should consider and discuss the June 2024 VA examiner's report noting that the Veteran's current complaints are related to mental health comorbidities, particularly PTSD and depression.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The opinion should reflect consideration of the pertinent evidence of record (e.g., the Veteran's documented relevant history and assertions).

Provide a rationale that deals with causation and aggravation as independent concepts.

The examiner is reminded that for secondary service connection purposes the term "aggravation" means any incremental increase in the claimed disability.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Miller, D. M. Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.