Citation Nr: A25033939
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-431317
DATE:  April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent for service-connected allergic rhinitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of LASIK surgery is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a kidney condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected allergic rhinitis manifests in, at worst, complete obstruction of the left side nasal passage.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent for service-connected allergic rhinitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from April 2004 to December 2012.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of both August 2023 January 2024 rating decisions issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision on appeal with regard to the Veteran's allergic rhinitis, and the January 2024 rating decision on appeal with regard to the Veteran's residuals of LASIK surgery, kidney condition, and headaches claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Nevertheless, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for residuals of LASIK surgery, a kidney condition, and headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Increased Rating 

The Veteran contends generally that symptoms associated with his service-connected allergic rhinitis are worse than presently rated. The Veteran was granted service connection for allergic rhinitis in an August 2023 rating decision and awarded an initial 10 percent evaluation effective March 23, 2023, the date in which VA received the Veteran's intent to file. Specific argument in support of this appeal has not been provided. 

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). VA's determination of the present level of a disability may result in a conclusion that the disability has undergone varying and distinct levels of severity throughout the entire time period the increased-rating claim has been pending. Hart v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007).

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Although a rating specialist is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). However, the Board must also consider staged ratings. Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 505.

The Veteran's entire history is considered when assigning disability ratings. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). A review of the recorded history of a disability is necessary to make an accurate rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.41. The regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings where such current findings are adequate and relevant to the rating issue. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994); Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31 (1999). The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 505.

The assignment of a particular diagnostic code is dependent on the facts of a particular case. See Butts v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 532, 538 (1993). One diagnostic code may be more appropriate than another based on such factors as an individual's relevant medical history, the current diagnosis, and demonstrated symptomatology. In reviewing the claim for a higher rating, the Board must consider which diagnostic code, or codes are most appropriate for application in the Veteran's case and provide an explanation for the conclusion. See Tedeschi v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 411, 414 (1995).

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a Veteran's service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. It is possible for a Veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The Court has indicated that a distinction must be made between a Veteran's dissatisfaction with an initial rating assigned following a grant of service connection (so-called "original ratings"), and dissatisfaction with determinations on later filed claims for increased ratings. Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 119. Further, in cases such as this one, where the original rating assigned has been appealed, consideration must be given as to whether the Veteran deserves a higher or lower rating at any point during the pendency of the claim. Id. 

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no obligation to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence of record. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence). Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as it relates to the Veteran's claims.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's allergic rhinitis is rated as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 6522. 38 C.F.R § 4.97.

Allergic rhinitis is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 6522, of the schedule of ratings for the respiratory system. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97. Pursuant to Diagnostic Code 6522, allergic rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side warrants a 10 percent evaluation, while allergic rhinitis with polyps warrants a maximum 30 percent evaluation.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran underwent a compensation and pension (C&P) examination in June 2023 for evaluation of his allergic rhinitis. The examiner reported that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis manifests in complete obstruction of the left side nasal passage. The examiner reported that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis did not manifest in polyps; greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides; complete obstruction of the right side; permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates; or any granulomatous conditions. The Board notes that the Veteran's symptoms most closely approximate those of a 10 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

The June 2023 C&P examination is the only evaluation of record regarding the Veteran's allergic rhinitis and VA treatment records do not provide any additional insight into the symptomatology of the condition relevant to the rating criteria. The Board has considered whether evaluation under an alternative diagnostic code would be more beneficial to the Veteran and found none apply. While there are other diagnostic codes that allow for higher evaluations, they require diagnosis of specific forms of rhinitis such as bacterial and granulomatous. As the Veteran has only been diagnosed with allergic rhinitis, an alternative evaluation under either Diagnostic Code 6523 or 6524 is not warranted.

Further review of the record shows that the Veteran receives VA treatment providers for various disabilities, to include his allergic rhinitis. However, there is no indication from the treatment notes of record that the Veteran has reported allergic rhinitis symptoms that are worse than those noted above. 

The Board has also considered the Veteran's argument included in his April 2024 VA Form 10182 stating that his spirometry results were lost and finds that the Veteran is mistaken. Of record are the Veteran's pulmonary function test (PFT) results dated June 29, 2023 from the above referenced C&P exam. However, the Board notes that the rating criteria for allergic rhinitis is not based on pulmonary function testing; thus, spirometry results would not impact the evaluation. Nevertheless, the results of the June 2023 PFT reflect FEV-1 of 87 percent predicted, and FVC of 88 percent predicted. Such results would warrant a noncompensable rating under every diagnostic code which utilizes PFT results as the rating criteria. Lastly, the Board can find no evidence of a diagnosis for a condition rated by way of pulmonary function testing. Thus, evaluating the Veteran's allergic rhinitis under Diagnostic Code 6522 is more beneficial to the Veteran.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings under Hart v. Mansfield, supra is appropriate; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology was been stable throughout the period on appeal. Therefore, assigning staged ratings is not warranted. The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record in regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017). 

Additionally, the Board has considered whether an inferred claim for a TDIU has been raised pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The Veteran's current employment status is unknown. The Veteran has also not alleged, and the record does not suggest, that he is unable to obtain and maintain employment due solely to his service connected allergic rhinitis. As such, a Rice claim is not raised.

In so finding the above, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that his allergic rhinitis is more severe than contemplated by the current rating assigned. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms such as pain because this requires only personal knowledge, not medical expertise, as it comes to him through his senses. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology, where the determination is not medical in nature and is capable of lay observation. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). However, he is not considered competent to medically attribute or assess the severity of his allergic rhinitis as required in the Diagnostic Code. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). Therefore, his statements do not constitute competent evidence and, the Board assigns more probative weight to the competent medical evidence of record.

Accordingly, resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence is against the assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent, for his allergic rhinitis and the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection - Residuals of LASIK Surgery, Kidney Conditions, and Headaches 

The Veteran contends that he has had problems with his eyes and vision since having LASIK surgery during active service. The Veteran also contends that he has a kidney condition and suffers from severe headaches and that both conditions began during active service. The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination associated with these claims.

VA must provide a medical examination when there is evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service event, injury, or disease, (3) some indication that the claimed disability may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease, and (4) insufficient competent evidence of record for VA to decide the matter. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i). The third prong, which requires evidence that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Service treatment records (STR) reflect that during active service the Veteran had LASIK surgery in 2011; and was treated for kidney stones in December 2009 and again in January 2010. STR's also reflect that in September 2013 the Veteran reported having severe headaches which varied from week to week. Thus, the Board finds that failure to afford the Veteran a VA examination for conditions that were documented during the Veteran's active service constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.

As the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the current nature and etiology of his claimed eye or vision conditions, kidney condition, and headaches, he must be provided such an examination on remand. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed eye or vision condition. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

For any diagnosed eye or vision condition, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disorder had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? 

The examiner should address the significance, if any, of the Veteran's LASIK surgery during service.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed kidney condition. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

For any diagnosed kidney disorder, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disorder had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? 

The examiner should address the significance, if any, of the Veteran's treatment for kidney stones in 2009 and 2010 as documented in the STR's.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed headaches. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present headache condition had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Schulte

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.