Citation Nr: A25033263
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-439075
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from February 1988 to February 1993.

This appeal is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system (known by the Board as AMA). 38 C.F.R. § 19.2. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that under 38 U.S.C. § 7105, an appeal to the Board must be initiated by the filing of a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in the form prescribed by the Secretary. See also 38 C.F.R. § 20.201. The NOD must be in writing and identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (b)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a). Except as provided in the case of simultaneously contested claims, a claimant, or his or her representative, must file a properly completed NOD with a decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) within one year from the date that the agency mails the notice of the decision. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (b)(1)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b). The Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal, but the Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).

In the present case, the Veteran's representative submitted a May 09, 2024, Notice of Disagreement. Here, the Veteran's representative identified that the Veteran wanted to appeal the disability rating for her service-connected PTSD. However, the representative noted that the date of the decision was "unknown". While the representative did not identify a specific decision with which the claimant disagrees, in construing the document in a liberal manner the Board has determined that the Veteran is seeking to appeal the February 2024 rating decision which denied a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected PTSD. 

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

The Veteran asserts that she is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for her service-connected PTSD.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

In July 2014, the Veteran submitted a statement in support of her claim. Here, she reported experiencing symptoms of depression, insomnia, anxiety, fatigue, and anger.

VA treatment records from September 2018 note symptoms of anxiety, depression, and sleep impairment. In June 2019, the Veteran reported emotional difficulties and depression due to family-related stressors. She denied suicidal ideations. Records from December 2019 document the Veteran reporting good compliance with her medication. She noted a past history of passive suicidal ideations but denied active suicidal ideations or plans. It was noted that the Veteran's depression was stable. Records from March 2020 document the Veteran reporting manageable work-related anxiety and that she was chronically depressed. The Veteran reported chronic passive suicidal ideation without intent or attempt but denied active suicidal ideations with plans.

The Veteran appeared for a VA examination in May 2020. The examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. The Veteran reported having a few friends and a good relationship with her children; she stated that she did not have any hobbies and was not dating. She reported positive performance evaluations at work but stated that she has used too many sick days due to not wanting to be there. The Veteran denied any past or present suicidal or homicidal ideations, intentions, or plans. She did report passive thoughts of death when she was in her 20s and approximately 3 months prior to her examination. The Veteran further reported mood swings and that she is mostly angry without reason. Symptoms were documented as depressed mood, anxiety, and suspiciousness.

VA treatment records from June 2020 document the Veteran denying suicidal and homicidal ideations during a mental status examination. Thought production was logical and goal directed; the Veteran denied auditory and visual hallucinations; intellectual functioning appeared grossly intact; and judgment and insight were fair. Records from October 2020 note symptoms of anxiety and depression; the Veteran reported a stable mood and good tolerance with current medication.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2022. The examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported that she rarely communicates with her son and that she has an "okay" relationship with her daughters; she stated that she does not communicate with her family of origin, except for her brother, and that she has not been in a romantic relationship for 9 years. The Veteran further reported self-isolation and that she has one friend. She reported a history of conflict and receiving reprimands at work. Symptoms were documented as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities. The Veteran denied suicidal ideation for the past year.

 VA treatment records from February 2024 document the Veteran reporting taking her psychiatric medication as prescribed with no issues. She denied depression, suicidal ideations and auditory or visual hallucinations. She reported an increase in her anxiety after a work-related injury but reported that her anxiety was slowly improving.

Upon reviewing the pertinent evidence of record, the Board finds that entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is not warranted. In this regard, the evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran's symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher. The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating.

VA treatment records, the VA examinations of record, and the Veteran's lay statements show that the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating (e.g., flattened affect, panic attacks more than once a week, disturbances in motivation and mood, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships), and symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating (e.g., obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities and suicidal ideations). 

The Board notes that the Veteran expressed suicidal ideation, which is similar to persistent danger of self-harm, which is contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017). However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not risen to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating. The Veteran regularly denied thoughts, intent, or a plan involving self-harm in existing treatment records, and during the May 2020 VA examination she reported that she had passive thoughts of death in her 20s and again 3 months prior to her May 2020 examination. VA treatment records repeatedly note that she has had passive suicidal ideations and thoughts of death in the past but no active suicidal ideations. Further, during the April 2022 VA examination, the Veteran denied suicidal ideations for the past year.

The Board also finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a 50 percent rating. More specifically, the April 2022 VA examiner found that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity which is associated with the 50 percent rating criteria.  

The Board notes that the Veteran experienced symptoms consistent with the 10 percent and 30 percent rating criteria. Here, the May 2020 VA examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication, which is consistent with the 10 percent rating criteria. Further, the Veteran consistently experienced anxiety, depression, sleep impairment, and suspiciousness throughout the record. However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms overall are more consistent with the 50 percent rating criteria. 

Moreover, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's PTSD is not warranted because the severity, frequency, and duration, of the Veteran's symptoms do not demonstrate the level of impairment required for a 70 percent rating. Here, the Veteran reported obsessional rituals during the April 2022 VA examination and reported having passive thoughts of death 3 months prior to the May 2020 examination which are contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria. However, the record does not show the Veteran displaying or complaining of obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities outside of the April 2022 VA examination. While the symptom of obsessional rituals may be present, the evidence of record does not show that the symptom is so severe that it interferes with routine activities. Regarding suicidal ideations, Veteran consistently denied current suicidal ideations during mental health evaluations of record and during VA examinations. Further, competent medical records do not show that the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Judgment and thought processes were determined to be fair during mental health evaluations and speech was determined to be logical. The Veteran often reported in VA treatment records that her medication was working satisfactorily and that she was managing her issues at work. As noted above, the Veteran's other remaining symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 50 percent rating.  

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 70 percent rating. The criteria for a 70 percent or higher rating are not met and the appeal must be denied.

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that her PTSD is more severe than as reflected by the current assigned disability rating. In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe her symptomatology, she is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of her symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged her reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities considering the rating criteria to be more persuasive. 

G. William Riggs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. K. Hall, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.