Citation Nr: A25033084
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-432283
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the evaluation for right hip strain adduction impairment from 10 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024, was improper, and the 10 percent rating is restored.

The reduction of the evaluation for left hip strain adduction impairment from 10 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024, was improper, and the 10 percent rating is restored.

The reduction of the evaluation for right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from 20 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024, was improper, and the 20 percent rating is restored.

The reduction of the evaluation for left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from 20 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024, was improper, and the 20 percent rating is restored.

Entitlement to eligibility for a specially adapted housing grant or a special home adaptation grant is denied.

Entitlement to eligibility for a grant for an automobile an adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The March 2024 rating decision rating decision reduced the Veteran's ratings for right and left hip strain based on limitation of adduction from 10 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024.  It failed to apply the correct statutory and regulatory provisions for reduced ratings. 

2. The March 2024 rating decision rating decision reduced the Veteran's ratings for right and left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from 20 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024.  It failed to apply the correct statutory and regulatory provisions for reduced ratings. 

3. The Veteran is service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), gastrointestinal disability, headaches, lumbar spine degenerative joint disease, right and left lower extremity sciatic and femoral radiculopathy, right and left hip strain with limitation of flexion, extension, and adduction, left knee strain with limitation of flexion and extension, right knee strain with limitation of extension, right and left knee instability, right and left ankle strain, tinnitus, right inguinal scar, mesh pain and testicular pain, and allergic rhinitis, and he has a total evaluation of 100 percent. 

4. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in loss or loss of use of a lower extremity or foot, and he does not have ankylosis of a knee or hip.   

5. The Veteran is not service connected for an upper extremity or hand disability, a severe burn injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, blindness or other vision impairment, or an inhalation injury. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction of the rating for right hip strain adduction impairment, from 10 percent to 0 percent, was improper; the 10 percent rating is restored, effective March 5, 2024.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.105, 3.321, 3.344, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253. 

2. The reduction of the rating for left hip strain adduction impairment, from 10 percent to 0 percent, was improper; the 10 percent rating is restored, effective March 5, 2024.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.105, 3.321, 3.344, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253. 

3. The reduction of the rating for right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from 20 percent to 0 percent was improper; the 20 percent rating is restored, effective March 5, 2024.? 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.105, 3.321, 3.344, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.? 

4. The reduction of the rating for left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from 20 percent to 0 percent was improper; the 20 percent rating is restored, effective March 5, 2024.? 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.105, 3.321, 3.344, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.? 

5. The criteria for establishing eligibility for financial assistance for specially adapted housing or special home adaptation are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.350, 3.809, 3.809a.

6. The criteria for establishing eligibility for financial assistance for an automobile and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.808.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty for training from June 2001 to August 2001, and on active duty from October 2001 to August 2002.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The claims for a grant for specially adapted housing or special home adaptation and for a specially adapted automobile or automobile adaptive equipment were first denied in a February 2024 rating decision.  The Veteran submitted a request for Higher-Level Review in February 2024, and the AOJ found that a duty to assist error had occurred.  After additional development was completed, which constituted new and relevant evidence, the AOJ issued a new rating decision in March 2024.  This rating decision also reduced the evaluations assigned for the Veteran's right and left hip strain adduction impairment and right and left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that in the April 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also listed the issue of entitlement to special monthly compensation based on loss of use and a need for aid and attendance, and he referenced a June 2022 rating decision.  This issue was addressed in a May 2022 rating decision and a June 2022 Board decision.  These rating decisions were therefore more than one year prior to the April 2024 VA Form 10182, and this is not a timely appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b).  This issue also had already been appealed by the Veteran under the AMA appeal system, and to include this issue would be duplicative. 

The Veteran also listed the issue of eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC), but this issue was not listed in the March 2024 rating decision, and an appeal of a decision from June 2022 would be untimely.  The Board also notes that this issue was not actually addressed in the June 2022 decision, and furthermore, the Veteran also already appealed this issue in an August 2022 VA Form 10182, and this appeal is currently pending before the Board.  It will be addressed in a separate decision.

Lastly, the Veteran also listed the issues of entitlement to a higher rating for right knee flexion and restoration of the reductions in rating for right knee extension and instability in the April 2024 VA Form 10182.  The ratings for these issues had, however, already been appealed through the Legacy appeal system, and they had been remanded in a May 2023 Board decision for further development.  While this development led, in part, to the reduction of the ratings in the March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran's request to appeal these decisions was premature, as they needed to be readjudicated in a Legacy Supplemental Statement of the Case.  A Supplemental Statement of the Case was then issued by the AOJ in June 2024.  These issues were then re-docketed at the Board, and they will be addressed by the Board in a separate decision at a later date.

Right and Left Hip Strain Adduction

The March 2024 rating decision rating reduced the Veteran's ratings for right and left hip strain based on limitation of adduction from 10 percent to 0 percent, effective March 5, 2024.  The rating decision stated that this rating was reduced because the evidence did not show limitation of adduction with inability to cross the legs or limitation of rotation of the thigh, with inability to toe-out more than 15 degrees. 

The Veteran wrote in March 2024 that the evidence did not show improvement in his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life, and did not support a reduction in the ratings.

To properly reduce a rating, VA must meet both procedural and substantive benchmarks.? In this case, the reduction did not reduce the Veteran's overall compensation payments, and a rating decision proposing the reduction was not required.? See 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(e).? 

When a disability rating has been in effect for 5 years of more, there is a heightened standard of review that must be applied when reducing that rating.  See?38?C.F.R. §?3.344(c).? For ratings that have been in effect for less than 5 years, 38?C.F.R. §?3.344(c) allows for reduction when reexamination shows improvement in the disability.? See also Smith v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?339 (1993).? The Veteran was assigned 10 percent ratings for right hip strain adduction from March 19, 2018, which was then raised to 20 percent from January 23, 2019, and back to 10 percent from December 1, 2020.  The Veteran's left hip strain adduction impairment was assigned a 0 percent rating from March 9, 2018, a 20 percent rating from January 23, 2019, and a 10 percent rating from December 1, 2020.  Therefore, although the Veteran's increased 20 percent rating was only in place for approximately one year, he had at least a 10 percent rating for both disorders for over 5 years, and the heightened standard of review does apply.

The entire record of examinations and medical history must be full and complete, and any reduction must be based on a conclusion that material improvement has occurred which is reasonably certain to be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life.  38?C.F.R. §?3.344(a).  The rating agency must make reasonably certain that the improvement will be maintained under the conditions of ordinary life even if material improvement in the physical or mental condition is clearly reflected.  Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320, 324 (1995).  VA is required to ascertain, based upon review of the entire recorded history of the condition, whether the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability and whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations.? When any change in evaluation is to be made, VA should ensure that there has been an actual change in the conditions, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in the use of descriptive terms.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.13.? 

In this case, the Board finds that VA did not properly follow the regulations pertaining to reductions of disability ratings, and the 10 percent ratings for right and left hip adduction impairment are restored.? 

The Veteran's right and left hip strain adduction impairment disabilities are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253, for impairment of the thigh.  Under Diagnostic Code 5253, a 10 percent rating is warranted for limitation of rotation of affected leg, cannot toe out more than 15 degrees.  A 10 percent rating is also warranted for limitation of adduction, with the inability to cross the legs.  A maximum 20 percent rating is warranted for limitation of abduction, motion lost beyond 10 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253.  

The Veteran had previously been assigned a 10 percent rating in a September 2020 rating decision on the basis that he had limitation of adduction of the thighs and could not cross his legs.  The evidence leading up to this rating decision included a July 2019 private evaluation.  The examiner wrote that the Veteran had 17 degrees of adduction on the right and 11 degrees on the left.  He could not cross his legs while sitting.  At a September 2020 VA examination, the Veteran had been found to have right and left hip abduction to 30 degrees and adduction to 10 degrees.  Limitation of adduction prevented him/made it difficult for him to cross his legs.

Subsequent medical evidence shows that the Veteran continues to have impairment in his right and left hip adduction.  A September 2020 VA examination found that the Veteran had adduction limited to 10 degrees, and the adduction limit prevented him from being able to cross his legs.  A November 2020 VA examination of the hips again found that he could not cross his legs due to limitation of adduction.

The Veteran submitted a May 2021 letter from a physician stating that the Veteran's hip disorder had actually been worsening.  A May 2021 Disability Benefits Questionnaire for hip and thigh impairment was also submitted.  The examiner did not, however, provide specific range of motion findings, but wrote that the Veteran had pain and decreased range of motion.

At a March 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported having sharp numbing pain with flare ups.  Range of motion testing found 35 degrees of abduction and 15 degrees of adduction in the right hip.  There were 30 degrees of abduction and 20 degrees of adduction in the left hip.  Limitation of adduction did not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs.

The Veteran attended a VA examination in March 2024.  The Veteran reported having hip pain and limitations in standing, walking, and sitting for extended periods of time.  He could not push, pull, lift, or stoop, and he had trouble getting out of bed or rising from sitting.  He reported having flare ups that were mild to moderate and that occurred weekly.  He had reduced right hip adduction of 15 degrees and abduction of 13 degrees.  The left hip had adduction of 20 degrees and abduction of 14 degrees.  Passive range of motion was the same, and there was no change after repetitive motion.  There was pain with weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  There was pain on palpation.  The examiner did not find that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time or flare ups.  His limitation in adduction did not prevent him from crossing his legs.

In this case, the March 2024 rating decision did not consider whether actual improvement had occurred, and it does not appear that the March 2022 or March 2024 VA examinations made any findings that there was improvement shown which would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life.  The March 2022 VA examiner marked that the condition since onset had progressed/worsened, and he made no specific findings regarding improvement in the Veteran's functioning in life.  The March 2024 VA examiner even wrote that the Veteran had reported no change in his hip pain, just progression of the pain and intensity.

The sole basis for the decreased rating seems to be that the Veteran's latest VA examination marked that he did not have the inability to cross his legs, while at prior examinations, the VA examiner found that he did.  The Board finds that this, on its own, is insufficient to decrease evaluations that had been in place for more than 5 years.  There were no findings or discussions regarding the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  There is no indication that this finding constitutes an actual improvement that will be maintained, and furthermore, there was no discussion whether the Veteran's ability to cross his legs would be impacted by flare ups or the use of medication.  The Veteran has reported that he frequently takes large amounts of pain medication to treat his bilateral hip pain.  The AOJ made no findings on whether this was the type of material improvement that would be maintained under the conditions of ordinary life.  

The Board finds that the March 2024 rating decision failed to apply the correct statutory and regulatory provisions when reducing the Veteran's ratings.  The failure to properly apply the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?3.344 renders a rating reduction void ab initio.  See Kitchens v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?320, 325 (1995).  The Veteran's 10 percent ratings for both right and left hip strain based on limitation of adduction, from March 5, 2024, are restored.  The Veteran therefore retains a 10 percent rating for both right and left hip strain based on limitation of adduction from March 5, 2024. 

The Board therefore concludes that the March 2024 rating decision did not appropriately apply the regulations pertaining to reduction of ratings, and because these regulations were not considered and applied, the reduction was improper, and the prior ratings should be restored.? See 38?C.F.R. §§?3.344, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13.?

Right and Left Lower Extremity Femoral Radiculopathy 

The March 2024 rating decision also reduced the 20 percent ratings assigned for right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy and for left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy, effective March 5, 2024.  The Veteran was initially awarded 10 percent ratings for both left and right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from June 16, 2020, and 20 percent from November 11, 2020, in a May 2021 rating decision.  Therefore, these ratings were in effect for less than 5 years at the time that they were reduced.  

For ratings that have been in effect for less than 5 years, 38?C.F.R. §?3.344(c) allows for reduction when reexamination shows improvement in the disability.? See also Smith v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?339 (1993).? However, several VA regulations are applicable to all rating-reduction cases, regardless of the length of time that the rating has been in effect.? Pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §§?4.1 and 4.2, VA is required in any rating-reduction case to ascertain, based upon review of the entire recorded history of the condition, whether the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability and whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations.? The rating agency should ensure that there has been an actual change in the conditions, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in the use of descriptive terms.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.13.? VA must not only determine that an improvement in a disability has occurred, but also that that improvement actually reflects an improvement in the ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.10.? 

The Veteran was initially awarded a separate rating for radiculopathy affecting the femoral nerves in a May 2021 rating decision because a June 2020 VA examination had found that his radiculopathy affected multiple nerves in the lower extremity, including mild incomplete paralysis in the anterior cruciate/femoral nerves.  The rating decision also relied on a November 2020 VA examination for findings that the Veteran's radiculopathy had worsened to become "moderate."  The Veteran was assigned initial ratings of 10 percent from June 16, 2020, and 20 percent from November 11, 2020.  Separate ratings of 10 percent from March 31, 2010 and 20 percent from November 11, 2020 were also assigned for right and left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy.

The Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathy is rated under Diagnostic Code 8520, for paralysis of the sciatic nerve.? Incomplete paralysis of the anterior crural (femoral) nerve is assigned a 10 percent rating when it is mild, a 20 percent rating when it is moderate, and a 30 percent rating when it is moderately severe.  38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.  Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is a 10 percent rating when it is mild and a 20 percent rating when it is moderate.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.??While separate ratings cannot be assigned for more than one nerve group in the upper extremities, more than one can be assigned when rating the lower extremities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

In this case, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's ratings for the femoral nerve radiculopathy apparently because the March 2024 VA examination found that the Veteran had severe constant pain, moderate paresthesias/dysesthesias, and moderate numbness in both legs, but that it affected only the sciatic nerves, and not the femoral nerves.  

The March 2024 rating decision did not, however, consider whether actual improvement had occurred, and it does not appear that the March 2024 VA examination actually did make any findings that there was actual improvement in the Veteran's condition.  The AOJ failed to apply the relevant regulations by not discussing whether there had been improvement which would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life.  Furthermore, the Board notes that the actual manifestation of the Veteran's lower leg radiculopathy symptoms seems to have worsened from 2020 to 2024, not improved.  The November 2020 VA examination found that the Veteran had only mild intermittent pain and mild paresthesias/dysesthesias, but the March 2024 VA examination found severe constant pain and moderate paresthesias/dysesthesias.  The Veteran also submitted part of a March 2023 Disability Benefits Questionnaire, which said that due to femoral and sciatic radiculopathy, he had severe weakness and pain, numbness, tingling, limited range of motion, and stiffness.  It is not clear, then, how the Veteran's radiculopathy could be said to have "improved."

The AOJ seems to have relied solely on the fact that the March 2024 VA examiner had found that the symptoms were caused by the Veteran's sciatic nerves alone, and not the femoral nerves.  This, however, also doesn't actually indicate a change from the evidence that was present at the time the initial ratings were assigned, because the November 2020 VA examiner also found that the Veteran's radiculopathy was caused by the sciatic nerves, and not the femoral nerves.  It appears that the AOJ may have assigned the increased 20 percent ratings for moderate radiculopathy in the femoral nerves in error.  If a rating at a particular level was erroneous and should never have been assigned, the proper method of correcting that error is through a finding of clear and unmistakable error in the original rating decision.  Thus, if the AOJ reduces a disability rating in an attempt to correct a mistake in a prior rating decision, the reduction is improper.  If the AOJ believes that this separate award for service connection should be severed, it must apply the correct standards for severing an award of service connection.  See 38?C.F.R. §?3.105(d); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?482, 487 (2006) (Once service connection has been granted, it can be severed only where the evidence establishes that the grant was clearly and unmistakably erroneous, and only where certain procedural safeguards have been met.).

The Board finds that the March 2024 rating decision failed to apply the correct statutory and regulatory provisions when reducing the Veteran's ratings.  The failure to properly apply the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?3.344 renders a rating reduction void ab initio.  See Kitchens, 7?Vet. App.?at 325.  The Veteran's 20 percent ratings for both right and left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy, from March 5, 2024, are restored.  The reduction was improper, and the prior ratings should be restored.? See 38?C.F.R. §§?3.344, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13.? The Veteran therefore retains a 20 percent rating for both right and left lower extremity femoral radiculopathy from March 5, 2024. 

Specially Adapted Housing and Special Home Adaptation

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to specially adapted housing because he has loss of use of his lower extremities.  The Veteran submitted a January 2024 application for specially adapted housing.  It stated that he was prescribed a cane and brace to ambulate, and that he had loss of use of one lower extremity which made it so that he could not balance or walk without the help of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair, that he had loss of use of a lower leg alone with the residuals of an organic disease or injury, and that he had loss of use of both lower extremities.  He wrote in January 2024 that he had loss of use of both lower extremities such that they preclude locomotion without the regular and constant use of an assistive device.

The Veteran has submitted numerous written statements indicating that he believes that he has loss of use of his lower extremities.  In December 2023, he submitted a statement that he used a knee brace and cane at all times for stability and support when in an upright position because it did not appear that his lower extremities were able to support his weight without the ever-present danger of falls.  He also submitted a statement that he used a cane for greater stability, but still had falls due to his knees giving way.  He wrote that any walking or exercise caused pain, swelling, grinding, and popping in his hips.

Specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who is entitled to compensation for permanent and total disability due to: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis rated as 100 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows.  Specially adapted housing is also available to a veteran with a permanent and total disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to: (5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or, (7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which affect the functions of balance or propulsion.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b), (d). 

Specially adapted housing may also be available to a veteran who served on or after September 11, 2001, who has a permanent disability that was incurred during such service, and which results in loss or loss of use of one or more extremities which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude ambulating without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair.  See 38 U.S.C. §?2101(a)(2)(C). 

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran can qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if the Veteran has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees; such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature.  Additionally, a special home adaptation grant is available for a veteran that has a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). 38 C.F.R. §?3.809a(b). 

The Veteran is service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), gastrointestinal disability, headaches, lumbar spine degenerative joint disease, right and left lower extremity sciatic and femoral radiculopathy, right and left hip strain with limitation of flexion, extension, and adduction, left knee strain with limitation of flexion and extension, right knee strain with limitation of extension, right and left knee instability, right and left ankle strain, tinnitus, right inguinal scar, testicular pain, and allergic rhinitis, and he has a total evaluation of 100 percent. 

The Veteran is not service connected for a burn injury, upper extremity disability, vision impairment, inhalation injury, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  The provisions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(b)(2),(4),(5),(6), 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(d), and 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a therefore do not apply and cannot be the basis for a grant of specially adapted housing or a special home adaptation grant, and these specific provisions will not be further discussed.

The Veteran's primary contention is that a grant for specially adapted housing is warranted because he has loss of use of his lower extremities and that he requires a cane and knee brace for ambulation.  In March 2024 statements, he wrote that he requires constant use of a cane for ambulation, as well as a knee brace, and that he wouldn't be able to walk for any significant distance without assistance from these devices.  He also submitted statements that he used a cane and brace, that he had precluded locomotion, and that his tinnitus, migraines, and dizziness affected his functions of balance and propulsion.

The majority of the extensive evidence in the claims file from the several years leading up to the Veteran's claims shows that he is able to walk independently, but he uses a cane to help with balance and support.  A January 2021 back examination found that the Veteran used a cane for ambulation.  He had pain with prolonged walking and could not walk for long distances.  He did not have function in the lower extremities that was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.

At a March 2021 knee examination, the Veteran did not use any assistive device to help with ambulation.  He had swelling and his knee sometimes gave out with prolonged walking.

The Veteran submitted a May 2021 Disability Benefits Questionnaire for hip and thigh impairment completed by private physician C.B.  The examiner did check "yes" for whether function was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.  He then wrote that the Veteran had pain at rest, was a fall risk, and had poor balance.  An accompanying May 2021 physical capacity assessment completed by C.B. marked that the Veteran's ability to stand or walk required hand-held assistive device for ambulation.

At July 2021 and September 2021 knee examinations, the examiner found that the Veteran used a cane with ambulation.  The Veteran reported having difficulty walking long distances.  He did not have function in the lower extremities that was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.

The Veteran submitted an August 2021 examination for housebound status, in which the examiner wrote that the Veteran had right leg weakness and used a cane.

At March 2022 VA examinations for the knees and hips, the examiner wrote that the Veteran regularly used a cane because of his knee conditions.  His knee disorders affecting prolonged standing, walking, bending, and squatting.  He did not have function in the lower extremities that was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.

A March 2022 examination for housebound status found that the Veteran had an antalgic gait and needed a cane for ambulation.  The examiner found that the Veteran had weakness with weight-bearing, and required cane assistance to help with balance and propulsion.

The Veteran also submitted several March 2022 Disability Benefits Questionnaires completed by private physician C.B. which indicated that the Veteran used a walker because he was a fall risk.

A different March 2022 Disability Benefits Questionnaire submitted by the Veteran found that he used a brace and cane for ambulation.  He did not have function in the lower extremities that was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.

He submitted a February 2023 evaluation for housebound status which stated that the Veteran had pain in his knees and needed a cane to steady himself, and that he had fallen.

A September 2023 examination for housebound status or aid and attendance found that the Veteran walked with a cane for his knees, and he reported having a fall in the shower in 2019 due to his knees giving out.  The Veteran had an antalgic gait when walking, but had no limitations with weight-bearing or propulsion.  There was no atrophy.  He reported being able to walk less than a block.  The Veteran said that he goes down to the gas station to get a pack of cigarettes, goes to medical appointments, and goes to the family house for an event if he feels like it.  

The Veteran attended a VA examination to assess his need for aid and attendance in December 2023.  He had pain with weight bearing in his legs, and his knees randomly gave out.  He used a cane for balance.  He was able to walk without the assistance of another person for 200 feet.

At VA examinations held in March 2024, the Veteran reported severe pain and moderate numbness in both legs.  His gait was normal.  He reported having limitations in being able to stand or walk for extended periods of time.  He used a cane to aid ambulation due to radiculopathy and lower extremity pain.  He did not have function in the lower extremities that was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.

The Veteran's VA treatment records show that in April 2021, he was noted to use a cane to offload his right leg.  He underwent a functional assessment, and was found to be independent in his ability to walk 150 feet, to walk 10 feet on uneven surfaces, and to go up and down four steps with or without a rail.  He was independence in walking for 15 minutes and walking across the street.  He reported that he was unable to climb more than a few stairs due to pain and his knees giving out.  He used a cane due to bilateral knee pain and "buckling."  At a November 2022 primary care evaluation, he had no joint or muscular complaints.  His extremities had normal pulses and no edema.  He walked with a cane.  At a June 2023 primary care evaluation, he requested a new cane, because his cane had broken.  His extremities had normal pulses and no edema.  

After reviewing all of the evidence, the Board finds that the weight of the medical evidence is against finding that the Veteran has loss of use of either lower extremity, and eligibility for a grant of specially adapted housing or special home adaptation is not warranted.

While the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has difficulty walking for long distances, that he often uses a cane and sometimes uses a knee brace, which are assistive devices, the weight of the persuasive medical evidence is against finding that he has no effective lower extremity function and is completely precluded from locomotion without the regular and constant uses of an assistive device, and he does not qualify as having loss of use of either leg.

"Loss of use" is not specifically defined under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 or 3.809a. Regulations pertaining to special monthly compensation for loss of use of a foot state that loss of use is held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance.  The determination should be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability to balance or propel oneself forward.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a)(2), 4.63.

In claims for specially adapted housing based on loss of use of a lower extremity, consideration is to be given to whether the Veteran's loss of use precludes locomotion without the aid of assistive devices.  The term "preclude locomotion" means the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches or canes as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c).  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) found that a "loss of use" exists when there is "deprivation of the ability to avail oneself" of that extremity, and functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination.  See Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78 (2017).  The Court found that loss of use for specially adapted housing required that a "veteran has suffered a deprivation in his ability to use his lower extremity so severe that he is precluded from perambulating without one of the required assistive devices."  Id.

In this case, the Board has reviewed all of the evidence of record and finds that at no time has the Veteran ever been found to have loss of use of his lower extremities such that he would be equally well-served by amputation with prosthesis.  Even taking into consideration the generous interpretation of "loss of use" discussed by the Court in Jensen, the Board does not find that the Veteran has loss of use of a lower extremity.

The Board finds that the weight of the probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran would not be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis, nor does he have a deprivation in his ability to use his lower extremities so severe that he is completely precluded from perambulating without an assistive device.  The evidence shows that the Veteran has pain with extended standing or walking, but throughout the appeal period, he maintained considerable function of the bilateral lower extremities and the ability to ambulate short distances independently.  

The Veteran was always found to be able to walk on his own, including a 2021 evaluation that found that he could walk for 15 minutes.  At the March 2024 VA examination, which found some more severe symptoms than those observed in prior VA examinations, including severe pain and moderate numbness in both legs, he nevertheless still had a normal gait.  While the Veteran had reduced range of motion in the lower extremity joints and pain and weakness that greatly affected his ability to walk or stand for very long, he still had considerable function in his legs.  Muscle strength testing and reflexes were fully normal.  None of the VA examiners ever found that the Veteran had such extreme functional impairment that the Veteran would be equally well served with amputation and prosthesis.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted a May 2021 Disability Benefits Questionnaire for hip and thigh impairment in which the examiner did check "yes" for whether function was so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.  This finding is outweighed, however, by the many other evaluations submitted both by VA examiners and by private examiners.  All other examiners found that the Veteran's function was not so diminished that no effective function remained than that which would be equally well served by amputation with prosthesis.  Examiner C.B. also wrote that the Veteran needed a walker, but the many, many other medical records in the file show that the Veteran does not use a walker, but instead uses a cane.  This suggests that the examiner did not actually review the Veteran's other medical records; his own notes regarding this, state that he reviewed the file "as provide[d] by the patient," and it is unclear what records he was provided with.  The examiner also did not actually perform any range of motion testing, but instead primarily just put slashes through most sections and made notes of the Veteran having pain with any movement.  This also greatly reduces the probative value of this evaluation, and the Board finds that it is outweighed by the other medical evaluations which were based on more thorough examinations of the Veteran and full reviewed of the medical record.  See Prejean v. West, 13?Vet. App.?444 (2000).? The subsequent March 2022 evaluations submitted by C.B. similarly show no range of motion testing and were based on records provided by the Veteran, and the references these examinations make to the Veteran needed to use a walker due to balance problems are also not found to be significantly probative evidence.  Furthermore, it is not clear to the Board that the May 2021 evaluation even really meant that the Veteran's impairment was so extreme as to be the equivalent of amputation, because he then wrote that the Veteran had pain at rest, was a fall risk, and had poor balance.  This does not actually seem to indicate that the Veteran had severe functional impairment in his legs, but rather, that he had pain and poor balance which put him at risk for falls.  This is consistent with the findings of other examiners, and does not suggest functional impairment that would deprive of the Veteran of the ability to avail himself of the use of his legs.  

The Board has also considered the holding of Jensen and the Veteran's assertion that he requires the use of a cane for the balance and propulsion required in ambulation.  The Veteran has been prescribed a cane by his providers, and he regularly uses the cane to help him with balance and support.  The evidence shows, however, that he uses his cane mainly because he has problems with stability.  He has reported feeling unsteady on his legs and having falls from his knees giving way.  He reported at his April 2021 functional assessment that he used a cane due to bilateral knee pain and "buckling."  In February 2023, it was noted that the Veteran  needed a cane to steady himself.  A September 2023 examination found that the Veteran walked with a cane due to his knees, and that he had previously fallen when his knees gave out.  He had no limitations with weight-bearing or propulsion.  In December 2023, it was also noted that he used the cane for balance.

The Board does not find that the weight of the persuasive evidence demonstrates that the claimant is completely precluded from ambulation without the use of this cane, or a cane and a brace.  He is able to stand and walk without his cane, although he has better stability with the cane and feels less likely to fall when using this cane.  The presence of a cane, or even a cane with a brace, to assist with stability does not, on its own, demonstrate that the Veteran's lower extremity disabilities are so severe that they preclude locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices.  See Jensen, 29 Vet. App. at 79.  

While the impact of the impairment on "balance" and the need for an ambulating device are specifically mentioned in the regulations that pertain to specially adapted housing and special home adaptation, there still must be loss of use of the extremity that is severe enough that it affects both balance and propulsion, and preclude any ambulation without an assistive device.  See 38 U.S.C. §?2101(a)(2)(C).  The Court has further defined this as "deprivation of the ability to avail oneself" of that extremity, with functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination.  Jensen, 29 Vet. App. at 78.  The criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 are intended to apply only apply to veterans who are genuinely precluded from locomotion and "are so severely disabled that they cannot enjoy the use of their homes unless they are modified to fit their needs."  Id. at 78-79.  Here, the Board, in its role as the fact-finder, finds that the Veteran's use of a cane for stability is not sufficient to meet the criteria requiring that locomotion is completely precluded without assistive devices.  The evidence as a whole does not demonstrate that the Veteran is unable to move his legs and feet adequately to propel himself forward and is thus precluded from locomotion without an assistive device.  The Board therefore finds that the weight of the persuasive medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran does not have deprivation of the ability to avail himself of his lower extremities, even when functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination is taken into account.

The Board has considered the lay statements of the Veteran regarding his problems with mobility and is sympathetic to his current struggles.  The medical evidence, however, shows that the Veteran is not eligible for a specially adapted housing or special home adaptation grant under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 or 3.809a.  If there are specific mobility devices that the Veteran needs for his mobility or the accessibility of his home, the Board recommends that the Veteran work with the VA Prosthetics and Sensory Aids Service through his VA care facility, which can assist in obtaining prosthetic devices and mobility modifications for the home.  The Veteran should also discuss with a VA care provider whether he should apply for a Home Improvements and Structural Alterations (HISA) grant, which provides grants for medically necessary home improvements and structural alterations, including ramps to allow entrance into the home, allowing accessibility into the kitchen or bathroom, and creating an accessible bathroom and shower.

In sum, the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran does not have a service-connected disability that results in the loss or loss of use of a lower extremity, nor does he have a service-connected disability that causes loss or loss of use of an upper extremity, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, residuals of an inhalation injury, full thickness or subdermal burns, or blindness in both eyes.  There is no indication in the record that he could potentially be eligible for specially adapted housing or special home adaptation under any of the criteria within 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 or 3.809a.  As the criteria are not met, the claim must be denied.  The evidence is not in approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.? See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (2021).???

Automobile Allowance or Adaptive Equipment 

The Veteran has also applied for a grant for an automobile and adaptive equipment or adaptive equipment only.  In March 2024, he wrote that he requires constant use of a cane and brace for ambulation, and that the evidence shows that he requires adaptive equipment and it unable to operate his automobile in a manner consistent with his own safety and the safety of others on the road.

Financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only.  38 U.S.C. § 3902(a)(b).  Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted where one of the following exists as the result of injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active service: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, meaning central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury precluding effective operation of an automobile; (5) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; or, (6) for adaptive equipment only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips.  38 U.S.C. § 3901; 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.  

"Loss of use" is not specifically defined under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.  Regulations pertaining to special monthly compensation for loss of use of a hand or foot state that loss of use is held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance.  The determination should be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability balance or propel oneself forward.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a)(2), 4.63.  

The Veteran is not service connected for vision impairment, a hand disability, a severe burn injury, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  The provisions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808(b)(2),(3),(4),(5) therefore do not apply and cannot be the basis for a grant for acquiring an automobile with adaptive equipment or adaptive equipment only, and these specific provisions will not be further discussed.

The Board also finds that the Veteran does not have ankylosis of one or both knees or one of both hips.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.808(b)(6).  At no time has any VA or private examiner found that the Veteran had ankylosis in a knee or hip, and the Veteran has not asserted that he has ankylosis in a knee or hip.  While private examiner C.B. wrote "0" for every single section that dealt with range of motion in the May 2021 private Disability Benefits Questionnaire, he also made notes regarding the Veteran having pain with decreased range of motion, so it appears that this was meant to signify that the Veteran had pain at all ranges, not that he had absolutely no motion in his hips.  He also did mark that the Veteran had no ankylosis in either hip.  C.B. also found that the Veteran had no ankylosis in either hip in his March 2022 evaluation.  Generally, ankylosis is defined as "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, surgical procedure." Lewis v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 259 (1992).  None of the VA examiners or treatment providers ever found the Veteran to have ankylosis, and all of the remaining medical evidence indicates that while he has had a limitation of motion in his bilateral hips and knees, he nonetheless has always had at least some range of motion, even if painful, which demonstrates that he did not have ankylosis.

At the March 2022 VA examination for the hips, the Veteran had right and left hip flexion to 85 and 90 degrees.  At the March 2024 VA examination for the hips, the Veteran had right and left hip flexion to 30 degrees.  At a March 2022 knee VA examination, the Veteran's right knee was not tested, but the left knee had flexion to 120 degrees.  At the March 2024 VA examination for the knees, he had right and left knee flexion to 60 degrees.  The Board does not find it necessary to further discuss the other earlier VA and private examination findings in the record, as they all show that the Veteran had at least some range of motion in his hips and knees.  Entitlement to automobile adaptive equipment under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808(b)(6) is therefore not warranted.

The Veteran's primary contention is that he has loss of use in his feet.  As was discussed above, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have loss of use of either foot or lower extremity.  The weight of the persuasive evidence indicates that the Veteran is able to use both feet to walk for at least short distances.  Unlike with the provisions for specially adapted housing, the adapted automobile regulations have no additional notation of needing to be precluded from ambulation without the use of an assistive device.  Therefore, the evidence weighs even more strongly against this claim, as it shows very clearly that the Veteran is able to walk with the use of a cane and brace.  At no time has the evidence ever indicated that the Veteran is unable to walk for short distances even when he is aided by a cane and knee brace.  The Veteran has always maintained some movement and strength in his lower extremities, and he is able to use his feet for the purpose of standing and walking.  The evidence as a whole does not demonstrate that the Veteran is unable to move his legs and feet adequately to propel himself forward and is thus precluded from locomotion.  The Board therefore finds that the weight of the persuasive medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran does not have deprivation of the ability to avail himself of his feet, and he does not meet the criteria for "loss of use" for either foot.  

The Board has again considered the lay statements of the Veteran regarding his problems with mobility, and he competent to report on his own problems with standing and walking.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Board finds, however, that the Veteran's lay assertions that he is precluded from ambulation are not consistent with the other medical evidence of record and with the Veteran's statements to medical providers showing that he is able to walk short distances.

While the Veteran may have decreased stamina, decreased range of motion, and knees that give way, the evidence shows that the Veteran is able to walk short distances independently, and he has therefore not had loss of use of a foot such that he is deprived of the ability to avail himself of either foot, including when pain, weakness, and incoordination are taken account.  The Board assigns great weight to the medical evidence and notes that it is the Board's responsibility to determine whether "loss of use" exists.  Tucker v. West, 11 Vet. App. 369 (1998).  The weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in a loss of use of a foot.

Although the Veteran is not eligible for a grant for automobile adaptations under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808, the Board recommends consulting with VA treatment providers regarding eligibility for specific vehicle modifications from the VA Prosthetic and Sensory Aids Service.

The competent and probative medical evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has loss of use of either foot or leg, and his service-connected disabilities do not meet any of the criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.  The claim for eligibility for a grant for an automobile and adaptive equipment or adaptive equipment only is denied.  The evidence is not in approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.? See Lynch, 21 F. 4th 776.??? 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mary E. Rude, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.