Citation Nr: A25033052
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-473452
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disorder, characterized as anxiety and depressive disorder, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was manifested by occupational and social deficiencies in most areas; there is no showing of total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disorder, characterized as major depressive disorder, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2017 to June 2019.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2024 issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In his September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. While the Board typically considers only those factors contained wholly in the rating criteria, it is appropriate to consider factors outside the specific rating criteria when appropriate in order to best determine the level of occupational and social impairment. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002); Massey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 204, 208 (1994).

Where there is a question as to which of two separate evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Nevertheless, where the evidence contains factual findings that show a change in the severity of symptoms during the course of the rating period on appeal, assignment of staged ratings would be permissible. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disorder, characterized as depressive disorder and anxiety

The Veteran asserts that his psychiatric disorder has worsened and is entitled to an increased evaluation. 

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder has been assigned a disability rating of 70 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9434. In order to warrant the next higher 100 percent rating, the evidence must demonstrate total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place; and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9434.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board determines that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for any period on appeal.

Specifically, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in July 2024 to assess his current psychiatric disorder.  During this examination, the Veteran reported an increase in depression, paranoia, and anxiety. He stated that he worried often and is irritable. He stated that he has mood issues and isolates himself often. He stated that he does not do much activity. His anxiety has increased when in class. The VA examiner opined that his psychiatric impairment causes occupational and social impairment in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood. His symptoms are depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.

In view of his most recent clinical evaluation, the Board determines that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted - especially in light of the Veteran's lack of legal trouble, substance abuse, hallucinations, suicidal ideation, and no signs of psychosis. Further, some of the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code for a higher rating have not been shown at all, including grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, and disorientation to time or place. Additionally, to the extent the Veteran has reported symptoms of a higher rating, the Board determines that these statements are less probative given that they are inconsistent with the medical evidence. Further, while the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, he is not competent to determine if her disorders cause total occupational and social impairment. 

Next, the Board has also considered the extent to which there are other indications of total occupational and social impairment, such as gross impairment of the thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436, 444 (2002).

In this regard, while the Veteran's disorder reflects a significant impact on his social and occupational functioning, the evidence does not indicate that a rating in excess of 70 percent is warranted. Here, during his July 2024 VA examination reported that he is currently attending school. Therefore, he did not display total social and occupational impairment even when factoring in other relevant criteria outside of the rating code. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436, 444. Therefore, based on the evidence of record, an increased rating in excess of 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric is not warranted, and the appeal is denied. 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Billinger, Associate Counsel