Citation Nr: A25033990
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 241008-481144
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity disability, to include as proximately due to, or aggravated by, another service connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 decision.  In September 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 decision [and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window].  In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity disability, to include as proximately due to, or aggravated by, another service connected disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity disability, to include as proximately due to, or aggravated by, another service connected disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity disability, to include as proximately due to, or aggravated by, another service connected disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2024 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ did not address all claims reasonably raised by the record. Additionally, the AOJ did not obtain an adequate medical opinion addressing all claims reasonably raised by the record. 

The September 2024 rating decision on appeal is the latest in a series of HLR and supplemental claim decisions reaching back to a March 2019 claim of service connection for "ganglion cyst secondary to right wrist." 03/21/2019, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). The Veteran made an additional statement in his claim that his claimed disability was "secondary to right wrist." Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Entitlement to service connection may also be established on a secondary basis where there is evidence that a current disability is either proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by, another, service connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 446 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

At the time of the March 2019 claim, as now, service connection was in effect for degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the cervical spine; right upper extremity radiculopathy associated with the cervical spine disability; and status post fracture, right hand, little finger. In addition to these disabilities, later VA examiners would document diagnosis of right carpal tunnel syndrome and right ulnar nerve entrapment. See e.g., 04/22/2022, C&P Exam. 

VA is obligated to liberally construe claims based on the reasonable expectations of a non-expert claimant and to determine and address all potential claims and theories of entitlement raised by the evidence. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (U.S. 1993); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (U.S. 2007); Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (U.S. 2009). 

Generally, "when a veteran has two diagnoses with separate factual bases, these diagnoses should be treated as two separate claims." Murphy v. Wilkie, 983 F.3d 1313, 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2020) (citing Boggs v. Peake, 520 F.3d 1330, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2008)). However, a claim for service connection may be expanded beyond a veteran's lay description of a disability to include any disability "that may reasonably be encompassed by several factors including: the claimant's description of the claim; the symptoms the claimant describes; and the information the claimant submits or that the Secretary obtains in support of the claim." Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App 1, 5 (2009).

The Board acknowledges that the AOJ attempted to adjudicate the question of whether the Veteran's claimed disability was secondary to the service connected right upper extremity radiculopathy associated with the cervical spine disability; and/or status post fracture, right hand, little finger. However, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim, both as originally filed in March 2019 and as pursued in subsequent supplemental claims and requests for HLR, should have been construed not only as a claim of service connection for a right wrist ganglion cyst secondary to the service connected disabilities of right upper extremity radiculopathy associated with the cervical spine disability; and/or status post fracture, right hand, little finger, but as a nonexclusive claim for any and all disabilities of his right upper extremity, whether on a direct or secondary basis, to include the carpal tunnel syndrome and ulnar nerve entrapment identified during the development of his claim. The Veteran is not a medical professional, and while his characterization of his claim as one for service connection of a ganglion cyst may be helpful in determining the scope of appeal, it should not preclude development of other claims and/or theories of entitlement reasonably raised by the evidence. 

Accordingly, on remand, the AOJ should obtain a VA medical opinion that: identifies all current disabilities of the right wrist and/or right upper extremity, other than the already service connected status post fracture, right hand, little finger and right upper extremity radiculopathy associated with cervical spine degenerative disc disease and arthritis; and addresses whether any of the disabilities so identified are the result of an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service, to include in-service onset; and/or whether any of the disabilities so identified are proximately due to or aggravated by another service connected disability. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any right wrist and/or right upper extremity disabilities (other than the already service connected status post fracture, right hand, little finger; and right upper extremity radiculopathy associated with cervical spine degenerative disc disease and arthritis), to include but not limited to right wrist ganglion cyst, carpal tunnel syndrome, and ulnar nerve entrapment.  The claims folder, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner and such review should be noted in the examination report. 

The examiner should identify and discuss any right wrist and/or right upper extremity disabilities identified during the examination and the pendency of this claim. For each diagnosed disability, please respond to the following: 

(a.) Whether the Veteran's right wrist and/or right upper extremity disability is at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or equal) related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or whether it first had its onset during a period of active service. 

(b.) Whether the Veteran's right wrist and/or right upper extremity disability is at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or equal)  (1) proximately due to service-connected disability, or (2) aggravated beyond its natural progression by service-connected disability.

If the examiner identifies multiple right wrist and/or right upper extremity disabilities, then each of these should be considered in relation both to each other and the disabilities for which service connection is already in effect. 

The examiner is advised that aggravation can include temporary worsening or flare-ups.  If aggravation is found, the examiner should also state, to the extent possible, the baseline level of disability prior to aggravation. This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record and by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time.

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sametshaw, Eric C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.