Citation Nr: A25033138
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240304-421693
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for hypertension is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, ilio-inguinal nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity, ilio-inguinal nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, internal saphenous nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity, internal saphenous nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, obturator nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity, obturator nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity, external cutaneous nerve of thigh, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, external cutaneous nerve of thigh, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cyclic vomiting syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right knee traumatic arthritis, status post arthroscopic exploratory surgery, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's sinusitis has not resulted in incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged treatment or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.

2. The Veteran's hypertension has not manifested by diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more or systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a compensable rating for sinusitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1. 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1985 to November 1990, from January 2008 to March 2008, and from December 2008 to March 2009.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in November 2023 and January 2024 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for cyclic vomiting syndrome, and entitlement to increased ratings for right knee and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathies, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition. The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). The medical, as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

1. Sinusitis 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a compensable disability rating for his service-connected sinusitis.

The Veteran's sinusitis is rated as noncompensable under Diagnostic Code 6513. Diagnostic Codes 6510 through 6514 pertain to various types of sinusitis, each of which is rated pursuant to a General Formula for sinusitis set forth in the rating schedule following Diagnostic Code 6514. This General Rating Formula for sinusitis applies in all circumstances in which VA is to evaluate the severity of sinusitis, no matter the specific diagnosis.

Under the General Rating Formula for sinusitis, a noncompensable rating is warranted when the condition is detected by x-ray only. A 10 percent rating is warranted for sinusitis manifested by one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. A 30 percent is warranted for sinusitis manifested by three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or by more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. A 50 percent rating is warranted for sinusitis following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or manifested by near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Codes 6510-6514.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his sinusitis in October 2023. The Veteran reported that he will get congestion that is constant, year round, worse in the fall and mid-June. He stated he feels as if he has scar tissue on the right side of his nose and when he blows his nose it will bleed at times. He uses Flonase. He stated his last infection was eight months ago.

The examiner noted that the Veteran did not currently have any findings, signs, or symptoms attributable to chronic sinusitis. The examiner stated that the Veteran had no non-incapacitating episode of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and purulent discharge or crusting in the past 12 months. The examiner further stated that the Veteran had no incapacitating episodes of sinusitis requiring prolonged (four to six weeks) of antibiotics treatment in the past months. There had been no history of sinus surgery.

Upon review of the record, the Board must find that the evidence is persuasively against the claim. After reviewing the Veteran's treatment records, the Board finds that there is nothing in the record to show that the Veteran had an incapacitating episode as defined by regulation that also required prolonged use of antibiotics (four to six weeks). There is also nothing in the record that indicates that he had at least three to six non-incapacitating episodes in the previous 12 months during any portion of the appeal period. The medical evidence does not support any such findings, and the Veteran has not submitted any contrary evidence or argument supporting the claim or contradicting the findings of the October 2023 VA examiner.

Therefore, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for sinusitis. Thus, the benefit-of the doubt rule does not apply. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Hypertension

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for his service-connected hypertension.

Hypertension is rated pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7101. Under this Code, a 10 percent rating is warranted for hypertensive vascular disease with diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, or; systolic pressure predominantly 160 or more, or; minimum evaluation for an individual with a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more who requires continuous medication for control. A 20 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more, or; systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more. A 40 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 120 or more. A maximum 60 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 130 or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

Note (1) states that hypertension or isolated systolic hypertension must be confirmed by readings taken two or more times on at least three different days. For purposes of this section, the term hypertension means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm. or greater, and isolated systolic hypertension means that the systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160mm. or greater with a diastolic blood pressure of less than 90mm.

The Board notes that the criteria for evaluating various cardiovascular system disabilities were amended effective November 14, 2021, but that the criteria for evaluating hypertension under DC 7101 were not amended.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has determined that the rating criteria for hypertension in DC 7101 takes into account the ameliorative effects of medication. McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271-73 (2016).

The term "predominant" is not defined in the rating criteria. Merriam-Webster defines predominant to mean "being most frequent or common." See, e.g., "predominant," Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/predominant.

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided with a VA examination for his hypertension. He is currently taking amlodipine 10mg and metoprolol 100mg daily; he reports he checks his blood pressure at home and reports they typically run in the 150s/90s. He took his medication this morning around 6:30. He states he has noticed that when he bends over or gets up too quickly, he will be lightheaded for a few seconds. He denies any chest pain or shortness of breath. He has not been seen in the emergency department or urgent care in the past two years for this condition. He is medically managed in the community and his PCP is managing his hypertension. He has not been seen by a specialist for this condition.

The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have a history of diastolic blood pressure elevation predominantly 100 or more. The Veteran took continuous medication for control of hypertension. The examiner noted three readings of 159/93, 157/90, and 149/83. She noted no other pertinent physical findings, complications, condition, signs, or symptoms related to the condition.

During the period on appeal, VA and private treatment records reflect systolic readings in no higher than the 150s and diastolic readings no higher than the 90s. A February 2021 private medical record reflects a blood pressure reading of 144/85 and an August 2022 VA treatment record reflects a blood pressure reading of 150/97.

The record contains no other evidence indicating that the Veteran's hypertension manifested by diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more or systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more.

Accordingly, the Veteran's hypertension has not more nearly approximated the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent. As the persuasive evidence is against the claim, there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for cyclic vomiting syndrome is remanded

The issue of entitlement to service connection for cyclic vomiting syndrome is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) obtained an October 2023 medical opinion prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. However, this medical opinion is not adequate because its rationale relies on a mistake of fact. 

The rationale indicates that there was no evidence of a current disability, vomiting syndrome. However, the February 2021 record from Michigan Medicine Gastroenterology Clinic indicates a current problem of intractable vomiting with nausea. As the negative nexus opinion relied on the lack of a currently diagnosed vomiting disability, an addendum opinion must be obtained which addresses whether this current diagnosis is related to his vomiting in service.

2. Entitlement to increased disability ratings for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities

The issue of entitlement to increased disability ratings for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) obtained an October 2023 examination prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, this examination is not adequate because it does not describe the effects of the Veteran's treatment, to include gabapentin on the severity of his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

The examination report noted that the Veteran has been on gabapentin 100mg daily and will take gabapentin sometimes twice daily since 2010 or 2011.

The Board notes that relief due to medication should not be a basis for a denial of a higher disability rating. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). Accordingly, a new examination should be conducted, and the examiner should disregard the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication(s), to include gabapentin and any other relevant medications. 

3. Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right knee traumatic arthritis, status post arthroscopic exploratory surgery, is remanded

The issue of entitlement to increased disability ratings for right knee disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) obtained an October 2023 examination prior to the rating decision on appeal. However, this examination is not adequate because it does not describe the effects of the Veteran's treatment, to include twice daily use of Ibuprofen, on the severity of his right knee disability.

The examination report noted that the Veteran has been taking Ibuprofen twice daily for right knee pain, which causes some improvement.

The Board notes that relief due to medication should not be a basis for a denial of a higher disability rating. Accordingly, a new examination should be conducted, and the examiner should disregard the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication(s), to include Ibuprofen and any other relevant medications

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to determine whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed vomiting disability is at least as likely as not related to service.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the current severity of the service-connected peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities, to include all service-connected nerves.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the current severity of the service-connected right knee disability.

In performing the above examinations, the examiner should disregard the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication(s), to include gabapentin, Ibuprofen and any other medications which affect the lower extremity peripheral neuropathies or right knee. The examiner should provide his or her opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities, to include all service connected affected nerves, and the right knee, without considering the ameliorative effects of medications. 

Stated another way, to the extent feasible, the examiner should describe the severity of the lower extremity neuropathies and right knee disability as it would be if the Veteran was not taking any medication(s) for the disabilities.

A rationale is needed for all opinions. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement or degree of nerve damage without resorting to speculation, state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	St. Laurent, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.