Citation Nr: A25033070
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240122-409608
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 2012 to October 2016.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), in January 2024.  He chose the direct review docket.  This means that the evidentiary review period closed at the time of the initial decision.  The Board received and docketed the appeal in January 2024.

VA regulations require that the Board contact an appellant and request clarification if the Board cannot identify which review option an appellant intends to select. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202(f).  A NOD may be unclear if an appellant attaches evidence to a NOD indicating that the appellant is seeking Direct Review, as evidence submitted along with a NOD may not be considered by the Board under that review option. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).

In the instant appeal, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 for the issues of service connection for left ankle, right ankle, left shoulder, low back, asbestosis, left ear hearing loss, and right ear hearing loss on the direct review docket on January 22, 2024.  He then filed another timely VA Form 10182 for the issues of service connection for left shoulder, low back, asbestosis, left ear hearing loss, and right ear hearing loss on January 23, 2024 wherein he selected the Evidence Submission docket.  The Board interpreted this as a valid request to switch dockets for the issues of service connection for left shoulder, low back, asbestosis, left ear hearing loss, and right ear hearing loss.  Those issues are currently pending on the evidence submission docket and will be adjudicated at a later date.  The Veteran was advised of this in a letter dated April 3, 2025.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is remanding the claims for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the re-adjudication.

Remand Analysis - All Claims

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no credibility findings as to the lay evidence of record.  Such findings will be made when (or if) these matters return to the Board.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

The AOJ did not obtain an adequate medical opinion prior to the initial rating decision on appeal. See 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A (d); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA provides a medical opinion it must be adequate for decisional purposes).

The VA examiner in December 2023 issued negative nexus opinions regarding the left and right ankle. He opined, among other things, that because there were no documented complaints or injuries to the ankles during or shortly after the Veteran's time of service; a nexus is unable to be established.  However, he did not address the Veteran's contentions that his ankle disorders are due to physical training and carrying heavy loads during service, which the Veteran raised on his VA Form 526EZ in July 2023. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) (stating that "[t]he examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion").  Indeed, the examiner noted that:

"Veteran reports onset of bilateral ankle symptoms since he was in boot camp in 2012. He remembers feeling bilateral ankle pain while performing the required activities of running, hiking, and carrying heavy equipment. He treated his ankle pain initially with rest and NSAIDs. He reports that his ankle symptoms have persisted to the current time."

Yet, the examiner did not address these reports in his nexus opinion.  He did not explain whether he had a medical basis to reject them.  Further clarification is needed before a final decision may be made on the merits of these claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral ankle conditions from the VA examiner in December 2023 (M.W., MSN, APRN, FNP-C) if available, or any other suitably qualified clinician.  An in-person medical examination may be scheduled if deemed medically necessary to answer the questions asked.  The clinician is asked to review the claims file and opine on the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's ankle disorders began during or are causally related to active duty, to include physical training, occupational duties, and carrying heavy loads?

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.  While a thorough and independent review of the claims file is expected, the Board calls the examiner's attention to the following relevant lay and medical evidence:

"	The Veteran's lay reports that the onset of his bilateral ankle symptoms was since he was in boot camp in 2012; that he remembers feeling bilateral ankle pain while performing the required activities of running, hiking, and carrying heavy equipment; that he treated his ankle pain initially with rest and NSAIDs; and that that his ankle symptoms have persisted to the current time

The examiner is advised that lay evidence is competent to report pain.  If there is a medical basis to doubt the lay history or discount the Veteran's assertions, the examiner is asked to explain why that is the case. If the basis of a negative opinion is in part the absence of treatment records showing reports of the disabilities, the examiner is asked to explain whether there is a medical basis to conclude that the Veteran would likely have sought treatment for the symptoms if they were present.

 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Reed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.