Citation Nr: A25033201
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240323-428223
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is granted.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disability is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity neurological disorder (claimed as left arm radiculopathy) is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity neurological disorder (claimed as right arm radiculopathy) is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity neurological disorder (claimed as left leg radiculopathy) is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity neurological disorder (claimed as right leg radiculopathy) is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for left leg shin splints is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for right leg shin splints is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for foot pain is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for tendonitis is dismissed.

The appeal for entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for right lower extremity scars is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for residual spiral fracture, right tibia, fibula (based on limitation of knee flexion) is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle residuals status-post spiral fracture tibia/ fibula with disuse osteopenia is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for status-post right condylar fracture with residual pain on palpation right condyle, and misaligned lower anterior teeth is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from June 2017 to June 2021.

The Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision which addressed the above-noted issues in December 2021, April 2022, and March, June, July, and September 2023.  Thereafter, in March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), wherein he sought to appeal the claims in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) System.  He selected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time the RO issued the above-noted rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

However, because the Board is remanding the above-referenced increased rating claims for the Veteran's right jaw fracture and tibia/fibula fracture with knee and ankle impairment, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran's left hip disability is etiologically related to his active service.

2.  The Veteran's right hip disability is etiologically related to his active service.

3.  As the RO granted service connection for a left shoulder strain by way of a July 2023 rating decision, there is no longer a justiciable controversy regarding the issue of entitlement to service connection for this disability.  

4.  With respect to his appeals for entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disability, bilateral upper and lower extremity neurological disorders, bilateral shin splints, foot pain, and tendonitis, as well as his claim for an increased rating for his right leg scars, the Veteran did not timely file a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) and good cause has not been shown that would permit the Board to extend the time for filing an NOD with respect to the rating decisions issued in December 2021, April 2022, and March 2023. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for a left hip disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2.  The criteria for service connection for a right hip disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3.  There being no justiciable case or controversy, with regard to entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain, the Veteran's appeal is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.

4.  The Veteran's VA Form 10182 was not timely received and the criteria for an extension of the filing of an appeal with respect to the rating decisions issued on December 10, 2021, April 20, 2022, and March 6, 2023, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.109, 20.202, 20.302.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Left and Right Hip Claims

The Veteran seeks service connection for a left and right hip disability, which he contends resulted from the rigors of his military service. 

The Board notes service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

The Veteran underwent a VA hip conditions examination in May 2023, which confirmed a current diagnosis of chronic bilateral hip pain, with resulting functional impairments.  These impairments include limitations in his ability to walk, stand, and bend over for extended periods of time.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Following his May 2023 examination, the examiner found the Veteran's bilateral hip pain was as likely as not incurred in service.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner stated critical training events such as running and conditioning hikes likely caused his current hip pain. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board is satisfied that the evidence supports a nexus between the Veteran's currently diagnosed bilateral hip disability and his military service.  Therefore, he is entitled to service connection for his left and right hip disabilities.

Left Shoulder Claim

Recently, in July 2023 the RO granted entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain.  Accordingly, there is no justiciable case or controversy regarding entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability. 

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal on this matter, and the above-noted issue is dismissed.

Untimely Appeals

According to 38 C.F.R. § 3.109, where an extension is requested after expiration of a time limit, the action required of the claimant or beneficiary must be taken concurrent with or prior to the filing of a request for extension of the time limit, and good cause must be shown as to why the required action could not have been taken during the original time period and could not have been taken sooner than it was.

There is no legal entitlement to an extension of time; rather,?38 C.F.R. §?3.109(b) leaves the decision to the sole discretion of VA.  Corry v. Derwinski,?3?Vet. App.?231, 235?(1992). 

VA law provides that a claimant, or his representative, shall file a Notice of Disagreement with a determination by the RO within one year from the date that the RO mails notice of the determination to him.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  The date of mailing the letter of notification of the determination will be presumed to be the same as the date of that letter for purposes of determining whether an appeal has been timely filed.  Id.  

As noted above, the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disability, bilateral upper and lower extremity neurological disorders, bilateral shin splints, foot pain, and tendonitis, as well as his claim for an increased rating for his right leg scars were addressed in December 2021, April 2022, and March 2023 rating decisions.  Both the Veteran and his representative were provided copies of those decisions, as well as an accompanying notification letter with each decision.  In those letters the Veteran was advised that if he disagreed with the rating decision, he should select an appropriate review option within one year of the date of the notification letter.  

Those letters also notified him of the array of possible review options, to include Supplemental Claims, Higher-Level Reviews, or an Appeal to the Board, as well as which forms to submit for each of the applicable review options.  In particular, the Veteran was expressly advised that if he wished to file an appeal to the Board, he should complete a VA Form 10182.  

After his one-year period to file an appeal had elapsed, in March 2024, the Veteran submitted a 10182.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b), time limits in which claimants are required to act to perfect a claim, or challenge an adverse VA decision, may be extended for good cause shown.  Where an extension is requested after expiration of a time limit, good cause must be shown as to why the required action (1) could not have been taken during the original time period and (2) could not have been taken sooner than it was.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.109. 

Here, the Veteran has neither requested an extension, nor provided good cause as to why he could not have timely filed his appeals or filed them sooner than he did.  

Although the Board acknowledges the Veteran's March 2023 notification letter and rating decision were returned as undeliverable, those documents were mailed to the Veteran's most recently provided address, as well as to his appointed representative.  Therefore, the Board finds the RO complied with its duty to notify the Veteran.  The Board also notes that persons dealing with the United States Government are charged with knowledge of federal statutes and lawfully promulgated agency regulations, regardless of actual knowledge or hardship resulting from innocent ignorance.  See Morris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 260 (1991), citing Fed. Crop Ins. Corp. v. Merrill, 332 U.S. 380, 384-85 (1947).  

In sum, the Board finds the above-noted regulations demonstrate a veteran must exercise due diligence in the prosecution of their claims, and good cause extensions must be based on extenuating circumstances which are outside the control of the claimant.  In this case, the Veteran did not state any extenuating reasons which were outside of his own control for failing to timely file his appeals, or for failing to file his appeal sooner.  

Since the Veteran's VA Form 10182 was untimely and good cause has not been shown to extend the deadline to file, the Veteran's appeals for entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disability, bilateral upper and lower extremity neurological disorders, bilateral shin splints, foot pain, and tendonitis, as well as his claim for an increased rating for his right leg scars are dismissed. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction for correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.

The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.

Initially, the Board observes that under certain circumstances, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4) require VA to obtain a VA examination or obtain a medical opinion.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  The failure to provide the above-noted assistance constitutes a due process violation.

Here, the Board notes that to be considered adequate, a musculoskeletal examination must include an assessment of the veteran's flare-ups, as well as range of motion measurements in weight bearing, non-weight bearing, and in passive motion.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017); see also Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).  The Veteran underwent VA knee and ankle examinations in May 2023.  A review of those examination reports shows the examiner failed to provide weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing range of motion assessments.  As the examiners failed to provide these critical evaluation criteria, a remand is necessary to correct these pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

With respect to the Veteran's status-post right condylar fracture, the Board notes the Veteran was only afforded an oral and dental examination in July 2021.  To date, he has not been afforded a temporomandibular conditions examination to determine whether he has residual jaw impairment resulting from his in-service right condylar fracture.  Based on the foregoing pre-decisional duty to assist errors, the Board finds a remand is necessary.

Accordingly, these matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

Obtain a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to fully assess the severity of the Veteran's service-connected residual spiral fracture right tibia, fibula (based on limitation of knee flexion); right ankle residuals status-post spiral fracture tibia/ fibula with disuse osteopenia; and status-post right condylar fracture with residual pain on palpation right condyle, and misaligned lower anterior teeth disabilities.

All pertinent evidence of record should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.

Ensure the examiner provides all information required for rating purposes, to specifically include both active and passive range of motion testing, as well as weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing range of motion assessments.

In addition, the examiner must consider and discuss all procurable and assembled data such as the frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, and the severity of the flare-ups, and then provide a retrospective assessment of the functional impairments the Veteran has experienced during flares, throughout the pendency of this claim.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary, he or she should be directed to clearly explain why that is so.

 

 

T. REYNOLDS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fraser, Gordon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.