Citation Nr: A25033573
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240618-450630
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

From May 6, 2023, entitlement to a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted 

FINDING OF FACT

From May 6, 2023, but no earlier, the Veteran's PTSD has more closely approximated occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD are met from May 6, 2023. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from March 2000 to March 2004, with additional service in the Marine Corps Reserve.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2023 rating decision issued by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

1. Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for service-connected PTSD, from May 6, 2023, is granted.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a higher rating for his PTSD.  The Board agrees.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

When there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of a disability, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The period on appeal for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD is from May 9, 2023, the date of receipt of his increased rating claim on appeal, plus the one-year lookback period.

The Veteran's service-connected PTSD is currently rated at 50 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 9411, effective July 15, 2022. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  As this Diagnostic Code is specific to PTSD, no other code may be employed to rate the Veteran's disability.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015) (when a condition is specifically listed in the rating schedule, it may not be rated by analogy and should be rated under the diagnostic code that specifically pertains to it).

Under Diagnostic Code 9411, a 50 percent evaluation is warranted if the evidence establishes there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and/or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted if the evidence establishes there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and/or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating (total occupational and social impairment) is warranted due to symptoms such as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); and/or disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a Veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Thus, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Id at 442. Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the Veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms; a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118. 

When it is not possible to separate the effects of a service-connected disability and a non-service-connected disability, reasonable doubt must be resolved in the appellant's favor and the symptoms in question must be attributed to the service-connected disability. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).

In August 2022, during the lookback period, the Veteran underwent an initial VA PTSD examination, at which time the examiner provided a diagnosis of PTSD, noting symptoms of anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. The Veteran was deemed competent to manage his financial affairs. On mental status examination, the Veteran was alert and oriented and was dressed casually and appropriately. Speech was normal. There was no evidence or reports of delusions, hallucinations, or suicidal/homicidal ideation. Mood was anxious and irritable, and affect was appropriate and congruent. 

In terms of social impairment, the Veteran reported that he had been married for eight years, and had two daughters, but noted relationship issues, in that he is "a lot more short-tempered." In terms of occupational impairment, the examination report notes that the Veteran has been gainfully employed since his discharge from the military, including work as a game warden, on an oil field, and currently in law enforcement. 

The examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.

In support of his claim, the Veteran has submitted a May 6, 2023 PTSD Evaluation and Independent Medical Opinion from a psychologist E.L. PsyD, which is dated within the lookback period.  Dr. E.L. determined that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. See May 2023 Correspondence. Doctor E.L. noted that the Veteran's symptoms have worsened and now include symptoms such as panic attacks more than once a week, flattened affect, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.

In terms of social impairment, the Veteran reported that, while his wife is supportive, "she knows when to back off," and that, regarding his daughters, "I don't have much patience with them... I am too strict, and I expect them to be disciplined." Regarding irritability, the Veteran reports "often I find myself being quick to anger with my young daughters... I will yell at them for minute reasons... I am just quick to anger... will get loud and yell at my kids... I expect them to be like adults and my wife has to talk me down... then I walk out to calm down... the kids don't really like to stay with [me] when my wife is not there... the kids are always asking me whether I am mad." Regarding obsessional rituals, the Veteran reports "have to check my gun safe 4-5 times before I leave... will check doors and locks 3-4 times before I go to sleep... even after I have done it and I am in bed I will have to go check again." The Board finds that the Veteran's reports of obsessional rituals are corroborated by a lay statement from his wife, in which she reports "[Veteran] also has a constant need to 'check' on things. He checks our doors, our safe, my straightener, etc., over and over. Before we leave the house to do anything, we must check all these things, sometimes multiple times. Often, we have to turn around after getting on the road to check them again, because he just isn't sure." See May 2023 Buddy/Lay Statement.

Subsequently in May 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA PTSD examination. The examiner identified symptoms of anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

In terms of social impairment, the examiner did not note any changes since the Veteran's last examination. In terms of occupational impairment, the Veteran reported that he "has a hard time focusing at work, spending more time to read reports and is less productive at work," and that "he is often side-tracked and has to return to activities to get tasks done."

The examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

On review, the Board finds that a rating of 70 percent is warranted from May 6, 2023. The most probative evidence indicates that the Veteran's condition had worsened during the lookback period and his PTSD symptoms now result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Although there are conflicting medical opinions, as both VA opinions conclude that the Veteran's symptoms are more closely aligned with lesser disability ratings, the Board finds the opinion of Dr. E.L. highly probative and entitled to more weight. See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995) (The Board may favor the opinion of one competent medical professional over that of another so long as an adequate statement of reasons and bases is provided). Dr. E.L. is the only examiner to adequately consider the lay statements of record regarding his obsessional rituals and irritability, and the Board affords the Veteran the benefit of the doubt in this regard. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating from May 6, 2023, the date of Dr. E.L.'s report acknowledging a worsening of the Veteran's PTSD. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

There is no support for taking the 70 percent rating further into the lookback period.  Although the August 2022 VA examiner endorsed difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, this is only one of the symptoms outlined for a 70 percent rating, and there are no other demonstrated symptoms of similar frequency, severity, or duration.  Instead the remainder of his symptoms support a 50 percent rating or lower (anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation or mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The evidence does not meet the criteria for a 100 percent rating at any time during the appeal period. The Veteran is currently employed, so he is not totally occupationally impaired.  Moreover, he has not demonstrated any of the symptoms outlined for a 100 percent, nor is there any other evidence of symptoms of similar frequency, severity or duration of record.  

Accordingly, entitlement to a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD is granted from May 6, 2023.

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cooper, Jacob A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.