Citation Nr: A25033838
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 191106-47807
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's sleep apnea is not secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea due to service or PTSD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served from June 2002 to June 2006. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2019 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the November 2019 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On December 1, 2023, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Further, the Board invites the Veteran to file a supplemental claim if he so wishes to continue to pursue this claim on the theory of service connection as secondary to service-connected PTSD. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In a March 2024 decision, the Board, in pertinent part, denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  The Veteran appealed the Board's 2024 decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In a November 2024 joint motion for partial remand (JMR) and December 2024 order, the Court vacated and remanded the claim for the Board to reevaluate the claim in light of the Court's instructions.

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea 

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Obesity in and of itself is ineligible for service connection, but it may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 350 (2020); see also G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017, at 2-3. In particular, service connection may be warranted if the following questions are answered in the affirmative: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity/aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for the service-connected disability. See Walsh, 32 Vet. App. 350.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

In his June 2019 VA 21-625EZ, the Veteran generally asserted that his sleep apnea arose in-service. However, service treatment records are silent for complaints, diagnosis, or treatment of sleep apnea or other sleep condition. At a February 2006 assessment, the Veteran denied feeling tired after sleeping. At his August 2006 report of medical history, the Veteran denied a history of frequent trouble sleeping.

VA treatment notes reflect assessment for obesity. In July 2013, the Veteran was afforded an obesity screening. The health risks of obesity were reviewed and discussed, and the benefits of a weight management treatment program were discussed. The Veteran was offered a referral to MOVE or another weight loss program, but declined referral at the time. In November 2018, the Veteran presented for shoulder pain. The Veteran reported he was not on a special diet, but felt he was compliant with his diet. The Veteran was offered a referral to MOVE or another weight loss program, but declined referral. In March 2019, the Veteran presented for low back pain and arthralgia. Diet, nutrition, and MOVE or other weight loss progress were offered, but the Veteran declined referral. A November 2019 visit reflected the Veteran reported eating an unhealthy diet. A May 2020 note reflected that the Veteran had gained weight and was eating out of boredom. He reported non-sedentary around the house, but no significant exercise.

VA treatment notes reflect diagnosis of sleep apnea. The Veteran was provided a home sleep study assessment in October 2018. At a December 2018 sleep consult, the Veteran was noted to have done the home sleep study. Treatment providers diagnosed mild sleep apnea. However, it was not indicated whether he needed a CPAP machine at that time. 

Within an eligible period after his appeal, the Veteran submitted a February 2024 private opinion in support of his claim. The clinician opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not secondary to the weight gain that is caused by the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The clinician indicated that obesity is a significant risk factor for sleep apnea. The examiner concluded that this was most likely secondary to constant anxiety, depression, and isolation due to PTSD which made it difficult to exercise and keep the weight off under those circumstances. The clinician further indicated that ample medical scientific evidence supported finding that PTSD and sleep apnea are linked in Veterans.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a diagnosis of sleep apnea, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that it began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

With respect to the theory of service connection as directly secondary to PTSD, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to grant service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected PTSD. The Board acknowledges that private practitioner M.M. opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not related to PTSD. With respect to PTSD, while the private opinion by M.M. is favorable at first glance, as outlined above, the supporting rationale actually does not outline any reasons of causation or aggravation, but merely show a correlation between PTSD and sleep apnea. Thus, the Board finds that this opinion is insufficient to grant service connection for sleep apnea.

Pursuant to the November 2024 JMR, the Board will re-evaluate the February 2024 private opinion under the factors listed in Walsh: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity/aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for the service-connected disability. Specifically, the Court directed the Board to evaluate whether, when reading the private opinion as a whole, the opinion addressed the relevant "but-for" causation standard. 

The February 2024 private clinician opined that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity. The examiner indicated that this was most likely secondary to constant anxiety, depression, and anxiety related to his PTSD because it was very difficult to exercise and keep the weight off under those circumstances. However, the private examiner does not provide an adequate rationale in this regard. Review of the underlying VA treatment notes regarding the Veteran's obesity reflect an unhealthy diet, but largely do not suggest any association with the Veteran's anxiety or PTSD symptoms. Indeed, most nutrition reports reflect normal reports of diet and relatively minimal exercise. Further, treatment assessments for obesity and hyperlipidemia indicate that the Veteran declined referral for nutrition or exercise consultations. In conclusion, the private opinion appears to heavily upon the Veteran's lay reports regarding the etiology of his weight gain to conclude that the Veteran's obesity was due to or aggravated by anxiety and PTSD symptoms which is not consistent with his underlying VA treatment notes.

The February 2024 private clinician opined that the obesity/aggravation of obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's sleep apnea disability. The examiner explained that current scientific research shows that obesity is probably the most important risk factor for development of sleep apnea. Accordingly, the Board finds that this prong of Walsh is supported, and that his obesity is a substantial factor in causing sleep apnea.

Pursuant to the JMR, the Court found that the February 2024 private clinician opined that in the absence of PTSD, the Veteran would not have become obese, and if he was not obese, he would not have developed sleep apnea. Review of the underlying treatment record shows the Veteran has significant co-occurring nonservice-connected disabilities, including significant complaints and treatment for a low back disability. Unfortunately, the February 2024 private medical opinion does not adequately address other potential contributing factors to the Veteran's sleep apnea, such as his history of low back pain. The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2023). By focusing exclusively on the PTSD disability and weight gain, the private opinion fails to consider the Veteran's complete medical history, thereby limiting its reliability. Accordingly, the Board finds that the private opinion's but-for causation opinion is also not sufficient to grant service connection for sleep apnea.

In conclusion, with respect to the theory of service connection as secondary to weight gain and obesity caused by service-connected PTSD, the Board finds that the Veteran's obesity is a not an "intermediate step" between his service-connected disabilities and his obstructive sleep apnea so as to permit service-connection on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). 

Thus, the evidence currently of record is insufficient to grant service-connection for sleep apnea on any reasonably raised theory. Further, the inadequacy of M.M.'s private medical opinion on this matter does not amount to a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Prior to the submission of the December 2023 brief and this private examination in February 2024, neither the evidence of record nor the Veteran ever raised the contention of secondary service connection. As such, no pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and the Board must only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. Nonetheless, the Board invites the Veteran to file a supplemental claim if he wishes to continue to pursue this claim on a secondary theory of service connection. 

In the December 2023 brief, the representative contended that the RO should have ordered a VA medical examination with respect to the Veteran's claim. The representative contended that the Veteran had a diagnosis of PTSD, and was service connected for PTSD, which they contended was a risk factor for developing sleep apnea. However, the theory of secondary service connection was not raised prior to the August 2019 rating decision - either by the Veteran, his attorney, or by the record. In this regard, the Board notes that the June 2019 claim simply asserted that the Veteran's sleep apnea arose in-service. Therefore, the AOJ did not have a duty to provide a VA examination based on a secondary service connection theory. At the time of the August 2019 rating decision, there was no evidence showing that the Veteran's sleep apnea might be associated with service. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83; see also Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Accordingly, the Board finds that the AOJ did not have a duty to provide a VA examination or medical opinion and that there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error in this case. Therefore, a remand for a VA examination is not warranted.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Although the Veteran believes that he suffers from sleep apnea that is related to his service-connected PTSD, there is no indication that he has specialized training sufficient to render a competent opinion on the matter, as such opinion requires medical expertise due to its complex nature. Thus, the Veteran is not considered competent to medically attribute his current sleep apnea to a specific cause or aggravation, as doing so requires medical knowledge and expertise that the Veteran has not been shown to possess. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). As such, the Veteran's opinion regarding the etiology and onset of his sleep apnea is not competent evidence and is afforded no probative weight for the question of nexus. In sum, the secondary nexus element of the claim is not met. 

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for sleep apnea is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Lauritzen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.