Citation Nr: A25033029
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240506-436604
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for neck pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2007 to July 2010.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran appealed the denials of service connection for headaches and neck pain, asserting that he was unable to attend a scheduled VA medical examination because the examination was "canceled one hour before [his] appointment."  The Veteran also elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the claims of service connection for neck pain and headaches are being remanded, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for neck pain

2. Entitlement to service connection for headaches

The Veteran seeks service connection for neck pain and headaches.  

At the outset, when a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for a necessary examination, or reexamination, scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  When the examination is scheduled in conjunction with a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant and death of an immediate family member.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (a), (b).

In October 2023, prior to the issuance of the March 2024 decision on appeal, the AOJ attempted to schedule VA examinations for the Veteran in connection with his service connection claims.  Records of the examination requests dated October 26, 2023, indicate the VA examinations were cancelled because the Veteran was unavailable.  On November 17, 2023, the Veteran contacted a VA representative to explain that he missed VA examinations scheduled for October 25, 2023, because he had to work.  During the November 17, 2023, phone call, the Veteran also requested the VA examinations be rescheduled, and he reported that he would attend the rescheduled VA examinations.  February 28, 2024, examination request records indicate that the Veteran refused to attend the rescheduled VA examinations.  Notably, the claims file is devoid of any letter or record of any other communication notifying the Veteran of the rescheduled VA examinations for his neck pain and headaches.

Thereafter, in the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had failed to report for his scheduled examinations without good cause.  After receiving notice of the March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran contacted another VA representative on March 14, 2024, requesting that the VA examinations be rescheduled because the appointments were canceled by Logistics Health Inc. (LHI) one hour prior to the scheduled appointment time.  See also May 2024 VA Form 10182.  The Veteran also reported that "the contractor informed him that he would be rescheduled by them, and the request would [not] be sent back to the VA."  

A review of the claims file does not reveal any further information regarding the missed February 2024 VA medical examinations.  

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record is approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran has presented good cause for his failure to appear for the schedule VA examinations for neck pain and headaches.  Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, remand is warranted to correct the pre-decisional duty-to-assist error of failing to reschedule the Veteran for VA examinations regarding his neck pain and headaches.  See 38 U.S.C § 5107.

Nonetheless, the Veteran is reminded that failure to report for future VA examinations or cooperate with efforts to schedule examinations may negatively impact his claims.  See Hyson v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 262 (1993); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991).  Specifically, when a claimant fails to appear for a VA examination and good cause for the absence is not shown, the claim may be decided based on the evidence of record, to include denial of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).  

Additionally, pursuant to 38 U.S.C § 1168, VA is required to provide medical examinations for veterans with presumed in-service exposure to certain toxins/environmental hazards as part of VA's duty to assist, unless the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) for which the Veteran submitted evidence.  Here, a TERA claim has been explicitly raised by the record based on the December 2022 and January 2023 VA Memoranda in the file, which indicate that (1) the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to toxins in service, and (2) the Veteran served in the Persian Gulf as specified in 38 U.S.C § 1117.  Therefore, if the VA examinations demonstrate that the Veteran has current diagnoses, TERA opinions should also be provided under 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination to determine the current nature and likely etiology of his neck pain.  The examiner must review the pertinent evidence in the claims file, including any relevant lay statements by the Veteran, service treatment records, and a copy of this Remand.

(a.) After conducting any necessary testing, does the Veteran have a current neck disability?  If not, does the Veteran's neck pain result in functional impairment when considering the Veteran's reports? Why or why not?

(b.) In the event that the Veteran has a diagnosed neck disability, or symptoms that cause functional impairment absent a diagnosed disability, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal if not higher) that the Veteran's neck pain had its onset during his active-duty service, or was otherwise caused by or related to some other disease or injury in service.  Why or why not?  

The examiner is informed that pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(c.) In the event that the Veteran has a diagnosed neck disability, or symptoms that cause functional impairment absent a diagnosed disability, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's neck pain was either caused or aggravated (worsened in severity beyond its natural progression) by his service-connected tinnitus.  Why or why not?  

The examiner is advised that there is NO requirement of "permanent" aggravation, only whether there was aggravation in general.

(d.) In the event that the Veteran has a diagnosed neck disability, or symptoms that cause functional impairment absent a diagnosed disability, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's neck pain is related to, or otherwise caused by a TERA?  Why or why not?  

In providing this opinion, the examiner is requested to determine and consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service, as well as the synergistic and combined effect of all TERAs.

(e.) Provide a complete rationale for all opinions.

(f.) If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion, without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination to determine the current nature and likely etiology of his headaches.  The examiner must review the pertinent evidence in the claims file, including any relevant lay statements by the Veteran, service treatment records, and a copy of this Remand.

(a.) After conducting any necessary testing, does the Veteran have a current headaches disability.  If not, do the Veteran's headaches result in functional impairment when considering the Veteran's reports of headaches? Why or why not?

(b.) In the event that the Veteran has a diagnosed headaches disability, or symptoms that cause functional impairment absent a diagnosed disability, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal if not higher) that the Veteran's headaches had their onset during his active-duty service, or were otherwise caused by or related to some other disease or injury in service.  Why or why not?  

The examiner is informed that pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(c.) In the event that the Veteran has a diagnosed headaches disability, or symptoms that cause functional impairment absent a diagnosed disability, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's headaches were either caused or aggravated (worsened in severity beyond their natural progression) by his service-connected tinnitus.  Why or why not?  

The examiner is advised that there is NO requirement of "permanent" aggravation, only whether there was aggravation in general.

(d.) In the event that the Veteran has a diagnosed headaches disability, or symptoms that cause functional impairment absent a diagnosed disability, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's headaches are related to, or otherwise caused by a TERA?  Why or why not?  

In providing this opinion, the examiner is requested to determine and consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service, as well as the synergistic and combined effect of all TERAs.

(e.) Provide a complete rationale for all opinions.

(f.) If it is not possible to provide the requested opinions, without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

3. Notification of the scheduled examination should be sent to the Veteran's current address of record, with a copy of the notification associated with the claims file.  The AOJ must advise the Veteran that it is his responsibility to report for the examination scheduled and to cooperate in the development of the claim.  The consequences for failure to report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claim.  38 U.S.C § 3.655.  If the Veteran does not report for any scheduled examination, documentation must be obtained and associated with the claims file showing that notice scheduling the examination was sent to the Veteran's last known address of record.  Documentation must be obtained and associated with the Veteran's claims file if any notice that was sent was returned as undeliverable.  

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jenkins Moody, Morgan B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.