Citation Nr: A25033768
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240407-431331
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of frostbite to lips is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The April 7, 2024, VA Form 10182 notice of disagreement, insofar as the attempted appeal of the denial of entitlement to service connection plantar fasciitis, was received by VA just over one year after the March 2023 rating decision (with April 3, 2023, notification), and the Veteran did not provide any good cause as to untimely appeal.

2. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's frostbite of the lips was first incurred in service or is otherwise related to an in-service event, injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal of entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis are met.  38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500 (b), 20.205.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for residuals of frostbite to the lips have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1981 to December 1993.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO) whereas the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) found new and relevant evidence had been received, but nonetheless denied the claim of service connection for residuals of frostbite of the lips on the merits. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 notification of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ notification of the decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

DISMISSAL

1. Entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis is dismissed as untimely appealed.

The Board notes that the Veteran's April 7, 2024, VA Form 10182 also noted disagreement with a March 2023 rating decision (April 3, 2023, notification), insofar as this rating decision denied service connection for plantar fasciitis.  For the reasons outlined below, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for service connection for plantar fasciitis must be dismissed.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) framework, claimants may elect to review a decision by the AOJ by filing a supplemental claim, Higher Level Review (HLR) request, or Board appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500.  An appeal requires a properly completed VA Form 10182 submitted within one year from the date of mailing of the notification of the determination.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.104 (c), 3.2500.

By way of background, the Veteran initially filed a claim for service connection for plantar fasciitis in October 2022 which was denied in a March 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran received notification of that rating decision April 3, 2023 and did not initiate a HLR request, supplemental review, or file a Board appeal within a year of receipt of the notification letter, thus the decision became final.  However, on April 7, 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 notice of disagreement with the March 2023 rating decision which denied service connection for plantar fasciitis, as well as the March 2024 rating decision which denied service connection for residuals of frostbite of the lips.

The Veteran's VA Form 10182 dated just outside one-year after notification of the 2023 rating decision, however, is deemed untimely to appeal the determination regarding service connection for plantar fasciitis.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.203, a Notice of Disagreement must be filed within one year from the date that the agency mails notice of the decision.  As notification of the decision was sent April 3, 2023, and the Veteran did not file the VA Form 10182 until April 7, 2024, the appeal is deemed untimely.  The Veteran did not provide any good cause for the untimely filing nor is there any reasonably raised in the record.  Further, the Board finds the matter was not specifically docketed, and the ministerial action of sending the Veteran the docketing letter associated with the timely filed VA Form 10182 for the other pending appeal cannot be deemed an explicit or implicit waiver of the procedural defect here as there were no reasonable expectations that the Veteran had in expecting the specific issue was on appeal.  The Board did not continuously "engage in substantive and procedural development" of the appeal" and there were no further communications, no hearing held, and no actions in which the Veteran would be under the impression that the merits of the case were being examined or developed in any meaningful way.  Cf. Percy v. Shinseki,?23?Vet. App.?37, 45?(2009).

The Veteran, further, has regularly filed claims and appeals in other matters indicating he is aware of the proper forms, procedures, and time limits for doing so.  Under these circumstances, the Board finds that the VA Form 10182 was untimely as it pertains to appealing the plantar fasciitis denial stemming from the March 2023 rating decision (with notification sent on April 3, 2023) and there is no good cause or implicit/explicit waiver of said timeliness.  See generally Ferko v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?262 (2024) (en banc); Hall v. McDonough,?34?Vet. App.?329, 332?(2022).  The appeal of service connection for plantar fasciitis is therefore dismissed.

SERVICE CONNECTION

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).  To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

2. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of frostbite of the lip is denied.

The Veteran contends he has residuals of frostbite on his lips that were first incurred in service. In particular, the Veteran stated that as a mechanic most of his work on vehicles during service was conducted outdoors as he provided maintenance support to other divisions while they were on field exercise.  He indicated that his lips worsened due to exposure to weather because the issued equipment did not cover his lips, only his forehead, cheeks, and chin.  He thus contends that he suffers from residuals of frostbite of the lips due to in-service exposure to cold weather.

The Veteran's DD-214 indicates that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was as a track vehicle repairer, thus exposure to the outdoors is consistent with the circumstances of his service.

While the Board finds sufficient evidence that the Veteran was exposed to cold elements during service, and indeed he is service-connected for frostbite residuals of his bilateral hands and feet, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that his currently diagnosed condition on his lips, which was diagnosed decades after service, is attributable to his military service.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's December 1992 service treatment records reflect that he was treated for frostbite of unknown severity in 1981.  It is worth noting that the record does not indicate the Veteran's frostbite injury was on the lips/face and, indeed, at the time, the reference was in the context of treatment of his feet and toes.  The Veteran is already service connected for residuals of cold weather injuries to his bilateral hands and feet.

Decades after service, in October 2021 medical treatment records, it is indicated that the Veteran was assessed for a history of cold injury frostbite resulting in distal neuropathy bilateral lower extremity, and that he had hyperpigmentation on both lips. September 2023 post-service private treatment records reflect post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation possibly from previous frostbite/scarring. December 2023 post-service private treatment records reflect a diagnosis of rash and other nonspecific skin eruption of the lips with the provider noting possible frostbite "years back".  February 2024 VA dermatology treatment records indicate that the Veteran was treated for dermatitis of the lips.  The Veteran reported working outdoors repairing vehicles during service, and exposure to extreme cold weather in Fort Sill Oklahoma, Fort Carson Colorado, and in Germany.  He stated that he is still having blisters and discoloration of the lips as well as itching and pain.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024, where at that time he was diagnosed with frostbite of the lips and toes with the Veteran reporting that his toes and lips are hypersensitive to the cold.  The examination report noted the Veteran's contentions and military history, to include his contentions of being exposed to the cold elements throughout his service when he was a tanker out in the open. On physical examination, the examining nurse practitioner (NP) reported that the Veteran's lips were dry, chapped, with hyperpigmentation, and the Veteran described a burning sensation.  

The NP considered the Veteran's lay statements, reviewed the record, and conducted a physical examination. Thereafter, she opined that it was unlikely that the Veteran's frostbite of the lips were incurred in or caused by service.  Although the Veteran described in-service exposure to the cold elements, the NP noted service treatment records only specifically indicated treatment for frostbite to the toes with no mention of the lips therein or after service for decades. The NP found the lack of chronicity of care during service or after service to be compelling and, therefore opined against a likely etiology between the Veteran's current manifestations and his described in-service exposure to the cold elements.

Analysis

The Board finds the persuasive weight of the evidence does not support entitlement to service connection for frostbite of the lips or residuals thereof.  While it is not reasonably in dispute that the Veteran was exposed to cold weather and he was treated for frostbite on his toes during service, the record is largely silent as to the manifestations related to his lips specifically for decades.

It is clear he now has skin related manifestations on his lips, but these manifestations were not complained of, treated, or diagnosed for many decades after service in 2021. Indeed, the February 2024 VA examiner considered the Veteran's description of in-service cold weather exposure, and lay description of symptoms thereafter, but found the lack of chronicity of care for many decades thereafter to be more compelling.  Thus, the examiner found a nexus unlikely and the Board finds the opinion persuasive.

To this end, the Board finds that service connection for frostbite of the lips residuals is not warranted.  In short, although the Veteran had some in-service complaints related to frostbite, the evidence of record indicates that he did not incur a chronic condition regarding frostbite of his lips therein or for decades after.  The persuasive, probative and competent evidence of record, further, weighs against a finding that any current residual frostbite of the lips is related to any in-service incident, to include exposure to cold weather in service during performance of his duties, requisite with his MOS.

Based on the entirety of the evidentiary record, the Board finds the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding of entitlement to service connection for residuals of frostbite to the lips.  There is no persuasive indication that the condition began in service or for many years after service nor has the condition been persuasively linked to any incident in service, to include his exposure to cold weather in service during performance of his duties, requisite with his MOS.  Indeed, there is persuasive evidence to the contrary.  The February 2024 NP opined that the Veteran's residuals of frostbite to the lips were less likely than not related to service and provided a thorough rationale to support her opinion based on an accurate characterization of the evidence of record, including consideration of the Veteran's in service cold weather exposure and all pertinent findings, such that the Board is able to make a fully informed decision.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007).  There are no contrary medical opinions in the evidence of record as to the etiology of the Veteran's residuals of frostbite of the lips.

While the September 2023 post-service and December 2023 private treatment records indicate that the Veteran's post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation/ skin eruption of the lips "may possibly" be from previous frostbite/scarring, these opinions are too tenuous to establish medical nexus to service. Cf. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2006) (stating that speculative medical opinions as to causation cannot support a nexus for purposes of establishing service connection). Indeed, it is not entirely clear whether the frostbite scarring refers to service or possibly a post-service activity. 

Again, while the Veteran's service treatment records mention frostbite injury to the toes/feet, the records are silent as to frostbite of the lips or any treatment, complaints, or diagnoses related to a skin condition / frostbite to the lips.  Indeed, there is no indication the Veteran complained of or sought treatment for any manifestations related to his lips for decades after service.

The February 2024 VA examiner considered the Veteran's exposure to cold weather and his lay description of in-service frostbite but found the lack of chronicity of care (particularly where he was treated for frostbite of the toes during service) to be more compelling.  The opinion is persuasive and consistent with the evidence of the record and was rendered in consideration of the Veteran's lay statements after review of the file and a thorough physical examination.

The Board acknowledges and considered the Veteran's contentions that he incurred frostbite specifically to his lips during service and has had residuals since service. The persuasive weight of the evidence, however, does not support the Veteran's contentions.  While he is certainly competent to report on his experiences and symptoms throughout the years, he is not competent to "diagnose" himself with specifically frostbite, and the Board finds the persuasive weight of the evidence against such a conclusion. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Where, here, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against an appeal, the reasonable doubt doctrine is not for application.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). As such, the Board finds entitlement to service connection is not warranted and the appeal is denied.

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Maddox, Rolen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.