Citation Nr: A25033876
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 200113-62243
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for a left ankle deltoid ligament sprain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2004 to April 2016.  Procedurally, an August 2018 rating decision, in pertinent part, denied a compensable rating for left ankle disability.  The Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement in October 2018.  In December 2019, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a statement of the case (SOC).  

In the January 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran opted into the into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) and elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2019 SOC, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran (or representative) with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the December 2019 SOC and prior to receipt of the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.

In an August 2023 decision the Board granted a 10 percent rating, but no higher, for the left ankle disability of left deltoid ligament sprain.  The Veteran appealed this decision to not award greater than 10 percent for the left ankle disability to the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) which granted a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) in November 2024.  A denial of entitlement to total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) by the Board was not appealed to the CAVC and is thus not part of this appeal.  

As noted above, the evidentiary window is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the December 2019 SOC, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for a left ankle deltoid ligament sprain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for a left ankle deltoid ligament sprain is remanded.

On the facts of this case, the issue of entitlement to disability rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for a left ankle deltoid ligament sprain must be remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the December 2019 SOC subject to this AMA appeal. 

As observed in the JMR, a VA examination of the ankle conducted in January 2016 did not include adequate testing for range of motion findings in all testing conditions required by 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 and as set forth in the CAVC decision in Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). This examination was noted to pre-date Correia, so appropriate testing for pain on motion per guidance from this decision was not completed.  Likewise, the examination pre-dated the CAVC decision of Sharp v. Shulkin 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017), so the Veteran was not tested after repetitive use over time and there was no rationale for the conclusion that repeated use over time did not result in functional loss. 

The JMR pointed out that the Board did not address the adequacy of the January 2016 VA examination in determining that a rating in excess of 10 percent was not warranted for the left ankle disability.  It stated that the Board must discuss the adequacy of the January 2016 VA examination and determine whether VA satisfied its duty to assist. Further it stated that if the Board determines VA has not done so, it shall return the claim to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error, to include determining whether a retrospective opinion is possible. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, see also Chotta v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 80, 85 (2008).

The Board finds that the January 2016 VA examination is inadequate, resulting in a pre-decisional error in the duty to assist.  Remand is therefore warranted for the AOJ to provide the opportunity if deemed possible, to obtain a retrospective opinion correcting the deficiencies of that examination.

Additionally, as pointed out by the JMR, the Board failed to discuss the fact that per an Examination Request uploaded to the claims file on August 10, 2018 the VA had indicated that the Veteran did not need to appear for this examination.  Later, as documented in Examination Requests uploaded to the claims file on August 27, 2018, this examination was cancelled due to the unavailability of the Veteran, but there was no indication as to whether the Veteran was at fault for this unavailability.  

A review of the Examination Request uploaded August 10, 2018 indicated that additional examination was necessary to address functional limitations as contemplated by the CAVC in Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 43-44 (2011).  In addition to directing the examiner to address functional loss and additional limitation in motion, including during flare-ups, or when the joint is used repeatedly over a period of time, the Examination Request directed the clinician as to methods to be used in providing the examination report without an actual examination.  The directions advised the clinician that "if using the ACE process to complete the Medical Examination, please explain the basis for the decision not to examine the Veteran, and identify the specific materials reviewed to complete the Medical Examination."  This was followed by a statement that the Veteran does not need to report for all examinations in regard to the left ankle disability.

In view of this, the subsequent cancellation of the examination due to "unavailability of the Veteran," particularly without further clarification as to whether the Veteran was ever notified, or if the failure to report was without good cause, constitutes a pre-decisional breach of the duty to assist.  The Board is cognizant of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 regarding action to be taken when a veteran fails to report for a scheduled VA examination "when entitlement to a benefit cannot be established" without the scheduled examination. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.655(a), (b).  However, as discussed above, there is nothing in the record reflecting that the Veteran refused to attend any examination deemed necessary to attend. See Kyhn v. Shinseki, 716 F.3d 572 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Accordingly, the Board must remand this claim to correct the errors by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A as such errors occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from the examiner who conducted the January 2016 VA ankle examination or, if that examiner is unavailable then another similarly qualified examiner may respond instead. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available for review by the examiner, and such review should be noted in the examination report. A new VA examination is only necessary if deemed so by the examiner. The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Please provide range of motion (ROM) estimates for the Veteran's left ankle at the time of the January 2016 examination.

(b.) Did the Veteran exhibit objective evidence of pain with active ROM testing? If so, please indicate the point at which evidence of pain was exhibited, expressed in degrees.

(c.) Did the Veteran exhibit objective evidence of pain with passive ROM testing? If so, please indicate the point at which evidence of pain was exhibited, expressed in degrees.

(d.) Did the Veteran exhibit objective evidence of pain with weight-bearing? If so, please indicate the point at which evidence of pain was exhibited, expressed in degrees.

(e.) Did the Veteran exhibit objective evidence of pain with non-weight-bearing? If so, please indicate the point at which evidence of pain was exhibited, expressed in degrees.

(f.) Please opine as to whether pain, weakness, fatigability, and/or incoordination significantly limited functional ability after repeated use over a period of time. If so, please describe the functional impairment and estimate the ROM measurements after repeated use over a period of time.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale for each proffered opinion. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion.

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training. As appropriate, the AOJ should conduct additional development or supplement the record. 

2. For the purposes of correcting the pre-decisional failure to obtain a VA examination in 2018, schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected left ankle disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. 

(a.) In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  

(b.) Additionally, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Eckart, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.