Citation Nr: A25033793
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 231024-387613
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for residuals of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied. 

Service connection for a right ankle condition is denied. 

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for a left ankle strain is remanded.

The claim for service connection for a back condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran experienced a TBI or right ankle injury/condition during active service. Additionally, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that he had experienced residuals of either a TBI or a right ankle injury at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for residuals of a TBI have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a right ankle condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2011 to July 2018 during which time he earned a parachutist badge. 

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision (right ankle and back) which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and the October 2023 AOJ decision (left ankle and TBI). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for left ankle and back conditions, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship (nexus) between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The requirement of a current disability is satisfied when the Veteran has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

1. Service connection for residuals of a TBI is denied. 

In August 2022, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for a head injury. He stated that, following an aircraft jump, he landed, hit his head "very hard," and blacked out for a few moments. He noted that this injury caused headaches and mental distress. Given the Veteran's report, the Board interprets this to mean that he is seeking service connection for residuals of a TBI (as characterized above). 

In an October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection. The AOJ found that the evidence did not show a currently diagnosed disability.

While service treatment records show care for multiple ailments and disorders, the records do not contain any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to a head injury or loss of consciousness. In fact, the records show that the Veteran consistently denied a history of TBI or experiencing headaches. Also, physical examinations consistently revealed no evidence of a head injury. The Board has summarized the most notable reports below.

In a November 2013 pre-deployment health assessment, the Veteran reported being in "excellent" health during the past month with no questions or concerns regarding his health.

During a November 2014 post-deployment assessment, the Veteran denied a history of TBI. 

In October 2017, the Veteran's records were reviewed to determine the presence of TBI/concussions to assess the need for functional limitations or additional evaluation or treatment. In that regard, zero occurrences were noted. In other words, his TBI screen was negative. 

In an April 2018 Report of Medical History for separation, the Veteran noted that he was "[c]urrently in good health." He denied frequent or severe headaches, a history of head injury, or any other physical ailments.  He did, however, report experiencing depression or excessive worry.  In that regard, the Veteran noted that he had an anxiety disorder and had been treated for depression, prescribed Zoloft, and attended therapy.  As an aside, the Veteran has been service connected for PTSD.

VA Medical Center (MC) treatment records are also silent as to a history of head injury or TBI. In September 2018, the Veteran attended a primary care initial evaluation to establish care with VA. He reported doing "well" but noted that he had "sometimes" been depressed; the report notes a history of anxiety and depression. His review of systems was negative, and the clinician noted no history of "serious" injuries. During the evaluation, the Veteran made no mention of a history of head injury or TBI, and he explicitly denied being diagnosed as having TBI during his deployments. Subsequent VAMC treatment records make no mention of an in-service head injury or a TBI diagnosis. 

Given the Veteran's August 2022 statements regarding mental distress, the Board reviewed and considered the April 2018, December 2020, and March 2022 VA mental disorders examination reports. However, none of the reports contain a diagnosis of TBI or list TBI as relevant to the understanding of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder. Also, none of the reports contain a statement from the Veteran regarding a head injury. 

The Veteran attended a July 2023 VA examination administered by a psychiatrist.  To administer the examination, the examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file, including service treatment records.  The examiner also considered the Veteran's lay statements regarding a June 2015 head injury. Specifically, he reported that during his first jump in Airborne School, he suffered a hard landing during which he struck his head on the ground and lost consciousness for a few seconds. The Veteran stated that he did not seek medical care. Rather, he stood on his own and was able to complete Airborne School. He further reported that since this injury, he had developed light sensitivity, headaches, progressively worsening concentration deficits, impulsivity, and behavioral symptoms of anxiety, depression, inability to maintain relationships, and impaired ability to cope with stress.

The examiner also conducted an assessment based on the TBI criterion. The examiner noted the following: there was no evidence of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions; the Veteran's judgment, motor activity, visual spatial orientation, and consciousness were all "normal;" his social interaction was "routinely appropriate;" he was "always" oriented to person, time, place, and situation; there was a lack of subjective symptomology or neurobehavioral effects; and he was able to communicate by and comprehend spoken and written language. Even more, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not have subjective symptoms or any mental, physical, or neurological conditions or residuals attributable to a TBI such as migraine headaches or Meniere's disease. 

The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have a TBI or any residuals of a TBI. The Board finds the examiner's opinion adequate to decide the claim. His report is reflective of a detailed record review and testing, and the opinion is concise and thoroughly supported by the credible evidence of record.

After careful consideration of the above, the Board finds that the medical evidence of record does not support finding that the Veteran had a TBI or experienced residuals of a TBI at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. This is adequately supported by the unrefuted medical evidence of record detailed above. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements to the July 2023 VA examiner finds them insufficient to establish service connection for a TBI.  As detailed above, he stated that he sustained an in-service head injury that resulted in a myriad of symptoms including depression, anxiety, concentration deficits, and an inability to cope with stress. To begin, the Board finds his statement regarding an in-service injury incredible. A careful review of the record shows that the Veteran had a history of seeking treatment in service for multiple issues, including mental health treatment. After separation from service, he continued to seek routine medical care yet made no mention of a history of TBI. It stands to reason that if he had in fact sustained an in-service TBI, he would have reported it and sought treatment for it as he did his other ailments. Further, he would have reported this information after his separation from service in order to receive optimal care. That notwithstanding, the Board also finds that the Veteran is not competent (meaning medically trained) to render an opinion regarding the etiology of the symptomology he described as such is a medically complex question. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Even more, the Board notes that many of the symptoms the Veteran described had been found to be associated with his acquired psychiatric disorder. For example, the March 2022 VA examination report indicates that his acquired psychiatric disorder manifested in symptoms that included anxiety, depressed mood, trouble concentrating, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. Consequently, the Board attributes no weight to the Veteran's statements, as they cannot be used to establish the presence of TBI residuals.

Moreover, even accepting for the sake of argument that the Veteran was knocked unconscious following a hard parachute landing, service connection requires not just an injury in service, but a residual disability from that injury.  Here, the TBI examination simply did not find symptomatology that was residual to a TBI (other than perhaps a mental health disorder, for which service connection is already in effect).

Accordingly, the claim for service connection for residuals of a TBI is denied. 

2. Service connection for a right ankle condition is denied.

In August 2022, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for an ankle strain sustained while "conducting PT," but he did not identify which ankle. In subsequent rating decisions, the AOJ denied service connection for both his right and left ankles. The Veteran appealed. 

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was treated for a left ankle injury in September 2011, but the records are devoid of any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to his right ankle. 

Similarly, VAMC treatment records contain no complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to the Veteran's right ankle. During a September 2020 VAMC urgent care visit, a physical examination revealed no musculoskeletal issues, and during a February 2022 VAMC primary care follow up, the Veteran denied any "significant history" regarding his musculoskeletal system.

The Veteran attended an August 2022 VA examination at which he was diagnosed with a left ankle strain. During the examination, he reported first experiencing ankle pain in 2011 during PT.  Specifically, he stated that while doing sprints, he felt as if he "rolled" his ankle. He reported that since that injury, he had complained of left ankle pain that radiated into his left lower leg. Of note, the Veteran did not describe an in-service right ankle injury or current right ankle symptomology.  Also, range of motion testing for his right ankle was normal with no evidence of pain on motion. In sum, no pertinent findings were noted with respect to the Veteran's right ankle.  As a result, the examiner opined that his claimed condition was less likely incurred in or caused by his active service because there were insufficient findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis. 

In light of the above, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran had a current right ankle disability or sustained an in-service incurrence.  Without this evidence, the first and second elements of the service connection analysis cannot be met.  Accordingly, the claim is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. The claim for service connection for a left ankle strain is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a left ankle strain. As noted above, he reported that since his in-service injury, he had experienced left ankle pain that radiated into his left lower leg.

Under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act, remand is permissible for only: (a) correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors, and (b) correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The conclusion of a medical opinion cannot be premised on the lack of evidence in service treatment records while ignoring lay statements regarding symptomology.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007).

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had a current disability and qualifying in-service incurrence.  However, it denied service connection because an August 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his in-service injury. In her report, the examiner noted that service treatment records lacked evidence of ongoing symptomology following his in-service injury. Critically, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements regarding ongoing symptomology, and the AOJ did not obtain an addendum opinion to address this deficiency.

Equally compelling, the Board notes that the August 2022 VA examiner conducted an examination of the Veteran's left knee. In her September 2022 report, she noted that medical records (during and after active duty service) were silent as to a diagnosis and treatment for a left knee condition. Despite this, she opined that the Veteran's condition was etiologically related to his active service because he had received a parachutist badge, and the examination findings were consistent with symptoms that could develop from parachuting. To support her findings, the examiner provided a citation to a journal article and noted the following: "The rate of injury for each area of the body is similar to previously reported rates, with lower extremity injuries making up the largest category, leading to 66% of admissions." Because this journal article was not made part of the record, the Board did not review the article; however, it is clear from the record that the AOJ did not request an addendum opinion regarding the relevance of this article to the Veteran's other lower extremity claim (i.e., his left ankle claim). 

Presently, the evidence of record is inadequate to decide the claim. However, the Board finds that the AOJ committed pre-decisional duty to assist errors when it failed to obtain an addendum opinion to address the deficiencies detailed above.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left ankle strain. On remand, the examiner is directed to consider and comment on the Veteran's August 2022 lay statements and the article referenced in the September 2022 Medical Opinion related to his left knee claim. 

2. The claim for service connection for a back condition is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a back condition. In an August 2022 statement, he reported experiencing pain around 2013 after lifting during field work. He then experienced a "[g]radual progression of mid back pain from rucking and being airborne."

Similar to his left ankle claim, the AOJ favorably found that he had a current disability and qualifying in-service incurrence; however, it denied service connection due to the VA examiner's opinion that there was no nexus between his disability and active service. In that regard, the examiner noted that service treatment records are devoid of any evidence of an in-service incurrence. Consequently, the examiner found no relation between the Veteran's current symptoms to his active service duties. Notably, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements regarding in-service symptomology, and the AOJ did not request an addendum opinion regarding this omission. 

In light of the above, the Board finds that the evidence of record is inadequate to decide the claim. However, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to obtain an addendum opinion that addressed the Veteran's lay statements.  Accordingly, the claim for service connection for a back condition must be remanded for further development. On remand, the AOJ is directed to obtain an addendum opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back condition, and the examiner is directed to consider and comment on his lay statements. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left ankle strain. If a new examination is needed to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled. The examiner is directed to answer the following questions: 

Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's current left ankle disability was incurred in or caused by his active service? Why or why not?

In answering the above, the examiner is directed to consider that the Veteran is the recipient of a parachutist badge. Also,  the examiner is directed to consider the Veteran's August 2022 lay statements (see page 13 of the August 12, 2022 VA 21-526EZ and see page 3 of the Ankle Conditions DBQ labeled as "C&P Exam" received on September 1, 2022 (note that there are multiple examination reports for this date)).  Further, the examiner is directed to consider the medical journal referenced in the September 2022 VA medical opinion related to the Veteran's left knee condition (see page 2 of the report labeled "C&P Exam" received on September 1, 2022).  

2. Obtain an addendum opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back condition. If a new examination is needed to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled. The examiner is directed to answer the following questions: 

Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's current back disability was incurred in or caused by his active service? Why or why not?

In answering the above, the examiner is directed to consider that the Veteran is the recipient of a parachutist badge. Also,  the examiner is directed to consider the Veteran's August 2022 lay statements (see page 13 of the August 12, 2022 VA 21-526EZ and see page 2 of the Back Conditions DBQ labeled "C&P Exam" received on September 1, 2022). 

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Graison-McBride, Kimberly F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.