Citation Nr: A25033003
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-472850
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's present right shoulder injury did not onset during active service and is not otherwise related to any incident of active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a right shoulder disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Air Force, on active duty from November 2006 to September 2014. His awards include the Afghanistan Campaign Medal, and the Iraq Campaign Medal, among others. 

This claim comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions dated September 2023, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In September 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182, selecting the Direct Review docket. Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decisions on appeal. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, establishing service connection requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999).

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability. 

The Veteran contends that his right shoulder disability is related to service. Specifically, in a February 2023 statement, he recalled having "issues with my shoulders ever since active duty" from physical training during service. 

After a review of the record, the Board finds the evidence is persuasive in showing the Veteran's right shoulder disability is not related to service. 

First, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) include one episode of treatment for a right shoulder disability. Specifically, in July 2008, he was seen for mild pain in the right shoulder, described as "local, dull." There are no other complaints in his STRs. Indeed, during his separation examination in July 2014, the clinician noted his shoulders "showed no abnormalities." Therefore, the Board concludes that while he reported in-service right shoulder pain in 2008, it had resolved by the time of his separation in September 2014. 

Regarding the Veteran's post-service medical treatment records, the objective medical evidence does not demonstrate any symptoms of a right shoulder condition until he underwent a VA examination in August 2023. For example, during a Separation Health Assessment in December 2014 for his initial VA claims, the VA examiner opined his upper extremities, and other musculoskeletal system to be "normal." Indeed, the Veteran reported bilateral upper extremity pain, however, this was limited to his wrist. Subsequently, he was diagnosed with a bilateral shoulder strain during his March 2023 VA examination. Therefore, continuity of symptoms has not been shown based on the clinical evidence. 

The Board recognizes statements from the Veteran regarding his history of symptoms since service. Specifically, he told the March 2023 VA examiner that his right shoulder disability onset in 2013 with stiffness and soreness in the shoulder joints. Moreover, in a February 2023 statement, he reported right shoulder pain since active service. While the Veteran is competent to report that he experienced symptoms, including pain, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case or determine that these symptoms were manifestations of a particular disorder. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Nevertheless, to the extent the Veteran asserts that his right shoulder condition has persisted since service, the Board determines that the Veteran's reported history of continued symptoms while competent, is nonetheless insufficient to establish a relationship between his complaints and active service. Indeed, his reported history of right shoulder pain is inconsistent with both his July 2014 separation examination, as well as his post-service VA Separation Health Assessment in December 2014. As such, the Board finds that continuity of symptoms has not been shown. 

Although the Veteran is not competent to diagnosis and provide etiological opinions related to the condition on appeal, service connection may nonetheless be established by competent evidence, including medical evidence and opinions, that demonstrates a relationship between the Veteran's symptoms and service. Nevertheless, the competent evidence fails to establish a relationship between active duty and the Veteran's current symptoms.

In this regard, the Board places significant probative value on the VA examiner that performed a detailed review of the Veteran's service and medical treatment records, as well as the comprehensive physical examination. The March 2023 VA examiner, in their May 2023 opinion, opined that his right shoulder disorder is not related to service. The examiner diagnosed him with a right shoulder strain and acknowledged his lay statement regarding onset during service. However, the clinician emphasized that there was no chronicity of care during, or after, active service. Moreover, according to the examiner, his separation physical in July 2014, showed no abnormalities. Due to the foregoing, the examiner opined against service connection for his right shoulder disorder. 

In addition, the March 2023 VA examiner provided an addendum opinion in May 2023. Here, the VA clinician opined that the Veteran's right shoulder disorder is not related to his in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). Further, the examiner opined that a "right shoulder strain is diagnosis of a physical condition and not known to be caused by exposures to chemicals or particles." 

As part of this claim, the Board also recognizes the statements from the Veteran, regarding the relationship between his condition and active service. Nevertheless, while he is competent to provide testimony regarding observable symptomatology such as pain, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case. These issues are also medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple systems in the body and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 n.4. Therefore, the Veterans statements, by themselves, are insufficient to establish service connection.

Considering the above discussion, the Board concludes that the evidence of record is persuasively against the Veteran's claim of service connection, and there is no doubt to be otherwise resolved. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). Therefore, the appeal is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is related to service. Specifically, in a February 2023 statement, he indicated that his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities prevent him from exercising, causing him to gain weight, in turn, that caused his OSA. 

In January 2023, prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran submitted a private opinion from Dr. Z.M. In this opinion, Z.M. wrote that he is service connected for bilateral wrist, lumbar spine and bilateral knee disorders. Further, such musculoskeletal disorders, caused the Veteran's obesity, and that his "obesity condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current Obstructive Sleep Apnea." 

Unfortunately, the Board finds Dr. Z.M.'s opinion to be inadequate, as it does not address whether the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his OSA; nor does it explain whether his OSA would not have occurred but for his obesity. In short, the private opinion indicates his service-connected disabilities may have caused his weight gain, which may have caused his OSA. Further, obesity may be considered in certain cases as an intermediate step in secondary service connection, obesity itself is not considered a disease or injury for which direct or secondary service connection may be granted. See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017).

However, the Board notes that the VA examinations of record also do not adequately contemplate whether the Veteran's OSA is secondary to his service-connected disabilities, as raised by the private opinion. Indeed, the March 2023 VA examiner, in their May 2023 opinion, indicates that obesity is a common cause of OSA as it narrows one's airway. However, they merely opine that "physical conditions are not a cause of sleep apnea" without discussing obesity as an intermediate step. As the Veteran, prior to the rating decision on appeal, expressly raised this theory of entitlement and the VA medical opinion does not address it, the Board finds there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand for an adequate VA medical opinion is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner is asked to provide responses to the following: 

(a) Is the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea at least as likely as not related to service?

(b) If not, is his sleep apnea at least as likely as not due to his service-connected disabilities, to include his bilateral knee, bilateral wrist, and back disorders? In answering this question, the examiner must make a determination on the facts of this particular Veteran's unique circumstances. 

(c) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee, bilateral wrist, and back disorders caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity?

(d) If the Veteran's obesity was caused or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee, bilateral wrist, and back disorders, was his obesity a substantial factor in causing his obstructive sleep apnea?

(e) If the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his obstructive sleep apnea, is it at least as likely as not that his obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for his obesity?

The examiner should review and address the Veteran's private opinion, dated January 2023, from Dr. Z.M. A fully explained rationale should be provided. 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	McDonald, Thomas K.