Citation Nr: A25033399
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241218-499887
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is dismissed.

REMANDED

Service connection for kidney disease is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's December 2024 VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) identified that the Veteran sought to appeal an April 2016 rating decision's purported denial of service connection for OSA.

2. There is no appealable VA decision related to service connection for OSA in any April 2016 rating decision.    

3. The Veteran's 2024 VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), was received more than one year after the October 2016 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for OSA; therefore, the filing is untimely.

4. The record shows no good cause that would permit the Board to extend the filing period for the OSA claim, and the Board did not waive the timeliness of the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for dismissal of the appeal as to entitlement to service connection for OSA have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105, 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.109, 20.201, 20.202, 20.203.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1965 through July 1967.  The Veteran deployed to Vietnam as an infantryman and was awarded the Combat Infantry Badge, Army Commendation Medal, Vietnam Service Medal, and Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Palm, among others.  

Procedural History and Applicable Evidentiary Windows

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on the Veteran's request for appellate review of two rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in December 2024, seeking Board review of an October 2024 rating decision (which denied service connection for kidney disease) and seeking review of an April 2016 rating decision (which he alleged denied service connection for OSA).  The Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  

  

The Veteran's December 2024 VA Form 10182 was timely for his appeal of service connection for kidney disease.  However, the December 2024 VA Form 10182 did not identify an appealable issue related to OSA in the April 2016 rating decision and was not timely.  The Board has dismissed that claim for the reasons set out below.  

Because the Veteran selected the Evidence Submission docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's kidney disease claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection for Obstructive Sleep Apnea

As noted above, the present appeal arises from a December 2024 VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  The Veteran indicated that one of the VA decisions he sought to appeal was an April 13, 2016 rating decision, which he asserted denied service connection for OSA.  However, the Board finds that the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement (NOD) does not meet the legal and regulatory criteria to trigger appellate review by the Board.

Notices of disagreement are required to identify the specific determination with which the claimant disagrees.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a). VA regulations further contemplate that appeals to the Board arise from decisions by an agency of original jurisdiction and direct that an application for review on appeal shall not be entertained unless it is in conformity with the requirements for a Notice of Disagreement.  38 U.S.C. §§ 7105, 7108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.104(c), 20.201.

Here, the portion of the December 2024 Notice of Disagreement purporting to appeal the denial of service connection for OSA in an April 2016 rating decision failed to specify an appealable issue with which the Veteran disagreed.  38 U.S.C. § 7 7105(b)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  Significantly, while the record does contain two April 13, 2016 rating decisions, neither decision adjudicated, or otherwise addressed, the Veteran's service connection for OSA claim (the Veteran's OSA claim was adjudicated in an October 2016 rating decision).  Thus, the application for review is not in conformity with the legal requirements for an application for Board review and the appeal must be dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7108.

While the Board acknowledges that the AOJ adjudicated a claim for "respiratory problems" in an April 2016 rating decision, even assuming arguendo that the AOJ's adjudication of "respiratory problems" included a denial of a claim for OSA, Board appellate review is initiated by a claimant filing a Notice of Disagreement on a form approved by VA within one year from the date the AOJ issues its notice of decision.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500; 20.203.  If a Notice of Disagreement is not filed within the one-year period, the decision becomes final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.160.  An extension of the period for filing a Notice of Disagreement may be granted by the Board for good cause.  38 C.F.R. § 20.203.

The one-year deadline is not a jurisdictional requirement; therefore, the Board may not dismiss an appeal for lack of jurisdiction due to an untimely filed VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Notice of Disagreement.  See Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262 (2024) (en banc).  However, an appeal may be dismissed for non-jurisdictional reasons, such as a procedural defect, when a Veteran does not substantially comply with proper claims processing rules, such as failing to use the correct form or untimely filing of required forms.  Id.; see also Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2021).

Here, the Veteran is seeking to appeal a rating decision from April 2016.  The Veteran was notified of the AOJ's denial of his claim for a respiratory condition in an April 15, 2016 Notification Letter, which informed him of his right to appeal the decision within one year from the date of the letter.  The Veteran did not file any review option within one year of notification and the April 2016 rating decision became final.  No extension has been granted, and the Veteran has not requested or provided good cause to extend the filing deadline associated with the April 2016 rating decision and notification letter.

The Board has considered whether it waived its right to enforce the filing deadline by docketing the Veteran's appeal.  See Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37 (2009) (holding that VA waived any objection to the timeliness of the legacy substantive appeal because VA consistently treated the matter as if it was part of the timely filed substantive appeal for over five years).  Here, the Veteran filed his VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement in December 2024.  In January 2025, the Board sent a Docketing Letter acknowledging receipt of the Veteran's appeal. The letter notified the Veteran that his appeal had been placed on the Evidence Submission docket, but indicated that it was possible, upon more detailed review, the Board would determine the appeal request did not meet the necessary procedural requirements, including timely submission of the appeal request.  The Veteran was notified that if the Board identified such a defect, it may issue a decision dismissing the appeal based on the defect.

The letter acknowledging receipt of the appeal request and the administrative act of assigning the attempted appeal a docket does not, alone, constitute a waiver of timeliness.  Although the appeal was docketed pursuant an automatic administrative action, the Board did not engage in substantive and procedural development of the appeal.  Furthermore, the January 2025 Docketing Letter notified the Veteran that procedural defects may be discovered resulting in the dismissal of his appeal. 

As the Veteran did not identify an appealable issue with which he disagreed in an April 2016 rating decision and because he did not seek review of any OSA claim within the one-year filing deadline, the Veteran's service connection for OSA claim did not meet the legal and regulatory criteria for Board appellate review.  

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA is dismissed.

A claimant may request readjudication of a previously denied claim, if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured and a supplemental claim is filed with the AOJ. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d) (a claimant must file a supplemental claim with new and relevant evidence for the AOJ to readjudicate a previously denied claim); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

The Board encourages the Veteran to file a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for service connection for his respiratory conditions and/or OSA.  As discussed above, submission of a supplemental claim along with new and relevant evidence will allow the AOJ (and, if appealed, the Board) to readjudicate his claim on the merits.  If the AOJ finds that readjudication is warranted, a new VA examination or opinion could also be obtained, which may advance the Veteran's claim for service connection.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection for Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)

The Veteran expressed his frustration with VA's denial of service connection for his chronic kidney disease, stating that he believes there is a medical link between his herbicide exposure during service and kidney disease.  See December 2024 Veteran Correspondence.  The Board extends its sincere regret that, unfortunately, remand is required for new VA opinions as to both direct and secondary service connection because of pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Board notes that the AOJ previously made the favorable findings that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of chronic kidney disease, and that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides during service in Vietnam.  See October 2024 VA Rating Decision Narrative.  The Board is bound by such favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Therefore, the Board is left to determine if there is a nexus between the Veteran's CKD and service or whether a separate already service-connected disability caused or aggravated the Veteran's chronic kidney disease.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

The record contains a VA medical examination report and associated medical opinion, offering a negative opinion on service connection for the Veteran's chronic kidney disease.  See October 2024 Kidney Conditions (Nephrology) Disability Benefits Questionnaire; October 2024 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire.

The October 2024 Kidney Conditions (Nephrology) Disability Benefits Questionnaire was completed after an examination of the Veteran and review of his VA and other medical records.  After that review and examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic kidney disease due to renal dysfunction.  This conclusion was supported by laboratory test results showing elevated creatinine levels and other abnormal readings.  In the examination report, the Veteran was notated as stating that his kidney disease was first diagnosed about three months before the VA examination and that he was currently being monitored, but not treated, for the condition.  Despite offering helpful information on the Veteran's kidney disease, the examiner did not discuss or offer an opinion on the etiology of the Veteran's condition or its relationship, if any, to the Veteran's military service or as to whether the condition was caused or aggravated by any of the Veteran's service-connected conditions.   

The October 2024 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire was completed contemporaneously with the October 2024 Kidney Conditions (Nephrology) Disability Benefits Questionnaire by the same examiner.  There, the examiner opined that, after considering the combined synergistic effectors of the Veteran's exposures, that his kidney condition was less likely than not caused by the combined effects of herbicide, or other exposures, in service.  The examiner noted the Veteran's other risk factors (aging, obesity, and hypertension) and further opined that aging was the most likely cause of the Veteran's condition.  The examiner provided citation to a VA Agent Orange informational website in support of their opinion.  See https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/agentorange (retrieved April 8, 2025).  The examiner did not offer further discussion or analysis in support of their opinion or explain how the VA informational website supported their conclusion.  Further, despite the Veteran's service-connected hypertension disability, and identifying hypertension as a risk factor for kidney disease, the examiner did not opine on secondary service connection.  

To be entitled to probative weight, a medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned explanation connecting the two.  Nieves-Rodrigues v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Further, the examiner must consider whether any lay evidence was satisfactory.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Lastly, the absence of a documented diagnosis or symptomology in service or at separation cannot be the basis for a negative opinion for service connection.  Ledford v. Derwinksi, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); Dalton at 23.  Accordingly, an inadequate medical examination or opinion may be assigned low probative value.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993) (Board may properly reject medical opinion where it is based on facts contradicted by the record).  

After review, the Board finds that the October 2024 VA medical opinion provided a conclusory opinion that the Veteran's kidney condition was not service connected and was caused by aging without sufficient discussion explaining the connection between the supporting medical data and literature with their conclusion.  While the Board acknowledges citation to a VA informational website, without further discussion explaining the specific information contained in that article that is relevant to the facts of the Veteran's claim and analysis of its applicability to the facts of this case, the Board finds the VA opinion on direct service connection, due to herbicide exposure, insufficient.  

Further, the VA examination and medical opinion failed to discuss or consider secondary service connection.  The Veteran is service-connected for type II diabetes mellitus, presumptively based on his exposure to herbicides during Vietnam.  The Veteran is also service-connected for hypertension, which the AOJ also awarded presumptively due to his herbicide exposure in Vietnam.  It is common knowledge that diabetes can involve the kidneys; however, the Board lacks the medical expertise to assess whether there is any causal relationship between the Veteran's type 2 diabetes mellitus and his kidney disease.  Further, as acknowledged by the examiner, there is a causal relationship between hypertension and kidney disease.  Despite both conditions involving the kidneys and the noted link with hypertension, the VA opinion did not consider or address whether either service-connected condition caused or aggravated the Veteran's kidney condition.   

The Board regrets the additional delay remand causes, however, there is no adequate medical opinion of record regarding direct or secondary service connection for the Veteran's kidney disease and the AOJ's reliance on an inadequate medical examination and opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes to provide an examination, it must be adequate).  

Mindful that it must construe a Veteran's claim sympathetically and that the scope of a disability claim encompasses the claimant's description of claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record, the Board considers both direct and secondary service connection as theories of entitlement falling within the scope of the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a); Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Accordingly, remand is therefore required to obtain addendum opinions regarding service connection on those theories of entitlement.    

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinions by an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's kidney disease.  The claims file and this remand should be made available to the examiner.  The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following: 

2. Direct Service Connection: opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's kidney disease was incurred in or caused by military service, including by exposure to herbicides during service in Vietnam.

3. Secondary Service Connection: opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's kidney disease was caused or aggravated by any of his service-connected conditions, including type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension.  In other words, would the Veteran's kidney disease have occurred "but for" a service-connected condition or whether "but for" a service-connected condition, the functional impairment of his kidney would have improved or worsened. 

If the clinician opines that the Veteran's kidney disease would result in less functional impairment but for a service-connected condition, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

4. The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report any lay observable symptoms and their history, as well as reports of medical diagnoses from other providers, and that the Veteran's lay reports must be specifically considered in formulating a medical opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so. 

5. A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  If the clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, they must explain why this is so.

(Continued on the next page)

?

6. Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Stanley, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.