Citation Nr: A25033072
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240601-445591
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran does not have a permanent and total service-connected disability due to anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, deep partial thickness burns, full thickness or subdermal burns, or residuals of an inhalation injury.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for eligibility for a special home adaptation grant have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.809a.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Marine Corps from August 1985 to August 1989 and from January 1991 to October 1991.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office.

On the June 1, 2024, VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket. The Board observes that the Veteran listed several conditions in this June 2024 appeal; however, the vast majority of those listed were duplicative of a May 2024 VA Form 10182 previously submitted, in which the Veteran had also selected the Direct Review docket, and which appeal was docketed at the Board accordingly (Docket Number 240526-443677). The Board may not adjudicate the same issues twice, and there is no evidence that the subsequent June 2024 appeal purported to withdraw the May 2024 appeal, nor did it purport to request to switch to a different review docket. As such, the only issue properly on appeal before the Board in this underlying docket, as non-duplicative of the prior May 2024 appeal, is the issue of entitlement to a special home adaptation grant. The Board will proceed accordingly.

As the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a "Priority Processing Request," VA Form 20-10207, citing that he was terminally ill, and submitting documents regarding End Stage Renal Disease. Other VA internal documents reflect his file has been designated with a terminal illness identifier. The Board construes this submission as a motion to advance his case on the docket (AOD) due to severe illness. An AOD motion may be granted if, among other factors, the Veteran is "seriously ill." 38 U.S.C. § 7107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c). The Board finds the evidence is sufficient to demonstrate a serious illness. As such, the Veteran's implied motion to advance his case on the Board's docket is granted.

1. Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to a special home adaptation grant. In the February 2024 decision on appeal, the AOJ readjudicated the Veteran's claim for a special home adaptation grant, previously denied in a September 2023 rating decision. The AOJ's decision to reopen and readjudicate the Veteran's claim is a favorable finding for the Veteran, i.e., an implicit finding that new and relevant evidence was received, and the Board is bound by that favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(c), 3.156(d).

By way of history, in April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 26-4555 Application in Acquiring Specially Adapted Housing or Special Home Adaptation Grant. He stated, "[b]ecause of my service connected conditions I need to be able to access walk in shower (currently have a tub) and can't get in my bathroom. I need wheelchair accessible accommodations." He did not specify which condition(s) necessitated these accommodations. 

A September 2023 decision denied entitlement to specially adapted housing and denied entitlement to a special home adaptation grant. 

In January 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim and listed "entitlement to special home adaptation." He did not request specially adapted housing.

In February 2024, the AOJ readjudicated the claim for special home adaptation grant, finding that new and relevant evidence had been received. However, the AOJ denied the claim on the merits, noting that a certificate of eligibility for assistance in acquiring necessary special home adaptations may be issued when the Veteran meets certain criteria, and finding that the Veteran did not meet those criteria. This appeal followed. The Board notes that on his VA Form 10182 (and in his January 2024 Supplemental Claim), the Veteran limited his appeal to eligibility for a special home adaptation grant. Thus, the Board will limit the analysis to whether he is eligible for a special home adaptation grant only and will not address eligibility for specially adapted housing.

A special home adaptation (SHA) grant is available for a veteran that has a permanent and total disability that either (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of one or more extremities or the trunk; or (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). 38 U.S.C. § 2101 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has determined that the term "loss of use" in the context of specially adapted housing claims means "a deprivation of the ability to avail oneself of the anatomical region in question. It is a general term, one that can readily accept additional specificity in various circumstances. Adjacent modifiers and, in the case of [special monthly compensation], regulatory efforts create that specificity." Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78 (2017).

The Board finds the appeal must be denied. There is no probative evidence to show that the Veteran has loss of use of the hands, burns, or otherwise meets the criteria for an SHA grant. 

The Board acknowledges that a recent Board decision in a different docket (Docket Number 240526-443677) restored the issue of entitlement to service connection for pulmonary sarcoidosis that had been previously severed, and remanded the issues of entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis and kidney disease. See April 8, 2025, Board decision. However, the Board does not find that that decision impacts the decision herein, as discussed below.

Taking into account the restoration of service connection for pulmonary sarcoidosis, at the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was thus in receipt of service connection for persistent depressive disorder rated at 70 percent, sleep apnea rated at 50 percent, migraine headaches rated at 30 percent, left ankle disability rated at 10 percent, gastroesophageal reflux disease rated at 10 percent, pulmonary sarcoidosis rated at 0 percent, and hypertension rated at 0 percent. His overall combined rating as of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal was 90 percent. The Veteran's current combined rating is 100 percent.

The Board notes that "inhalation injuries" as referenced in 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a generally refer to injuries due to breathing steam or toxic inhalants present in a fire environment, and that this criterion was added "because inhalation injuries can result from the same incidents that cause severe burns,"' see 74 Fed. Reg. 67145, 67148 (Dec. 18, 2009). Nevertheless, an argument could be made that the Veteran's pulmonary sarcoidosis satisfies the criterion of "residuals of an inhalational injury," in a broad sense, thus potentially establishing eligibility to SHA, if such condition were totally disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a. 

In this case, the AOJ has never addressed whether pulmonary sarcoidosis constitutes residuals of an inhalation injury, and, if so, whether SHA would be warranted based on the condition being totally disabling, and the Veteran has not made any argument to that effect. However, while the maximum rating for pulmonary sarcoidosis is 100 percent, in the Veteran's case, his pulmonary sarcoidosis condition was rated noncompensable prior to the severance; it was not totally disabling. As such, eligibility for SHA would still not be warranted because the Veteran's disability, even if it qualifies as "residuals of an inhalation injury," did not have a permanent and total rating as required for SHA grant eligibility. There are no other service-connected conditions that are totally disabling or would otherwise possibly meet the criteria for an SHA grant. For all these reasons, the Board is unable to grant the appeal based on the evidentiary record before it. In summary, for the period of review, there are no service-connected conditions that could conceivably qualify under the applicable SHA grant criteria of 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a, and the Veteran has made no argument with respect to any particular conditions.

Nor can the Board remand the appeal to request the AOJ readjudicate the SHA question once the other appeal stream is fully resolved at the AOJ level to include assignment of a new rating (if warranted) for pulmonary sarcoidosis. Under the AMA, the Board can only remand to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error or any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. 

Here, there is no such error warranting remand. Pulmonary sarcoidosis had already been severed at the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, so there was no error by the AOJ in failing to address it in the inquiry as to whether the SHA grant criteria were met. That the severance has since been reversed and service connection restored does not change the facts as they were before the AOJ at the time. But as the Board has discussed above, even if service connection had still been in effect, the condition was not considered to be totally disabling and would not qualify for an SHA grant. There is no error.

Nor is the Board able to surmise how the AOJ will rate the pulmonary sarcoidosis going forward now that service connection has been restored, i.e., whether it will reevaluate the condition and potentially assign a different or higher rating. Simply put, the Board cannot presume that this condition would henceforth be rated as totally disabling so as to satisfy SHA criteria, and the Board finds no evidence in the evidentiary record before it to support that it would be totally disabling. Even if it were to be subsequently rated as totally disabling upon restoration of service connection, the period of review before the Board in this appeal is limited to the evidentiary record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision. The Board reiterates that prior to the severance, the condition was rated as noncompensable. 

Similarly, the Board does not find that this appeal is inextricably intertwined with the other appeal stream separately adjudicated by the Board, so as to potentially justify a remand on that basis. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (allowing the Board to remand for "correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim"). In that regard, claims are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one claim would have a "significant impact" on the other and "could render any review by the Court of the decision on the claim meaningless and a waste of judicial resources." Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991). 

While the Board determined that the severance of pulmonary sarcoidosis was improper and restored service connection, the Board finds herein that the Veteran's SHA claim is not inextricably intertwined with that issue or with either of the remanded issues on appeal. The Veteran has never tied his request for an SHA grant to pulmonary sarcoidosis, nor contended in any submission that entitlement to SHA is based in whole or on part on any symptoms or limitations associated with pulmonary sarcoidosis. The remanded condition of kidney disease is not a condition upon which an SHA grant may be based (absent loss or loss of use of the hands resulting from such disease, which has not been demonstrated), nor is allergic rhinitis; the Board does not find that allergic rhinitis constitutes "residuals of an inhalation injury," nor could it be totally disabling, even if service connection were ultimately granted for that condition. 

Moreover, in the Veteran's initial application, he merely stated he needed a wheelchair-accessible shower due to "service connected conditions." No conditions were listed, and the Veteran has not made any arguments since. 

Finally, the evidence does not reflect the Veteran's now-restored pulmonary sarcoidosis has rendered him wheelchair-bound, so as to implicate that condition in his initial application statement. The relevant August 2023 Respiratory Conditions VA examination noted the symptoms associated with pulmonary sarcoidosis were fatigue and dizziness, that there were "no respiratory specific issues," and there was no finding or suggestion that the identified symptoms of dizziness or fatigue were of such severity that he was unable to stand, walk, or was wheelchair-bound as a result. Rather, the examiner found that the functional impact of the condition was "limitation in physical activity due to intermittent periods of dizziness and level of fatigue." The rating ultimately assigned for the condition reflects a low level of impairment from the condition. Thus, the evidence does not support a finding that this condition, even if it constitutes residuals of an inhalation injury, would be totally disabling.

In fact, the evidentiary record does not reflect that the Veteran is wheelchair-bound at all. The evidence does not support a finding that during the period of review he required regular or constant use of a wheelchair due to any conditions, service-connected or otherwise. Throughout the period of review, his routine hemodialysis appointment records (thrice weekly) consistently reflect his mode of ambulation to be "walking", and he typically presented for appointments alone, without requiring assistance of another person. 

In summary, there is no basis warranting remand under the controlling regulation, as there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error, no error in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty, and this appeal is not inextricably intertwined with other pending/remanded claims.

In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not nearly in balance, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Accordingly, the claim is denied.

The Veteran is reminded that he may subsequently file a Supplemental Claim for SHA and thereby continuously pursue the claim; any such Supplemental Claim would necessarily take into effect the restored condition of service connection for pulmonary sarcoidosis and/or any other service-connected conditions that might meet the SHA criteria.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Medley, Amanda T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.