Citation Nr: A25033150
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-430750
DATE:  April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active naval service from July 2001 to February 2006.?? 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).??In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.?Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. §?20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.

Service Connection - Headaches

The Veteran has asserted that he should be service-connected for headaches.

At the outset, the Board notes that at the time of his July 2001 enlistment examination, the Veteran was noted to have taken aspirin that day for a headache. However, on the Report of Medical History the Veteran expressly denied experiencing frequent or severe headaches. Further, the Veteran's head, face, neck, and scalp and his neurological system were noted to be normal on clinical examination. The examining clinician did not make a diagnosis of a headache disability at the time of his entry into active service. Rather, it was merely noted he had taken aspirin for a headache, and that such was not considered disabling. In light of the fact that it does not appear that the Veteran had a chronic and continuing headache disability at the time of his entry into service, but merely had an acute headache that resolved with over-the-counter medication, the Board finds that the presumption of soundness applies in this case. 38 U.S.C. § 1111. 

In connection with the claim of entitlement to service connection for headaches, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2022. At that time, the examiner diagnosed tension headaches and opined that the Veteran's tension headaches were less likely than not incurred in or caused by active service. As rationale, the examiner noted that the Veteran experienced headaches and sinusitis in service, but that their separation examination was normal with regard to headaches. Therefore, a nexus could not be established between the Veteran's current tension headaches and active service.

In March 2023 an addendum medical opinion was obtained. At that time, the examiner opined that the Veteran's tension headaches were less likely than not caused by participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). As rationale, the examiner noted that tension headaches are caused by muscle tension in the neck and/or scalp and that based on the exposure that their military occupation specialty (Airframe Technician) underwent, there is no evidence of a relationship between tension headaches and the Veteran's participation in a TERA.

The Board finds that the medical opinions of record are not sufficient to resolve the appeal. In this regard, the March 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches were likely related to tension in the neck and/or scalp. A review of the record in this case shows that the Veteran is service-connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Further, the June 2022 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's in-service complaint of headaches was related to sinusitis. A review of the record in this case shows that the Veteran is service-connected for sinusitis. However, opinions regarding secondary service connection were not obtained.

Failure to obtain adequate medical opinions prior to the issuance of a decision in the appeal constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and remand is required for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed headaches. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests or studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed headaches were caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for a service-connected disability, to specifically include sinusitis and stress related to PTSD. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	UmezEronini, Ikechukwu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.