Citation Nr: A25033051
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432553
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for status post sigmoid colon cancer residuals, including left colectomy, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that diagnosed colon cancer began during active service or is otherwise related to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for colon cancer have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1986 to November 1990.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service event, incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service event, disease, or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Certain chronic diseases, such as malignant tumors (to include colon cancer), will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within the presumptive period of one year following separation from service; or, if they were not shown as chronic in service (or within the applicable presumptive period) then service connection can be supported with a showing continuity of symptomatology since service attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307, 3.309(a). Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In August 2022, the President signed the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) into law. See H.R. 3967, 117th Congress (2021-2022). This new law created an entitlement to a Toxic Exposure Risk Activities or TERA examination for certain veterans exposed to toxins during active-duty service. 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Service connection for status post sigmoid colon cancer residuals

The Veteran contends that he developed colon cancer because of service. Specifically, he asserts that his colon cancer was caused by exposure to asbestos and other chemicals while stationed aboard the USS Denver and at Camp Pendleton.

Private VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran was diagnosed with colon cancer in December 2018. Following diagnosis, the Veteran underwent a partial colectomy and chemotherapy in 2019. The record also indicates that the Veteran continues to experience some residuals because of the treatment, including occasional constipation and mild abdominal pain. See February 2024 VA examination. Therefore, the first element of service connection has been met.

Regarding in-service incurrence, the record shows that the Veteran has been determined to have participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA). A July 2023 and January 2024 VA Memorandum state the Veteran was exposed to asbestos, lead, vanadium, arsenic, zinc, manganese and other chemicals while stationed on USS Denver and at Camp Pendleton during active duty. Based on this, toxic exposure has been conceded. See July 2023 and January 2024 VA TERA Memoranda. Accordingly, the second element of service connection has also been met.

Therefore, the remaining question is whether there is a connection between the Veteran's colon cancer diagnosis and conceded in-service exposure. The Board finds that service connection for colon cancer, including residuals, is not warranted in this case.

As noted above, the Veteran was diagnosed with colon cancer in 2018. Service treatment records note abdominal complaints, however, the Veteran was found to have appendicitis, followed by an appendectomy in January 1990. There is no evidence of colon cancer in the treatment records until December 2018. Therefore, the evidence weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran's colon cancer first manifested during a period of active-duty service.

A TERA specific opinion was obtained in February 2024. The examiner opined that the colon cancer was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. In support, the examiner explained that medical literature shows the major factors that increase colorectal cancer are age, personal or family history of sporadic cancer, inflammatory bowel disease and history of abdominal irradiation. The consistent risk factors include obesity, diabetes, tobacco use, excess consumption of alcohol, processed meat and lack of physical activity. Other risk factors for colon cancer include race, sex, acromegaly, and a history of renal transplantation. The examiner cited to one study that did show an association between workplace benzene exposure and colorectal ancer, however, the risk was restricted to the ascending and transversal part of the colon. In the Veteran's case, he had sigmoid cancer, which the examiner explained is a different part of the colon. Further, the examiner stated the risk was strongest among women. The examiner concluded that although some small studies have identified a potential association between benzene exposure and colon cancer, a definitive causal link between the chemicals near Camp Pendleton or aboard the USS Denver has not been established per current medical literature. 

The Board notes that VA treatment records show the Veteran is obese in the ongoing problem list and he previously smoked a pack of cigarettes a day for about 10 years and finally quit in 2000.

The Veteran submitted a private evaluation in March 2024. His provider stated he had an intestinal neoplasm in December 2018 and documented his current residuals. The provider did not, however, provide a nexus to service or any in-service toxic exposures. 

After review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's colon cancer was related to service. As noted above, the evidence does not show that the colon cancer first manifested during a period of active-duty service, therefore, presumptive service connection based on chronicity is not warranted. Furthermore, the medical evidence does not show a causal link to in-service toxic exposures. The only medical opinion of record shows it is less likely than not the Veteran's colon cancer is related to in-service toxic exposures. Although the VA examiner stated that there is not a definitive causal link between workplace chemicals and colon cancer, her explanation clearly demonstrated that it is less likely than not related in the Veteran's case. The VA examiner explained that the limited studies that did show any correlation were not relevant in the Veteran's case as his colon cancer was in a different location of the colon than in the studies. Further, she addressed colon cancer risk factors, specific to the Veteran, such as his obesity and smoking history. She also supported her opinion with medical references. As such, the Board finds the VA examiner's opinion is adequate and probative.

Although the Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to describe the symptoms he is experiencing, there is no evidence of record demonstrating that he has the necessary medical expertise to establish medical causation or issue a competent opinion as to medical causation. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377; King v. Shinseki, 700 F.3d 1339, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2012). Thus, the Veteran's lay statements are not competent to establish a medical causation between his colon cancer diagnosis and his in-service toxic exposures. For that reason, the Board must rely on the medical evidence of record. In that regard, the relevant only medical opinion of record is the February 2024 VA examination rendering a negative nexus opinion as to the Veteran's colon cancer. Necessarily, it is the most probative evidence of record with respect to the medical nexus element of this claim.

Accordingly, as the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that service 

connection for colon cancer, to include as due to toxic exposures, is warranted. Therefore, the claim is denied. 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jaigirdar, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.