Citation Nr: A25033393
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-464321
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Navy from February 1991 until February 1995.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the February 2023, VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.

In the August 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Under the AMA a remand is proper only when there is a duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, or if another error fails to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a duty to assist error that occurred when the AOJ failed to obtain adequate medical opinions. Prior to the August 2024, rating decision on appeal, the AOJ obtained medical opinion; however, those examinations are inadequate.

The Board finds that the November 2022, VA Examiner's rationale is vague and conclusory.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion...must supports its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  While the VA Examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not related to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, there was little to no rationale provided and no discussion of any possible aggravation. 

Additionally, the issue of the theory of entitlement tied to obesity was raised by the Veteran in his October 2022, statement in support of his claim.

The Board notes that obesity cannot qualify as an in-service event because it occurs over time and is based on various external and internal factors, as opposed to being a discrete incident or occurrence, or a series of discrete incidents or occurrences. VAOGCPREC 1-2007 (Jan. 6, 2017).

On January 6, 2017, the General Counsel issued a precedential opinion which held that obesity could be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability and thus satisfy the causal link between the two. VAOGCPREC 1-2017.  In such cases where the issue is raised, the adjudicator should resolve three issues: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the veteran to become obese; (2) if so, whether the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the service-connected disability.  VAOGCPREC 1-2017.

The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that proper interpretation of G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017 requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation in its analytical framework: (1) whether the service-connected disability (caused the veteran to become obese/aggravated the veteran's obesity); (2) if so, whether the (obesity/aggravation of obesity) as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for (obesity caused/obesity aggravated) by the service-connected disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.  Walsh v. Wilkie, 18-0495 (February 24, 2020).

Because the AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion regarding obesity as an intermediate step, the medical opinions did not adequately address the issue of obesity, remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and VA medical opinion.

Overall, the Board finds that the medical opinions obtained do not have probative value.

Because there is no positive medical opinion provided, the Board is without sufficient medical evidence and a remand is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should arrange for a VA medical opinion, with examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran only if deemed necessary by a medical professional, to determine the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension. The examiner should review the claim file (including this remand) and note such review was conducted. Based on review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) Is Veteran's hypertension at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to any service-connected disability?  The examiner is advised that a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

(b.) Is the Veteran's hypertension at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated, i.e., worsened beyond its natural progression, by any service-connected disability?  The examiner is advised that a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

(c.) Regarding obesity, the examiner should address the following questions: (1) whether the service-connected disability (caused the veteran to become obese/aggravated the veteran's obesity); (2) if so, whether the (obesity/aggravation of obesity) as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for (obesity caused/obesity aggravated) by the service-connected disability.

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for all opinions, including citations to any medical and/or scientific research that the examiner has relied upon.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, the examiner must note if the inability is due to a lack of personal knowledge (the examiner does not have the knowledge or training); or a lack of knowledge in the medical community (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts); or a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required).

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Liggitt, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.