Citation Nr: A25033139
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-466657
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left lower nerve extremity radiculopathy (lumbar radiculopathy) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Army from October 2003 to October 2006. This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for left lower nerve extremity radiculopathy (lumbar radiculopathy) for further development, this additional evidence and any other evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. §3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for left lower nerve extremity radiculopathy (lumbar radiculopathy) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a lumbar radiculopathy condition that is related to a back injury he sustained during active military service. In the alternative, he contends that he has a lumbar radiculopathy condition that is due to or aggravated by his service connected lumbar spine condition.

The issue of entitlement to service connection is remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

Under the AMA, the Board must remand for correction by the AOJ, pre-decisional duty to assist errors. This includes when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103A (c)(1)(B), 5103A (f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The AOJ obtained a July 2023 medical examination and corresponding opinion prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with lumbosacral strain and lumbar radiculopathy. The Veteran reported symptoms including "low back pain, stabbing pain, intermittently low back will lock up and is stuck in a hunched position," and that he described "incredible pain when my back locks up, I can't stand up straight. That pain takes my breath away." The July 2023 examiner found that the Veteran's descriptions and complaints of symptoms were consistent with lumbar radiculopathy. However, the VA examiner did not order any diagnostic or imaging studies despite finding that the Veteran had symptoms consistent with radiculopathy and there were no diagnostic/imaging studies yet ordered. The examiner's only statement of explanation for not ordering x-rays was "x-rays were not clinically indicated," but there is no explanation for why the x-rays were not clinically indicated. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 07/31/2023 (DBQ).  

The July 2023 VA examiner then opined that the Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy was less likely than not due to his service-connected lumbosacral strain because lumbsacral strain is a muscular condition and radiculopathy is from "nerve root compression caused by a disc herniations or spondylosis, and therefore the two are not "medically related."  The examiner did not render an opinion on aggravation of a non-service connected condition by a service-connected condition. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 08/14/2023 (opinion).

Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that the July 2023 VA examination was incomplete and without adequate explanations because the examiner failed to order diagnostic and/or imaging studies or explain why diagnostic and/or imaging studies were not "clinically indicated," despite expressly noting that the Veteran had not been provided any diagnostic or imaging studies. In addition, the Board finds that the July 2023 VA opinion is inadequate because the opinion did not incorporate evidence or details from the Veteran's file, including relevant VA treatment records, nor explain why the Veteran's described in-service injury is not at least as likely as not related to his current lumbar radiculopathy condition, why diagnostic and/or imaging studies were not necessary, and did not render any opinion on whether the Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy condition is a non-service connected condition and is at least as likely as not aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar back disability. Opinions regarding secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the July 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate because the examination is incomplete, and the opinion is conclusory. On this point, when VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007); see also Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1, 12 (2001) (emphasizing the Board's duty to return an inadequate examination report "if further evidence or clarification of the evidence... is essential for a proper appellate decision."). There is no other relevant examination of record. The AOJ's failure to ensure that the VA examination and opinion were adequate constitutes a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal and remand is warranted.

The Board further finds that the AOJ failed to assist the Veteran in developing evidence for his claim prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal. The Veteran's file includes VA treatment records from February 2008 through June 2015. The Board notes that the VA treatment records that are available reveal an October 2011 rheumatology consultation where the VA physician indicated that the Veteran's back pain is a "sharp shooting pain lasting minutes," and appears to have ordered x-rays "to ensure no spondyloarthropathy." However, there is no indication in the record whether the x-rays were done, what the results of the x-rays revealed, and whether there was any follow-up care for the Veteran's back symptoms. Moreover, there is no evidence that the Veteran stopped receiving treatment from VA health after June 2015, but his file includes no VA treatment records dated after June 2015, and there is no indication in the evidence that the AOJ inquired or attempted to obtain any more recent VA treatment records. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's file includes evidence that the associated VA treatment records are incomplete, and that the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal. 

In addition, in the Veteran's January 2023 lay statement for his lumbar back condition, he expressly refers to an acute in-service injury to his low back and that following the injury, he "continued to receive treatment for my low back issues from civilian doctors." However, the only subsequent development letter in the Veteran's file asked the Veteran to update his electronic payment information and is silent for any invitation to identify or submit private treatment records. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's file includes evidence that prior to the September 2023 rating decision, the Veteran received private treatment for his claimed lumbar radiculopathy condition, and that AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain relevant private treatment records prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal. 

Under the AMA, the AOJ's failure to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103A (c)(1)(B), 5103A (f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). The Board finds that AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain relevant VA treatment records and to invite the Veteran to submit relevant private treatment records prior to adjudicating the claim which constitute duty to assist errors prior to the rating decision on appeal.

Therefore, the Board finds that remand is warranted to correct the aforementioned duty to assist errors prior to the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's VA treatment records for the period from at least as early as October 2011 to the present. If necessary, contact the Veteran and request information to identify and locate the records, approximate time frame covered, and the condition for which treatment was provided. 

2. Invite the Veteran to identify relevant private medical providers and submit relevant private treatment records. He should also be invited to complete a VA form 21-412, Authorization to Disclose Information to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  

3. Following the requested development, schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's claimed lumbar radiculopathy condition. All evidence and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials and then provide responses to the following:

(a.) As to the Veteran's claimed lumbar radiculopathy condition. Does the Veteran have a diagnosable lumbar radiculopathy disability, to include symptoms that cause functional impairment in earning capacity? The examiner should perform all clinically indicated diagnostic and imaging studies. If such diagnostic and imaging studies are not clinically indicated, the examiner should explain why they are not clinically indicated.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

i.	Is the Veteran's claimed lumbar radiculopathy disability at least as likely as not related to active military service, including as due to an acute back injury described in the Veteran's January 2023 lay statement.

ii.	Is the Veteran's claimed lumbar radiculopathy disability at least as likely as not proximately due to his service-connected lumbar back condition?

iii.	Is the Veteran's claimed lumbar radiculopathy disability at least as likely as not aggravated, i.e., made worse, by his service-connected lumbar back condition?

Review of the following is necessary: 

(b.) VBMS document titled, "VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim," receipt date 01/25/2023 (statement regarding "lower extremity nerve condition").

(c.) VBMS document titled, "VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim," receipt date 01/25/2023 (statement regarding "low back").

(d.) VBMS document titled, "CAPRI," receipt date 01/31/2023, page 52 of 96 (Veteran's description of "sharp shooting pain" in back).

(e.) VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 07/31/2023, pages 2 and 5 of 13 (VA examination with diagnosis of lumbar radiculopathy and Veteran's description of back pain). 

(f.) VBMS document titled, "STR-Medical," receipt date 12/14/2006 pages 12 and 18 of 74 (separation report of medical history includes "recurrent back pain or problem").

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms, to include post-service onset of symptoms proximately due to or aggravated by any service-connected disability. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The examiner must include the underlying reasons for the conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webb, Katherine S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.