Citation Nr: A25033366
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-454768
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral spine disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2011 to July 2015.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In July 2024, the Veteran requested direct review of the appeal by the Board on VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).

As the current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket by a Veterans Law Judge, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based upon the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the previous RO decision on the issue on appeal, only evidence of record on the date of the July 2024 rating decision will be considered.  VA will not seek additional evidence on behalf of the Veteran as part of the review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral spine disability.

Although the Board regrets the delay, additional development is needed prior to further disposition on the claim of entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain disability.

VA's statutory duty to assist the Veteran includes the duty to conduct a thorough examination so that the evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991); Snuffer v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 400 (1997).  Assistance by VA includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on a claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  When the medical evidence is inadequate or incomplete, VA must supplement the record by seeking an opinion or ordering another medical examination. Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 213 (1992).

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for a lumbosacral spine disability because the claimed disability is the result of service.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he injured his back while conducting physical training in service.

A July 2024 rating decision found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service and that the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain.  The Board is bound by those favorable findings.

In June 2024, a VA examiner conducted a review of the Veteran's medical records.  The VA examiner stated that the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain in 2014.  The examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's symptoms began during service after prolonged periods of standing, walking, and diving while wearing heavy equipment.  Although the June 2024 did not provide a medical opinion, the examiner stated that the Veteran experienced functional impact as a result of the lumbosacral strain disability.

In August 2021, a VA examiner determined that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by service.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's service entrance and separation examinations contained no complaints of musculoskeletal conditions or issues.  While the VA examiner acknowledged the Veteran's service medical records contained a complaint of lower back pain in January 2014, the examiner stated that the lack of medical records demonstrated that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was not etiologically related to service.

At the January 2011 service entrance examination, the Veteran indicated that he did not experience recurrent back pain or have back problems.  The Veteran reported that he had no recurrent back pain or back problems again in September 2012.  In January 2014, the Veteran sought treatment for lower back pain.  The service treatment records indicated that the Veteran likely strained the lower back during service and the Veteran was told to perform lower back pain exercises and treat pain with medicine and ice.  In March 2014, the Veteran reported chronic lower back pain, but also indicated he had no back pain in the same report.  At the April 2015 service separation examination, the Veteran reported that he did not have recurrent back pain or back problems.

When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The Board finds the August 2021 VA medical opinion to be inadequate because the examiner did not provide an adequate rationale to support the opinion.  A medical opinion must support a conclusion with an analysis the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinion.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).  The examiner offered a conclusory statement and provided no meaningful rationale for the opinion.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's current disability was not caused by service, but did not explain what led to that opinion, cited no supporting evidence, and did not refer to relevant medical literature.  Although the examiner noted that the Veteran reported symptoms in 2014, the examiner did not offer any explanation as to how the Veteran's service did or did not relate to the Veteran's lumbosacral strain. 

Additionally, the VA examiner relied on lack of medical evidence to determine that the Veteran's disability was not related to service.  An opinion that relies only on the absence of symptoms or treatment in service is not adequate.  A lack of medical evidence in service medical records does not preclude service connection.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an absolute bar to the service connection claim).

As the August 2021 opinion did not provide an adequate rationale or consider all the evidence of record, the Board finds it to be incomplete and inadequate.  

Additionally, the Board finds that the June 2024 VA examiner did not provide an etiology opinion, which makes that VA examination incomplete, and thus, inadequate.  Moreover, the dates included in the VA examination are contradictory.  Specifically, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain onset in 2014 but that symptoms started in 2015.

The Board finds that the incomplete examinations constitute a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and an adequate examination and medical opinion are needed.  Remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

Additionally, the record does not show that the AOJ sent a notice to the Veteran that indicated the types of evidence that may be used to substantiate a claim for entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain disability.  The failure to send the Veteran proper notice prior to adjudicating the claim constitutes a predicational duty to assist error.  Those facts were before the AOJ at the time of the rating decision on appeal and must be corrected on remand.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).

Accordingly, remand is appropriate to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors to obtain an adequate etiology opinion regarding diagnosed lumbosacral strain disability and to provide the Veteran with proper notice of the types of evidence that may be used to substantiate a claim for entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain. 

The Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is not a one-way street.  A Veteran is required to cooperate with the examiner's efforts to evaluate the nature and current severity of symptomology.  Wood v. Derwinski,1 Vet. App. 190 (1991).  The Veteran is notified that it is the Veteran's responsibility to report for any scheduled examination and to cooperate in the development of these claims.  The consequences of failure to cooperate with or report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.  The Veteran is notified that failure to cooperate during the requested VA examination may result in an adverse determination.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655; Connolly v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 566 (1991).

The Board notes that on his April 2024 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, the Veteran indicated that he sought treatment in the community of Big Timber, Montana.  However, the Veteran did not provide any records of that treatment, or a release required for VA to obtain medical records from any facility in Big Timber, Montana.  The Veteran is reminded to submit a completed VA Form 21-4124 in order for VA to make attempts to obtain non-VA records.  In the alternative, the Veteran can submit any records himself.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Mail the Veteran and representative the proper notice required that indicates the types of evidence that may be used to substantiate a claim for entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain disability based and allow the appropriate time for a response.

2. Request the Veteran identify the names, addresses, and approximate dates of treatment for all VA and non-VA health care providers who provided treatment for all claimed disabilities, to include any providers in Big Timber, Montana.  After securing the necessary releases, attempt to obtain all copies of pertinent treatment records identified by the Veteran that are not currently of record.

3. Then, schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of any lumbosacral spine disability with an examiner who has not previously provided an opinion in this claim.  The examiner should review the record, to specifically include the service medical records; the lay statements of record; the post-service treatment records; and this Board Remand.  The examiner should examine the Veteran and consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding symptoms during and since service.  A clearly stated rationale should be provided for all opinions.  The examiner should provide the following information:

(a.) Confirm that the examiner has not previously provided an opinion in this claim.

(b.) Diagnose all lumbosacral spine disabilities shown in the record or during the pendency of this claim.

(c.) Determine when the Veteran was diagnosed with a lower back disability.  Specifically consider the diagnosis of scoliosis of the thoracic spine in April 2014 and lumbosacral strain in 2015.  Opine whether it is as likely as not that any current lumbosacral strain is related to complaints of lower back pain during service.  Specifically discuss the severity of lumbosacral strain when diagnosed and the way in which the disability develops.  Based on that timeline of separation from active service in July 2015 and diagnosis as determined above, opine whether it is as likely as not that a lumbosacral strain disability began during service.

(d.) Opine whether it is as likely as not that any lumbosacral spine disability is related to service or any event, injury, or disease in service.  Cite to any evidence that supports the opinion.  If the Veteran's diagnosed lumbosacral strain is attributed to another etiology, the examiner must identify the other etiology and explain why the other etiology is more likely.  The examiner should discuss the complaints and findings during service in making the opinion.

(e.) The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements and all lay statements regarding onset in service and statements regarding the continuity of symptomatology during and since service.  If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason.

(f.) The examiner must consider the Veteran's reported symptoms, specifically lower back pain.  If the Veteran's reported symptoms are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason.  The examiner cannot base the opinion solely on any lack of recorded treatment or complaints in service.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marissa R. Harper

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.