Citation Nr: A25033452
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 230620-359985
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, femoral nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, femoral nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, external cutaneous nerve of the thigh, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, external cutaneous nerve of the thigh, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, ilio-inguinal nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, ilio-inguinal nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, obturator nerve, is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, obturator nerve, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from September 2011 to September 2015. His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and the Sea Service Deployment Ribbon.

This matter arises from a February 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. Following a denial on Higher-Level Review in May 2023, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in June 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claims are readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is remanded.

3. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, femoral nerve, is remanded.

4. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, femoral nerve, is remanded.

5. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, external cutaneous nerve of the thigh, is remanded.

6. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, external cutaneous nerve of the thigh, is remanded.

7. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, ilio-inguinal nerve, is remanded.

8. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, ilio-inguinal nerve, is remanded.

9. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, obturator nerve, is remanded.

10. Entitlement to an effective date prior to September 14, 2022, for the award of service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, obturator nerve, is remanded.

In the February 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for radiculopathy of each of the nerves addressed herein, assigning an effective date of September 14, 2022, for each award. The AOJ based the assignment of the effective date on a finding that September 14, 2022, was the first date on which the evidence showed that lower extremity radiculopathy was diagnosed.

On appeal, the Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted. Specifically, in a February 2023 submission, he contended that he had continuously pursued his claim prior to September 14, 2022, and that while a non-VA physician had given a date of diagnosis of September 14, 2022, "sympathetic development" showed that the non-VA physician stated that the condition was present prior to her examination. The Veteran contends that the effective date of the awards should be November 9, 2020, stating that that was the date of his initial claim which had been continuously pursued. In a June 2023 submission, he contended that even though the non-VA physician listed a specific date of diagnosis, that did not mean that that was the same date on which the disabilities began. 

In general, the effective date of an award of service connection is the day following separation from active service or the date entitlement arose, if the claim is received within one year after separation from service.  Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), an effective date can be preserved if a claim is continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option in response to an AMA decision on a claim, generally within one year from when the decision was issued. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c). If an AMA claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, rather than as of the date the most recent request for review was received. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h). For AOJ decisions rendered on Higher-Level Review, continuous pursuit can be established by filing either a Supplemental Claim or a VA Form 10182. In the case of continuously pursued claims, the effective date will generally be fixed in accordance with the date of receipt of the initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran has continuously pursued his claims for service connection for lower extremity radiculopathies since January 27, 2021. He first filed claims for service connection for lower extremity radiculopathies on that date, which were initially denied in a March 2021 rating decision. In November 2021, within a year of the March 2021 rating decision, he filed a supplemental claim, which was again denied in a February 2022 rating decision. Thereafter, in January 2023, within a year of the February 2022 rating decision, he filed another supplemental claim. The February 2023 rating decision underlying the present appeal was issued in response to the Veteran's January 2023 supplemental claim. In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran has continuously pursued his claims since the submission of his January 27, 2021, application for service connection. The date of claim is therefore January 27, 2021, and that date represents the earliest effective date that is available for the awards. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's contention that he first filed a claim for service connection on November 9, 2020. However, review of the claims file shows that, in point of fact, he filed a claim for service connection for restless leg syndrome (RLS) of the lower extremities on that date. While acknowledging that the signs or symptoms of RLS may be similar to those of radiculopathy in some respects, the Board must conclude that RLS and radiculopathy are separate and distinct disabilities. The AOJ treated them as such, and the Veteran also appealed the denials of service connection for RLS under an entirely separate appeal stream in the AMA.

As noted, the Veteran first filed a claim for service connection for RLS on November 9, 2020, which was initially denied in a March 2021 rating decision. Importantly, the Veteran's claims for service connection for lower extremity radiculopathies were also initially denied in the same March 2021 rating decision. Thereafter, in July 2021, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review as to the AOJ's denials of service connection for lower extremity RLS, but he did not request Higher-Level Review with respect to the AOJ's denial of service connection for lower extremity radiculopathies. In a September 2021 rating decision, the AOJ continued its previous denials of service connection for lower extremity RLS. The Veteran submitted a supplemental claim with respect to lower extremity RLS in November 2021. The AOJ again denied the claims in a March 2022 rating decision. To date, the Veteran has not appealed the March 2022 rating decision with respect to lower extremity RLS, nor has he requested any eligible review option with respect to those claims. In light of the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's November 9, 2020, application for service connection for lower extremity RLS is not in any way tied to the present appeal stream regarding lower extremity radiculopathies. An effective date of November 9, 2020, is therefore not available. 

Turning to the merits of the present appeal, and given the Veteran's continuous pursuit of his claim since January 27, 2021, the Board again notes that the earliest effective date possible as to the awards of service connection for lower extremity radiculopathies is January 27, 2021. The primary question for the Board, then, is whether entitlement arose prior to that date, or subsequent to it but prior to the currently assigned effective date of September 14, 2022, such that an earlier effective date may be granted. In that regard, the Board finds that there is a conflict in the evidence as to when the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathies were first present (i.e., as to when entitlement first arose). 

At the outset, the Board notes that the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran did not have lower extremity radiculopathies prior to the submission of his January 2021 claim for service connection. He underwent a VA examination in connection with a claim for an increased rating for his service-connected lumbosacral strain in September 2020. While he reported that he had some pain that radiated to his legs, straight leg raise (SLR) testing was negative, bilaterally, and the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have radicular pain or any other signs and/or symptoms due to radiculopathy. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his present claims in February 2021. The examiner found that the Veteran did not have a peripheral nerves condition. While acknowledging that the Veteran reported pain and paresthesia in his buttock, thighs, calves, and other areas of the lower extremities, the examiner stated that he had been seen by a medical provider and diagnosed with RLS for those symptoms. He added that a prior sleep study showed limb movement, that the September 2020 VA examination was negative for radiculopathy, and that a March 2020 MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the lumbar spine showed no nerve root compression. The examiner expressly found that the Veteran did not have lumbar radiculopathy and attributed the Veteran's symptoms to RLS. 

The Veteran underwent EMG (electromyography) testing performed by a non-VA provider in May 2021. The provider noted the Veteran's report that he had pain in the lower extremities but stated that it was of unclear etiology. The EMG studies were normal, with no evidence of peroneal neuropathy, generalized peripheral neuropathy, or lumbosacral radiculopathy. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in connection with a claim for service connection for neuritis in July 2021. On examination, SLR testing was again negative, bilaterally, and the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have radicular pain or any other signs and/or symptoms due to radiculopathy. He cited to a December 2015 x-ray and the May 2021 EMG study to support his findings. He noted that the x-ray showed only mild L4-5 disc disease narrowing without spondylitis or arthritis, and that the normal May 2021 EMG essentially ruled out neuritis or lumbosacral radiculopathy. He stated that the Veteran's symptoms did not conform to any known anatomic distribution related to a back condition, and that if anything, they reflected periodic limb movements of sleep recorded on a February 2021 sleep study. 

An August 2021 MRI of the lumbar spine showed mild L4-5 degenerative disc disease (DDD) and facet arthrosis with underlying neural foraminal stenosis, which lead to mild encroachment on the neural foramina. In November 2021, the Veteran submitted a statement from a non-VA provider, M.S., M.D., dated in October 2021. Dr. S. cited to the March 2020 and August 2021 MRIs showing bulging discs, and stated that as to each MRI, the Veteran was diagnosed with radiculopathy. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in connection with a claim for an increased rating for his service-connected lumbosacral strain in December 2021. The examiner noted the Veteran's report that he had radiating pain into his lower extremities, but on examination, SLR testing was again negative, and the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have radicular pain or any other signs and/or symptoms due to radiculopathy. He cited to the August 2021 MRI to support his finding as to radiculopathy. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in connection with his November 2021 supplemental claim for service connection for lower extremity radiculopathy in December 2021. The examiner found that the Veteran had RLS, but nerve testing showed that all nerves of the lower extremities were normal, including all of the nerves for which the Veteran has since been service-connected. 

The Veteran began treatment with a new provider, B.W., M.D. in April 2022. The first treatment record from that provider shows that the Veteran was seen for pain in his legs. On examination, he had decreased range of motion in the lumbar spine and positive facet maneuver bilaterally. An August 2022 record from Dr. W. shows that the Veteran was first diagnosed with radiculopathy by that provider at that time. The claims file also shows that Dr. W.'s records were printed out on September 14, 2022, and that they show a diagnosis of radiculopathy of the lumbar region generally.

The Veteran submitted a statement from Dr. W. in September 2022. Dr. W. stated that the Veteran had been under his care since April 2022 and that his diagnoses were lumbosacral radiculopathy, sciatica, and lumbar strain. 

The Veteran submitted a Peripheral Nerves Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) from a non-VA provider, R.K., F.N.P., in January 2023, which is dated in December 2022. Ms. K. stated that the Veteran had pain in his legs and chronic pain syndrome, identifying the date of diagnoses for those problems as September 14, 2022. She also noted that he had a diagnosis of radiculopathy in the lumbar region with a date of diagnosis of August 31, 2022 (which is the date on which Dr. W.'s records reflect that he first diagnosed the Veteran with lumbar radiculopathy). Ms. K. indicated that the Veteran had lower extremity radiculopathies of each of the nerves for which the Veteran has been subsequently awarded service connection. 

Upon review of the foregoing, and as noted previously, the Board finds that there is a conflict in the evidence as to when the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathies were first present (i.e., when entitlement to service connection arose). It appears clear that he did not have lower extremity radiculopathy at any time prior to May 2021, as EMG testing clearly demonstrated no evidence of lower extremity radiculopathy. The July 2021 VA examiner also found that he did not have radiculopathy at that time, and a peripheral nerves DBQ from December 2021 also showed that all nerve testing was normal. Still further, Dr. W. did not diagnose radiculopathy in his treatment records until August 2022, and Ms. K. also indicated that the Veteran was first diagnosed with radiculopathy in August 2022.

By contrast, the August 2021 MRI shows mild encroachment on the neural foramina, and in his November 2021 statement, Dr. S. noted that radiculopathy was diagnosed per March 2020 and August 2021 MRIs. With respect to Dr. S.'s statement, the Board finds that it is insufficient for an award as to earlier effective dates. His finding that radiculopathy was diagnosed per the March 2020 and August 2021 MRIs appears to be inconsistent with interpretation of the MRI reports. Still further, and importantly, Dr. S.'s finding as to the March 2020 MRI is in direct contradiction to the May 2021 EMG study which demonstrates that the Veteran did not have lower extremity radiculopathy at that time. 

In light of the conflict in the evidence as to when the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathy was first present, the Board finds that the AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to obtain a VA medical opinion to resolve the conflict prior to issuing the February 2023 rating decision. Further development on that basis is required. 

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange to provide the record on appeal to a qualified VA examiner for the purpose of obtaining an opinion as to the earliest date on which the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathies were present.

After reviewing the record, the examiner should identify the date, or approximate date, on which it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathies first arose. 

The Board emphasizes that it is seeking an opinion in this regard because there is a conflict in the evidence as to when the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathies first arose. 

In formulating the requested opinion, the examiner should consider the September 2020, February 2021, July 2021, and December 2021 VA examination reports pertaining to the Veteran's lumbosacral strain, peripheral nerves, and neuritis; the March 2020 and August 2021 MRIs; the May 2021 EMG study; the October 2021 statement from Dr. S.; the treatment records from Dr. W. showing that the Veteran first diagnosed lumbosacral radiculopathy in August 2022, along with his September 2022 statement; and Ms. K.'s December 2022 Peripheral Nerves DBQ. The examiner should also consider and address the Veteran's general contention that the date on which the disabilities were first diagnosed is not necessarily the date on which they first began. 

The need for an in-person examination, or video or telephone interview of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner. 

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Oldroyd, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.