Citation Nr: A25033447
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240913-472878
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a psychiatric disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from December 1985 to November 1995.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran's claim for service connection for depression with irritability and anger has been recharacterized as a psychiatric disability, to include depression with irritability and anger.  See?Clemons v. Shinseki, 23?Vet. App.?1, 5 (2009).

With regard to all of the issues below, the Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements about the onset or continuity of his symptoms are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  Although the Board is requesting medical opinions regarding the lay statements, this is for thoroughness and not based on a finding that they are credible.  

1. Service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

VA must provide an examination with regard to a claim for disability compensation when there is competent evidence of a disability that may be associated with an in-service disease, injury or event, but there is insufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The Veteran's service treatment records note a right ankle sprain after a fall in July 1987.  The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one.  Id. at 83.  This evidence meets that threshold.  Because this error in the duty to assist occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal, a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran a VA examination.  

In addition, in an August 2023 memorandum, VA found that the Veteran's service included a toxic exposure risk activity.  In general, such a finding requires VA to obtain a medical opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the claimed disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1)(B).  However, this requirement does not apply "if the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran submitted evidence."  38 U.S.C. § 1168(b).  In sub-regulatory guidance issued on June 12, 2024 (VBA Letter 20-24-06), the Veterans Benefits Administration determined that an exception to the need to obtain a toxic exposure opinion applied to claims based on physical trauma, including blunt force trauma, penetrating trauma, and trauma due to repetitive use.  Although this guidance is not binding on the Board, the Board finds it persuasive and accepts its determination as appropriate.  The Veteran was treated for right ankle trauma during active duty service.  For this reason, the Board does not find that it is necessary to obtain an opinion regarding a nexus to toxic exposure for this claim.

2. Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

The Veteran's service treatment records also note a right hand injury in March 1987 and a right wrist injury in July 1993.  This evidence meets the low threshold to "indicate" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease.  Id. at 83.  Because this error in the duty to assist occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal, a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran a VA examination.

Because the Veteran was treated for right wrist trauma during active duty service, the Board does not find that it is necessary to obtain an opinion regarding a nexus to toxic exposure for this claim.

3. Service connection for a psychiatric disability is remanded.

The Veteran's service treatment records also note psychiatric hospitalization in January 1988.  This evidence meets the low threshold to "indicate" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease.  Id. at 83.  Because this error in the duty to assist occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal, a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran a VA examination.

In sub-regulatory guidance noted above, the Veterans Benefits Administration also determined that an exception to the need to obtain a toxic exposure opinion applied to claims based on mental disorders.  Although this guidance is not binding on the Board, the Board finds it persuasive and accepts its determination as appropriate.  For this reason, the Board does not find that it is necessary to obtain an opinion regarding a nexus to toxic exposure for this claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an examination by an appropriate clinician for the purpose of determining the etiology of the Veteran's right ankle disability.? The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician for review.? 

The clinician must provide an opinion as to whether any right ankle disability during the period on appeal had its origin in service, is related to the Veteran's active service, or if arthritis had its onset within one year of the Veteran's separation from active duty service.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the Board calls the clinician's attention to July 1987 service treatment records noting a right ankle sprain after a fall.

The rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided.  Note that an absence of records of treatment or a diagnosis in service cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding and that chronicity of care is not a requirement for service connection.  If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the clinician should so state and provide reasoning as to why a conclusion would be so outside the norm that such an opinion is not possible.

2. Arrange for an examination by an appropriate clinician for the purpose of determining the etiology of the Veteran's right wrist disability.? The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician for review.? 

The clinician must provide an opinion as to whether any right wrist disability during the period on appeal had its origin in service, is related to the Veteran's active service, or if arthritis had its onset within one year of the Veteran's separation from active duty service.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the Board calls the clinician's attention to March 1987 service treatment records noting a right hand injury and July 1993 service treatment records noting a right wrist injury after a fall.

The rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided.  Note that an absence of records of treatment or a diagnosis in service cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding and that chronicity of care is not a requirement for service connection.  If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the clinician should so state and provide reasoning as to why a conclusion would be so outside the norm that such an opinion is not possible.

3. Arrange for an examination by an appropriate clinician for the purpose of determining the etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric disability.? The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician for review.? 

The clinician must provide an opinion as to whether any psychiatric disability during the period on appeal had its origin in service or is related to the Veteran's active service.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the Board calls the clinician's attention to January 1988 service treatment records noting psychiatric hospitalization.

The rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided.  Note that an absence of records of treatment or a diagnosis in service cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding and that chronicity of care is not a requirement for service connection.  If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the clinician should so state and provide reasoning as to why a conclusion would be so outside the norm that such an opinion is not possible.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Frank, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.