Citation Nr: A25033186
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240909-472024
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his currently diagnosed OSA is proximately due to his service-connected insomnia. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1981 to December 1984 and June 1991 to October 1991. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in October 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In September 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, based on the evidence the Board may consider, service connection for OSA is awarded herein, which is a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal.

Entitlement to service connection for OSA, claimed as secondary to service-connected insomnia.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran does not contend, and the record does not suggest, that his OSA is directly related to his military service. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (2008). Rather, he contends that such disorder is caused or aggravated by his service-connected insomnia as such caused him to gain weight, which, in turn, led to his OSA. 

In this regard, service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Further, service connection may not be awarded on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

In January 2017, VA's Office of General Counsel issued a precedential opinion finding that obesity may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be connected on a secondary basis. In order to meet these criteria, the veteran must show (1) that his service-connected disability caused or aggravated his obesity; and, if so, (2) whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his claimed condition; and (3) whether the claimed condition would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017; Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).

In the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of OSA as demonstrated by an April 2022 sleep study and May 2023 VA examination, and is service-connected for insomnia. The Board is bound by such favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the remaining inquiry is whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed OSA is caused or aggravated by such service-connected disability, to include via obesity as an intermediate step.

In this regard, in March 2023, C.M.B., a private PA-C, completed a sleep apnea medical assessment and noted a diagnosis of OSA. He opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and obesity was due to and/or related to his service-connected insomnia; it was least as likely as not that his OSA was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from his service-connected insomnia; and it was at least as likely as not that, without the Veteran's weight gain and obesity, his OSA would not have occurred. In support thereof, he noted that the Veteran's reported weight upon military entrance was 145 pounds and his current weight was 215 pounds with a body mass index (BMI) of 33.7, which met the national standard by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for obesity. He explained that such demonstrated the Veteran's overall progressive weight gain and current obesity, which chronologically developed after his mental health stressors related to his service-connected insomnia occurred.

In this regard, C.M.B. noted that the Veteran's service-connected insomnia included commonly known symptomatology, such as intermittent anxiety, depressive mood, and associated sleep disturbance. He also cited to recent studies in the medical literature indicating that depression induced weight gain and obesity, and obesity was associated with mood, anxiety, and somatoform disorders, as well as elevations in psychological distress. C.M.B. also noted that medical studies documented that food intake was altered by endocrine processes, which are related to disturbances in mood, to include feelings of anxiety and/or depressive symptomatology. He explained that the inability to control food intake and engage in consistent exercise may account for repetitive episodes of weight gain, and many who fail to maintain a normal weight may be susceptible to daily, monthly, or seasonal perturbations in mood, which result in an excessive intake of carbohydrate-rich foods and resistance to engaging in physical activity related to fatigue. He also reasoned that the medical literature from both laboratory and epidemiological studies indicated that chronic partial sleep loss, to include insomnia, increase the risk of obesity and weight gain. Specifically, he explained that sleep loss results in metabolic and endocrine alterations related to internal misperception of insufficient energy availability. 

C.M.B. further cited to medical studies that documented the pathophysiology of OSA related to obesity in that obesity has been found to be associated with passive pharyngeal critical closing pressure, and the deposition of fat around the pharyngeal airway was likely to increase the collapsibility of the pharyngeal airway. He noted that the fat deposition around the abdomen led to reductions in functional residual capacity, which would be predicted to reduce lung volume tethering effects on the upper airway. He also noted that there was rapidly accumulating evidence from both laboratory and epidemiological studies to indicate that chronic partial sleep loss may increase the risk of obesity and weight gain. C.M.B. further cited to multiple medical studies that documented that obesity was known to predispose patients to OSA. Thus, he concluded that the Veteran's OSA was at least as likely as not secondary to the weight gain from his service-connected insomnia. 

Conversely, in May 2023, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected insomnia. In support thereof, he noted that the available records revealed no objective evidence of any direct, causal relationship between the noted insomnia and development of the OSA. The examiner also observed that such records revealed the presence of snoring and obesity with a BMI of 34, prompting a sleep study in April 2022 that revealed OSA. He further noted that the Veteran received a CPAP, which he continued to use without complications, but he had persistent daytime hypersomnolence. However, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected insomnia caused him to gain weight, which, in turn, led to his OSA.

Nonetheless, in July 2023, a private opinion was received from Dr. Z.M., who opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current OSA was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected insomnia with subsequent sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity. As rationale, he noted that the medical literature documented that mental health disorders often lead to social isolation, impaired functioning, and weight gain, and depression was a major factor in the development of daytime somnolence, a condition that typically preceded development of OSA. He also noted that recent studies in the medical literature supported that mental health conditions induced weight gain and obesity, even when adjusting for socio-demographic characteristics and psychotropic medications usage. 

Dr. Z.M. further observed that the Veteran's BMI was 29 upon separation from service and that his current BMI was 33.7, which was in the obesity range, and developed after his mental health stressors related to his service-connected insomnia occurred. He also reasoned that the medical literature confirmed a nexus between body weight and weight gain with OSA. In this regard, he cited to medical studies that discussed the pathophysiology of OSA that was intimately linked to obesity. Specifically, he noted that anatomic and functional considerations of the pharyngeal airway, the central nervous system, central obesity, and leptin likely interact in the development of OSA in obese individuals. He also noted that the pathophysiology of OSA was intimately linked with obesity with an estimated 58 percent of the moderate to severe cases attributable to a BMI greater than or equal to 25 kg/m2. Furthermore, Dr. Z.M. explained that weight gain and obesity was the number one risk factor for developing OSA. Thus, he concluded that, per the medical literature, the Veteran's service-connected insomnia promoted sleep disturbance and weight gain that led to his current obesity condition, which then led to his diagnosis of OSA. 

In August 2023, another VA opinion was obtained, at which time such examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected insomnia. In support thereof, he noted that insomnia in service did not include snoring, daytime drowsiness, or apneic episodes; thus, he concluded such was not related to the currently diagnosed OSA. However, such examiner also did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected insomnia caused him to gain weight that, in turn, led to his OSA.

Nonetheless, as C.M.B., Dr. Z.M., and VA examiner are all medical professionals with the appropriate expertise to address the etiology of OSA, considered all relevant facts and applicable medical principles, and provided a rationale for their conclusions, their opinions are entitled to equal probative weight. Thus, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that, based on the opinions of C.M.B. and Dr. Z.M., the Veteran's OSA is proximately due to his service-connected insomnia. Therefore, service connection for such disorder on a secondary basis is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Clark

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.