Citation Nr: A25033110
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-440210
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to asthma, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1973 to December 1976.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision.

In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 and elected direct review.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

A July 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  She noted that the Veteran had submitted an article regarding peristent photosensitivity following occupational exposure to epoxy resin, but it made no mention of sleep apnea.  She also acknowledged that the Veteran submitted a material safety data sheet indicating that, for D.E.R liquid epoxy resins and DEN liquid epoxy novolac resins, inhalation of vapors is not considered to be a problem due to low vapor pressures at room temperature.  The examiner found that the Veteran denied having frequent trouble sleeping in a May 1976 report of medical history and that he was not diagnosed with sleep apnea in 1998.  She stated that there is no medical evidence the Veteran's current sleep apnea was caused by any epoxy exposure.

Similarly, the July 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's asthma was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  She again noted the two articles regarding epoxy resin, which did not mention asthma, and stated that one of them indicated that inhalation of vapors is not considered to be a problem with epoxy resins.  The examiner also found that the Veteran denied having asthma in a May 1976 report of medical history and that, when he was first diagnosed with asthma after service, it was noted that that the disorder was caused by his work environment in a basement at that time.  She further observed that his symptoms had improved significantly in 2009 after the company moved locations.  The examiner concluded that there is no medical evidence the Veteran's current asthma was caused by any epoxy exposure.

Nevertheless, the July 2023 VA examiner did not address a study abstract submitted by the Veteran in February 2023, which discusses a potential relationship between epoxy exposure and delayed asthma.  Nor did she address the "Resin Affairs" document submitted in February 2023, which also discusses the relationship between epoxy inhalation and asthma.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed. See also July 2023 Board remand.

The Board further notes that the issues on appeal are inextricably intertwined. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (noting that two issues are inextricably intertwined when the adjudication of one issue could have significant impact on the other issue); Gurley v. Peake, 528 F.3d 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (remand of inextricably intertwined claims was warranted for reasons of judicial economy even in absence of administrative error).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  The AOJ should obtain a VA medical opinion to determine etiology of the Veteran's asthma.  A physical examination is not needed unless one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has asthma that is causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or epoxy exposure therein. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider a study abstract submitted by the Veteran in February 2023, which discusses a potential relationship between epoxy exposure and delayed asthma, and the "Resin Affairs" document submitted in February 2023, which addresses a potential relationship between epoxy inhalation and asthma.  

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

2.  The AOJ should obtain a VA medical opinion to determine etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea.  A physical examination is not needed unless one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current sleep apnea is causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or epoxy exposure therein.

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is caused by or resulted from asthma.  He or she should address whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would have been less severe but-for his asthma, to include any worsening of functionality.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider the articles submitted by the Veteran regarding the effects of exposure to epoxy resin.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brandon C. Procell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.