Citation Nr: A25033777
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240327-426913
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Prior to April 17, 2023, a higher rating than 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability (lumbosacral strain, degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine) is denied.     

Prior to April 17, 2023, a compensable disability rating for hemorrhoids is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  During the appeal period, the Veteran's lumbar spine disability (lumbosacral strain, degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine) was manifest by low back pain and range of motion not less than 60 degrees of forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine or 120 degrees of combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine or less. 

2. During the appeal period, the Veteran's hemorrhoids were not more than mild or moderate, were not large or thrombotic and irreducible with excessive redundant tissue evidencing frequent recurrences and did not result in persistent bleeding with secondary anemia or fissures.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to April 17, 2023, the criteria are not met for an increased rating of more than 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability (degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine). 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155 , 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1 , 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

2. Prior to April 17, 2023, the criteria are not met for a compensable disability rating for hemorrhoids. 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. §4.114, Diagnostic Code 7336.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from July 1980 until February 1993. See June 2012 Form DD 214; see also June 2012 Form DD 214; See also January 2015 Form DD 214. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), reflecting his wishes to appeal the April 2023 denial to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) via the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. §3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Disability Rating 

Legal Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. §4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. §4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two  disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. §4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. §4.3.

The Board has reviewed all evidence in the claims file, with an emphasis on the evidence relevant to these appeals. Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, every piece of evidence of record. Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The Board will summarize the relevant evidence as appropriate and the analysis will focus on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as to the claims. 

1. Evaluation of a lumbar spine disability, which is currently 10 percent disabling 

Spine Criteria

Disabilities of the spine are rated under either the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula) or the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in a higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined. 38 C.F.R. §4.71a. 

Diagnostic Code 5242 is rated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. 

Under the General Formula, 10 percent evaluation is warranted if forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; if there is muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in an abnormal gait or abnormal spine contour; or if there is vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent evaluation is warranted if forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or if there is muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in abnormal gait or abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

 A 40 percent evaluation is warranted if forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is 30 degrees or less; or if there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. §4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. 

For VA compensation purposes, normal ranges of motion of the thoracolumbar spine are flexion from 0 to 90 degrees, extension from 0 to 30 degrees, lateral flexion from 0 to 30 degrees, and lateral rotation from 0 to 30 degrees.  The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided here are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. 38 C.F.R. §4.71. 

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under the appropriate diagnostic code. Id. at Note 1. 

 Effective February 7, 2021, the spine diagnostic codes were amended. There were no changes to the range of motion measurements and ratings described above.   

Factual Background

In July 2011, the Veteran requested adjudication of his character of discharge. His service from July 1980 to February 1993 was deemed dishonorable for VA purposes, and thus, he was not entitled to benefits. 

The Veteran filed a service connection claim for a lumbar spine disability in June 2012.   

In an August 2016 administrative decision, the Regional Office (RO) determined that the Veteran's service from July 1980 to May 1990 was considered honorable for VA purposes and the Veteran was entitled to receive VA benefits. In a December 2019 administrative decision, the RO confirmed the determination of Veteran's character of discharge as dishonorable from January 1990 to February 1993.

In December 2019, the Veteran underwent a VA examination related to his back (thoracolumbar spine) condition. He was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain as of 1989. The Veteran reported persistent lower back pain. He had been treated for reoccurring back pain and muscle strain while in service in 1989. The examiner noted that the Veteran's range of motion was "all normal" and while pain was noted on examination, it did not result in functional loss. The examiner indicated no radiculopathy. The examiner noted imaging studies of the lumbar spine indicating mild L3-L4 and marked L5-S1 degenerative disc disease but otherwise "negative lumbar spine." The examination was not conducted during a flare-up and the Veteran reported no flare-ups during the examination.  

In May 2020, a VA favorable medical opinion was provided regarding the Veteran's lower back condition.  

In July 2020, the AOJ granted service connection for lumbar strain with an evaluation of 10 percent effective June 28, 2012. 

In July 2021, the Veteran filed a request for higher level review, asserting he was entitled to a higher rating for lumbar strain. 

At a September 2021 Higher Level Review Informal Conference, the Veteran asserted that his prior examination was "rushed" and questioned the "thoroughness." He stated that the examination documented severe arthritis but also indicates "full range of motion with no problems or flare-ups." The Veteran also argues that he has longstanding neurological complaints, as documented in January 2015 treatment records ("complaints of pain and weakness of right arm and left leg for which veteran was referred for additional testing.")

In September 2021. after a higher level review, the AOJ found a duty to assist error and remanded the matter to develop a new examination. Specifically, the AOJ found that the back/thoracolumbar spine examination diagnosed lumbar strain and the medical opinion addresses lumbar strain only. However, arthritis is indicated in imaging studies and degenerative disc disease is indicated in a December 2019 lumbar spine X-ray report. The AOJ requested clarification of a new examination to reconcile whether or not the Veteran's lumbar degenerative disc disease/arthritis is at least as likely as not incurred in, caused by or a continuation of back pain during service or a progression of lumbar spine strain. See September 2021 Higher Level Review Return. 

In October 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for his lumbar spine (back disability). The examiner diagnosed 'degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome.' The Veteran reported that he developed pain in his lumbar spine with no known injury.  He stated that he now had pain "most of the time" but no radiation of pain into his legs. He did however assert that he has difficulty walking and uses a cane since having surgery for an aortic dissection. The examiner noted no reported flare-ups.

Upon physical examination, the Veteran's range of motion revealed forward flexion of 80 degrees, extension to 30 degrees, bilateral flexion to 30 degrees, and bilateral rotation to 30 degrees. This results in a combined range of motion of 230 degrees.

The examiner noted no evidence of pain on range of motion, crepitus or tenderness or pain on palpation.   

The Veteran was able to perform repeated use over a period of time, with no additional loss of function or range of motion noted. The examiner noted that no flare-ups had been reported. The estimated range of motion during repeated use or flare-ups was not determined. 

The examiner noted no localized tenderness, guarding, muscle spasms, muscle atrophy, ankylosis, intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), or other neurologic abnormalities associated with the thoracolumbar spine.

The examiner reported that the Veteran's back pain did not hinder his ability to walk, stand or run for prolonged periods. (Although in the Veteran's medical history, the examiner reported that the Veteran had difficulty walking and walked with a cane due to surgery for a thoracic aortic dissection). The examiner indicated that the Veteran's back condition did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.

In January 2022, the AOJ continued the Veteran's evaluation of 10 percent disabling for degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine (previously rated as lumbar strain). The VA changed the diagnostic code and applied both historical and rating schedule criteria but still arrived at a 10 percent rating.

In January 2023, the Veteran requested a higher level review of the January 2022 rating decision regarding the evaluation of degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine. The Veteran asserted that the VA examination was inadequate because it did not document flare-ups which were confirmed in treatment records. Also, the Veteran asserted that there should be a separate rating assigned for radiculopathy. 

At an April 2023 Higher Level Review Informal Conference, the Veteran asserted that his lumbar spine evaluation was inadequate because it did not fully address the severity of the Veteran's condition to include flare-ups. Also, the evaluation did not include a separate evaluation for the issue of radiculopathy.

In April 2023, the AOJ continued the Veteran's evaluation of lumbar strain at 10 percent disabling. 

In March 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement appealing the April 2023 rating decision continuing the evaluation of lumbar strain at 10 percent. 

Analysis

The Veteran's lumbar spine degenerative disc disease is currently assigned a 10 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242 (degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome). An April 2023 decision on appeal continued the 10 percent rating. The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for this condition, as his symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. Specifically, he asserts that lumbar spine flare-ups were not accounted for in prior evaluations. 

The Board has considered whether a higher rating is warranted under the General Formula. While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay statement that he has back pain "most of the time" and difficulty walking, the evidence does not indicate that his condition more closely approximates a higher rating than 10 percent. His forward flexion is 80 degrees (greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees) and his combined range of motion for the thoracolumbar spine is 230 degrees (greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees). The examiner did not indicate any muscle spasm, guarding or localized tenderness. The Veteran does not have any vertebral body fracture. Moreover, the Veteran's difficulty with walking and use of a cane has been attributed to an aortic dissection he experienced in April 2012, not a lumbar spine condition. See September 2016 SSA records. 

Regarding neurological impairment, the Veteran has already been granted service connection for headaches, radiculopathy (middle and lower radicular group of right upper extremity associated with degenerative arthritis, cervical strain with spinal stenosis), degenerative arthritis (cervical strain with spinal stenosis) and degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine. The Veteran has not been service connected for an aortic dissection, and any lower extremity radiculopathy noted in the medical record has been attributed to the aortic dissection. The lay and medical evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has any other neurological abnormalities associated with his spine disability.  As such, the Board denies a higher rating than 10 percent for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability, prior to April 17, 2023. See 38 C.F.R. 4.71a. 

2. Evaluation of hemorrhoids, which is currently 0 percent disabling

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's hemorrhoids are evaluated under Diagnostic Code 7336 for hemorrhoids. A noncompensable rating is assigned for mild or moderate hemorrhoids. A 10 percent rating is assigned for hemorrhoids that are large or thrombotic, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences. A 20 percent rating is assigned for hemorrhoids with persistent bleeding and with secondary anemia, or with fissures. 

Factual Background and Analysis

In July 1989, the Veteran was treated for a thrombosed hemorrhoid with bloody exudate. The Veteran reported that the symptoms had persisted for three months and he "cannot sit down due to pain." On examination, the clinician found a "1 cm thrombosed hemorrhoid. The Veteran underwent surgical removal of the  hemorrhoid. The clinician recommended treatment with medications including Anusol, Metamucil and Senakot, sitz bath and Tylenol for pain. 

At a July 1989 follow-up appointment, the clinician noted: "S/P excised external thrombosis hemorrhoid." The Veteran stated that he was "a lot better" and reported "slight blood but very tolerable." On examination, the clinician found decreased edema. The clinician recommended the continuation of medications for treatment. 

The Veteran was again seen in July 1989, reporting "blood in stools" from hemorrhoids. He also reported "blood spots on pants." The clinician recommended the continuation of medication for treatment. 

In January 1990, the Veteran was examined for re-enlistment. The examiner noted "h/o hemorrhoids-NCD." 

In June 2012, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for hemorrhoids. 

In December 2019, the Veteran underwent a VA examination related to hemorrhoids. The examiner diagnosed "external hemorrhoid s/p hemorrhoidectomy." The veteran reported a prior history of hemorrhoids that were surgically removed in 1988. The Veteran reported no residuals or ongoing treatment. The Veteran did not have a treatment plan involving continuous medication. No signs or symptoms were noted. There was no examination of the rectal/anal area and the examiner did not provide a reason why none was performed. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's condition did not cause a functional impact. The examiner found that there as "documented evidence that supports a permanent residual or chronic disability shown by service treatment records or demonstrated by evidence of medical records following service. The examiner opined that the hemorrhoid condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by service. See May 2020 Medical Opinion Questionnaire.

In July 2020, an addendum was written to clarify why no rectal/anal examination was performed on Veteran during the December 2019 VA examination. The response provided was: "I cannot give a clarification why [the examiner] did not perform exam on Veteran since he had performed an exam for her other exams."

In July 2020, the AOJ granted service connection for hemorrhoids with a noncompensable rating effective June 28, 2012. 

In July 2021, the Veteran requested a higher level review of the noncompensable rating for hemorrhoids. In a September 2021 Higher Level Review Informal Conference, the Veteran asserted that the VA examination was "rushed" and questioned the thoroughness of the examination. In September 2021, the AOJ found a duty to assist error and remanded the matter to develop a new examination. 

In October 2021, the Veteran underwent another VA examination related to hemorrhoids. The examiner made a diagnosis of "internal or external hemorrhoids." The examiner noted that the patient had developed hemorrhoids in 1984. He had a flare-up of hemorrhoids "about 1-2 times a month" but uses no medications. The examiner described the Veteran's symptoms as "mild or moderate" hemorrhoids that "come and go." The examiner performed an examination of the rectal/anal area and noted "no external hemorrhoids, skin tags only."   

In January 2022, the AOJ continued to assign a noncompensable rating. 

In January 2023, the Veteran requested a Higher Level review of the issue. In an April 2023 Informal Conference, the Veteran asserted that his hemorrhoids caused impairment by preventing him from being able to sit for long periods. See April 2023 Higher Level Review Informal Conference Statement.

In April 2023, the AOJ continued to assign a noncompensable rating. 

In March 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement asserting that he is entitled to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids.

Analysis

The Veteran asserts that he experiences functional impairment from his hemorrhoids which prevent him from sitting for long periods. However, the Veteran's medical records do not show hemorrhoid findings consistent with a compensable rating.

In October 2021, the Veteran was afforded a physical examination to determine the severity of his hemorrhoid condition. The examiner noted "no external hemorrhoids, skin tags only." While the Veteran reported intermittent flare-ups, he was not using any treatments. After examination and review of the claims file, the examiner described the hemorrhoids as "mild or moderate", with no thrombosis, persistent bleeding or excessive redundant tissue.   

The findings of the October 2021 VA examiner are assigned significant probative weight because the examiner completely reviewed the Veteran's claims file, interviewed the Veteran and performed a physical examination. As such, the claims file contains no evidence (including the Veteran's reports of observable symptoms, which the Board finds to be competent and credible) that the Veteran's hemorrhoids resulted in symptoms consistent with a compensable rating. 

Accordingly, the criteria have not been met for a compensable rating for the Veteran's hemorrhoids during the appeal period, and the appeal must be denied. 

 

 

R. Feinberg

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	De Angelis, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.