Citation Nr: A25033683
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-435667
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for bilateral pes planus is denied.

A disability rating of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a chronic respiratory disorder, to include an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The most probative and persuasive evidence reflects that the Veteran's pes planus was not shown in service and that this condition is not otherwise related to his active service.

2. The Veteran's PTSD results in difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting, consistent with a 70 percent disability rating, but does not cause symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are not met to establish service connection for bilateral pes planus. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria are met to establish a disability rating of 70 percent for PTSD. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from March 1985 to January 1993, to include service in Southwest Asia.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in February 2024 and April 2024 and constitute initial decisions; by law, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 and April 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If the evidence was submitted after this time, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Because the Board is remanding the service connection claim for a chronic respiratory disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Legal Criteria

Service connection is warranted for a disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To substantiate a claim of service connection there must be competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a claimed disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present claimed disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases may be presumed to be service connected if manifested as chronic in service or to a compensable degree within a specified period after active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran asserted that his bilateral pes planus was due to his active service, specifically, his bilateral pes planus was due to walking and standing during his active service.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that at his entrance physical, he had a normal examination of his feet with no pes planus noted. On an accompanying medical questionnaire, he specifically denied having any foot trouble. At a March 1988 physical, he again had a normal examination of his feet and denied having any foot trouble. Finally, at his separation physical, he had a normal examination of his feet and continued to deny having any trouble with his feet. His STRs do not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a foot condition during his active service.

The Veteran's post-service medical records show that he was diagnosed with pes planus in May 2001, more than eight years after his separation from active service. 

As such, the Veteran's STRs do not show that he was diagnosed with pes planus during his active service. Furthermore, his post-service medical records show that he was diagnosed with this condition more than eight years after his separation from active service. Finally, there is also no competent medical opinion of record which suggests that the Veteran's pes planus might be related to his active service.

Consideration has been given to the Veteran's assertion that his pes planus was due to his active service. He is clearly competent to report symptoms of this condition. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, while the Veteran may describe symptoms, he lacks the medical training or qualifications either to diagnose pes planus or to relate this condition to his active service. Id. 

While the Board notes that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination in connection with the appealed issue, such action is not warranted in this case. Specifically, STRs do not show any complaints, treatments or diagnosis related to pes planus Further, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran's pes planus may be related to his active service. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

While the Veteran asserted that his pes planus was due to walking and standing during his active service, a mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the claimant's current condition is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010). The Court has held that VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is not credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service. See Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010).

In light of the above, the Board finds that a VA examination and/or opinion is not necessary to decide this claim.

Accordingly, the criteria have not been met to establish service connection for pes planus, and the claim is denied.

Increased Rating

Legal Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as, for example: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas (such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood), due to such symptoms as for example: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent disability rating is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as, for example: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of living; disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, occupation, or own name.

When rating a mental disorder, VA must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency must assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency must consider the extent of social impairment but cannot assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

Furthermore, the specified factors for each incremental rating are examples, rather than requirements, for a particular rating. The Board will not limit its analysis solely to whether the Veteran exhibited the specific symptoms listed in the rating criteria. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Indeed, the symptoms listed under § 4.130 are not intended to serve as an exhaustive list of the symptoms that VA may consider but as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or the effects, that would warrant a particular rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442 (2002). The veteran's actual symptoms, and resulting social and occupational impairment, will be the primary focus when assigning a disability rating for a mental disorder, and the Veteran may qualify for a particular rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Factual Background

The Veteran filed an increased rating claim for his PTSD in February 2024. The April 2024 rating decision continued the assigned 50 percent disability rating. He asserted that he was entitled to a higher disability rating.

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he lived with his wife and their marriage was generally good. He denied having significant work impairment. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's mental health symptoms included: depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbance of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

The Veteran's medical records show that he receives treatment for his PTSD. However, his medical records do not document findings consistent with a 100 percent rating.

Analysis

After a review of the record, the claims file documents that the Veteran's PTSD has resulted in symptoms consistent with a 70 percent rating.

The February 2024 VA examiner indicated findings consistent with 70 percent rating, that is, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting. The VA examiner conducted an examination, reviewed the claims file, and explained the findings. As such, the findings of the February 2024 VA examiner is given great probative weight.

The Veteran's PTSD symptoms have been consistent with a 70 percent rating since February 6, 2024, the date he filed his increased rating claim. However, the record does not show that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in total occupational and social impairment. For example, he continued to live with his wife and denied having any significant work impairment. The claims file does not document gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. As such, a 100 percent rating for his PTSD is not warranted.

Accordingly, the criteria are met for a 70 percent disability rating for PTSD, and the claim is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Regarding the Veteran's service connection claim for a respiratory disorder. He asserted that he had a respiratory disorder due to his active service. He reported that he started to notice the onset of symptoms during his active service.

The Veteran had service in Southwest Asia from August 2, 1990, through July 31, 1991, and VA determined that the Veteran had presumptive toxic exposure.

VA will pay compensation to a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that manifest "during service on active duty in the Armed Forces in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War" or to a degree of 10 percent or more before December 31, 2021. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; see 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a); 82 Fed. Reg. 49121 (Oct. 24, 2017). A qualifying chronic disability is as a chronic disability that results from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases). 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i). 

A "medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness" has been defined as a "diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities." 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii). "Chronic multisymptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered medically unexplained." Id. 

Along with the three examples of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness provided by Section 1117(a)(2)(B), Congress has provided a list of signs or symptoms that may be a manifestation of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that includes: skin symptoms, headaches, muscle pain, joint pain, neurologic symptoms, neuropsychological symptoms, respiratory system symptoms, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal symptoms, cardiovascular symptoms, abnormal weight loss, and menstrual disorders. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that, if a veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a relationship between the disability and the TERA.

The Veteran's STRs show that he was treated for an upper respiratory infection in July 1996. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2023. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran's respiratory symptoms included exertional chest pain and shortness of breath. The examiner found that the Veteran did not have a respiratory disorder. However, the examiner did not discuss the Veteran's symptoms and whether these symptoms were due to an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness. Furthermore, while the examiner considered the Veteran's asbestos exposure, the Veteran's treatment for an upper respiratory infection and his TERA during active service were not considered.

Accordingly, the failure to obtain an adequate VA opinion regarding the cause of any chronic respiratory disorder, to include an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness, is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which requires a remand for corrective action.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for a TERA examination and opinion pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a) to ascertain whether the Veteran's has a chronic respiratory disorder, to include an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness, is directly related to his active service, particularly his presumed toxic exposure:

a. Identify by diagnosis each current respiratory disorder found on examination, if any.

b. Is any chronic respiratory disorder related to his active service, to include as a result of toxic exposure? Why or why not?

The examiner must specifically address: (1) the total potential exposure through the Veteran's active service and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

c. Is current cluster of symptoms the Veteran is experiencing i) an undiagnosed illness; or ii) a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms? Why or why not?

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Berryman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.