Citation Nr: A25033302
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240807-462065
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left eye blindness with scarring is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's left eye blindness with scarring was caused by military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left eye blindness with scarring have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably in the Arkansas Army National Guard from September 1977 to September 1980 with various periods of active duty for training (ADT) and inactive duty for training (IDT). The Veteran has an established active service from January 1978 to May 1978.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a December 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In August 2024, the Veteran timely filed VA form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and selected the Direct Review docket.

In selecting the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service connection for Left Eye Blindness with Scarring

The Board finds that, based on the collective evidence of record, the Veteran's left eye blindness with scarring was not caused by an in-service event, injury, or disease.

The Veteran contends that during basic military training, he sustained an injury to his left eye, corneal scar, after running into a tree limb, resulting in his current left eye blindness with scarring (left eye blindness).

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for direct service connection requires medical or, in some circumstances, lay evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship/nexus between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran currently carries a diagnosis of left eye blindness secondary to corneal pannus and ocular hypertension. See October 2023 C&P Exam. As such, the Veteran has shown that he suffers from a current disability and therefore, the first service connection element has been met.

However, the Veteran has not shown affirmative or competent evidence demonstrating an in-service incurrence attributable to the Veteran's left eye blindness.

Review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are absent reports, complaints, or treatment for an eye injury while the Veteran was in basic training. See June 2023 STR - Medical. Additionally, the Veteran did not seek any post-basic training in-service treatment that may have indicated the development of corneal scarring as contended by the Veteran. See November 2023 STR - Reserve STR.

Review of the Veteran's military personnel records (MPRs) are absent injury reports, complaints, concerns, or deficiencies of the eye during service. Additionally, the records do not show information demonstrating qualifications/fitness for duty concerns associated with medical clearances related to vision/eye injury, referral for a vision evaluation and clearance, or a necessity for vision correction or treatment.

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted an eye conditions disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) from his treating optometrist. See May 2023 VA Examination. The DBQ confirmed the Veteran's current diagnoses of, in relevant part, bilateral ocular hypertension and left eye cortical cataract. The DBQ detailed the current limitations associated with the Veteran's eyes however, an etiological/nexus opinion, to include a specific cause, was not indicated or stated by the provider. Therefore, the DBQ is of no probative value in determining whether the claimed incident and injury occurred.

In October 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) examination to determine the nature and etiology of his left eye blindness. See October 2023 C&P Exam. The Board notes, while a TERA VA examination was requested and performed, information contained in the report also included a direct service connection opinion. During the examination, the Veteran reported (1) the claimed activity resulting in exposure described as training in the woods, (2) the alleged in-service incident/injury, (3) a dermal injury route, (3) the incident/injury as occurring once, (4) a 1989 left eye cataract surgery, (5) multiple left eye retinal detachments in 2005, (6) a 2007 left eye corneal transplant, and (7) beginning in 2014, left eye pain and gradual loss of vision. The examiner opined that the Veteran's current condition was at least as likely as not caused by the Veteran's claimed in-service incident/injury and/or toxic exposure risk activity. The examiner cited medical literature which included VA public health exposure information, cataract development after an eye trauma, traumatic cataract surgery complexities, and normal findings of cataracts in individuals over the age of 60. Specific to the Veteran, the examiner noted that the Veteran's age (29) with which the Veteran received cataract surgery was abnormal. Additionally, the examiner stated that the treatment for traumatic cataracts resulted in the Veteran's blindness. While the examiner has provided competent evidence as to the Veteran's current left eye blindness and functional impact, the opinion is insufficient to demonstrate a finding that that claimed in-service injury occurred. Furthermore, the examiner is competent to provide an opinion as to etiological links between a traumatic eye injury and blindness, however, such opinion is based on an unestablished in-service incurrence. As such, though the examiner's opinion demonstrates that the Veteran likely suffered a traumatic eye injury prior to his 1989 surgery, the specific event with which the injury originated has not been established. Therefore, the Board finds that as to whether the in-service injury in fact occurred, the VA examination is of no probative value.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a lay witness statement from an unnamed/unidentified individual (individual) claiming to have served with the Veteran during basic training in 1978 at Fort Benning, Georgia. See May 2023 Lay Witness Statement. The Board notes that the individual's signature does not assist in deciphering a name. The individual stated that the Veteran "told [him] a tree limb hit him in his eye and everything was blurry." The individual also stated that the Veteran reported that his provider attributed the left eye cataract, detached retina, and left eye blindness to the claimed injury/impact. Generally, lay testimony, when deemed competent, may assist in establishing an element of a claim. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  In order to be competent, the individual must have personal knowledge, derived from their own senses, of what is being attested; "[c]ompetent testimony is thus limited to that which the witness has actually observed, and is within the realm of his personal knowledge." See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 471 (1994). See also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). In this case, while the statement provides information regarding the Veteran's claimed incident, the statement is not based on the individual's observations derived from their senses but rather a reiteration of the Veteran's report to the individual. The statement therefore is not competent to establish that the claimed in-service injury occurred and as such, of no probative value.

The Board considered the Veteran's lay statements as to the claimed injury and etiological opinion related to his current condition. The Veteran asserted that he suffered a cornea scar during basic training after running into a tree limb. See May 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran reported that following the claimed incident, he did not seek medical treatment because an eye injury was not evident to/observable by other third parties. The Veteran also stated that he did not encounter any alternative left eye-related trauma nor health issues associated with the eyes. The Veteran is of the opinion that the claimed incident resulted in a left eye cornea scar causing a left eye cataract followed by subsequent retinal detachments and blindness. See April 2024 VA Form 9. Here, the Veteran's report of the alleged in-service incident/injury is not supported by the collective evidence of record. Specifically, the in-service and post-service records do not demonstrate, suggest nor document any in-service incident/injury that may serve in supporting that the Veteran's reported left eye injury in fact occurred. Accordingly, the Veteran's lay statements do not provide competent evidence to establish that the claimed in-service incident/injury occurred. As such, the Veteran's statements cannot be considered probative to establish an in-service incurrence.

Additionally, though an in-service incurrence must be established before determining whether a nexus may exist, the Board will address the Veteran's aforementioned contention as to his left eye blindness and etiological opinion. The Veteran is competent to report regarding his observable symptoms and his opinion concerning the cause of a condition or disability, however, he does not possess the medical knowledge, training, or expertise to provide a competent opinion as to the etiology of his symptoms. See Jandreau 492 F.3d at 1376-77. Specifically, the Veteran's argument that he incurred a corneal scar after the purported incident/injury is outside the scope of the Veteran's competency as the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran possesses specific medical training to diagnose a condition of the eye. Therefore, the Board finds the Veteran's etiological opinion as not competent or probative.

The Veteran has not submitted any additional competent evidence, such as post-service treatment records related to his eye, including optometry records, the 1989 traumatic cataract surgery, or other evidence that may support that the claimed in-service injury occurred.

After consideration and review of all available records, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of the claimed in-service injury. Specifically, the in-service MPRs and STRs do not show complaints, incident reports, performance concerns related to an eye injury, referral for an eye evaluation, treatment, or diagnosis for the left eye. Next, the unnamed/unknown individual's lay statement is not competent as the information does not provide the individual's observations derived from their senses to confirm the incident in fact occurred. Next, the Veteran's claim as to the alleged incident/injury is not supported by the collective evidence of record. Lastly, the Veteran has not provided any additional competent evidence, such as post-service treatment records, to demonstrate that the in-service incident/injury occurred. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine under 38 U.S.C. § 5107 is not applicable as to this claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

As the evidence does not show an in-service incurrence suggestive of an etiological link in the development of the Veteran's left eye blindness with scarring, and the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's left eye blindness with scarring is related to an in-service incurrence, the criteria for service connection are not met and therefore, service connection for left eye blindness with scarring must be denied.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Klemm-Kafel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.