Citation Nr: A25033418
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240210-415221
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance is denied.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for special aid and attendance is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The service-connected disabilities alone do not make the Veteran unable to independently perform daily functions of self-care or to protect himself from the hazards and dangers incident to his daily environment, or to require the aid and attendance of another person.

2. The Veteran did not meet the threshold criteria for an additional monthly allowance of special monthly compensation at the rate under subsection (r)(1) or (r)(2) of 38 U.S.C. § 1114.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on regular aid and attendance have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

2. The criteria for special monthly compensation based on the need for special aid and attendance as contemplated by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(1) and (r)(2) are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(e), (h), 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2008 to March 2016.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance.

Special monthly compensation (SMC) is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (b).

The need for aid and attendance means being so helpless as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).  The criteria for establishing that need include whether the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance as determined under criteria enumerated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a).  The following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person: (1) inability of the Veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; (3) inability of the Veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; (4) inability to attend to the wants of nature; or (5) physical or mental incapacity which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the Veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the Veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance not that there is a constant need for aid and attendance.  Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996) (at least one factor listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a) must be present to grant special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance).

Bedridden will be a proper basis for the determination of whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  Bedridden will be that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the claimant remain in bed.  The fact that claimant has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

In order for the Veteran to prevail in the claim, the evidence must show that the service-connected disability or disabilities resulted in the need for regular aid and attendance.  Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444 (2000).

Analysis

The Veteran has established service connection for PTSD, rated 100 percent; irritable bowel syndrome, rated 30 percent; cervical strain associated with thoracolumbar scoliosis, rated 20 percent; thoracolumbar scoliosis, rated 10 percent; right wrist tendonitis, rated 10 percent; left wrist tendonitis, rated 10 percent; temporomandibular joint dysfunction, rated 10 percent; left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain, rated 10 percent; right ankle lateral collateral ligament strain, rated 10 percent; carpal tunnel syndrome, right upper extremity, rated 10 percent; carpal tunnel syndrome, left upper extremity, rated 10 percent; left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, rated 10 percent; right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, rated 10 percent, and other noncompensable disabilities. The combined service-connected disability rating is 100 percent, effective November 11, 2020.

The Board finds that a review of the record does not show that the Veteran meets the criteria for aid and attendance. The evidence shows that he is able to maintain minimal personal hygiene. There is no indication of an inability to feed or dress himself, an inability to attend to the wants of nature, or physical or mental incapacity that requires the care or assistance of another on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

A November 2022 Review PTSD medical examination diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD and reported that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  The Veteran reported using cannabis in helping with calming down when his symptoms heighten.  The Veteran met every criterion of the PTSD diagnostic criteria, including exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violation, presence of one or more intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event, persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event, negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event, marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event, duration of the disturbance more than one month, the PTSD symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning, and the disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition.

A January 2022 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance received by VA in January 2023 reported that the Veteran could prepare his own meals, that the Veteran could not prepare his own meals if knee pain or depression limited him, and that the Veteran did not need assistance in bathing or other hygiene needs unless sciatica flared.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did not require nursing home care or medication management, and that the Veteran had the mental capacity to manage his own benefit payments.  The Veteran's appearance was noted as well groomed and well kept.  The examiner stated that there were no restrictions on the Veteran's upper extremity with reference to grip, fine movements, ability to feed himself, to button clothing, shave, and attend to the needs of nature.  The examiner stated that bilateral lower extremity sharp/aching pain could restrict the Veteran's motion.  There were no restrictions of the spine, trunk, and neck. There was no pathology including the loss of bowel or bladder control or the effects of advancing age, such as dizziness, loss of memory or poor balance, that affected the Veteran's ability to perform self-care, ambulate, or travel beyond the premises of the home.  The Veteran was reported to be able to leave the home five to eight hours a day. 

A January 2024 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance reported that the Veteran did not require assistance with hygiene, eating, dressing, ambulating, transferring in or out of bed, or toileting.  The examiner did report that the Veteran required assistance with medication management and received assistance from his mother with laundering, meal preparation, housekeeping, reminders to care for hygiene, and ensuring his safety during exacerbations of PTSD.  The Veteran was reported to not be legally blind, to not require nursing home care, and to have the mental capacity to manage his benefit payments.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was well groomed, had good eye contact, and could leave the house daily but when he has an episode of exacerbation of PTSD he was unable to leave the house at all may stay in about a week.

The Board finds that while the service-connected disabilities impact the Veteran's life significantly, he is not entitled to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person as a result of the service-connected disabilities. The evidence of record does not show that the Veteran is permanently bedridden, that he is unable to dress or undress himself consistently or keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable, that he requires assistance adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances, that he is unable to feed himself, that he is unable to attend to the wants of nature, or that he requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect him from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment as a result of the service-connected connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l).

The record of evidence suggests that the Veteran is able to take care of himself and is not incapable of performing activities of daily living independently due solely to service-connected disabilities.  While the Veteran may need some reminders and some assistance, the record indicates that the Veteran is capable of independently performing all activities of daily living.

The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service to our country.  However, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and entitlement to SMC based on the need for the regular aid and attendance of another person is not warranted.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

2. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for special aid and attendance.

In two separate January 2024 submissions of VA Form 21-4138, the Veteran claimed entitlement to SMC(r).

In addition to regular levels of compensation for aid and attendance as authorized by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r) provides for a higher level of benefit called "special aid and attendance" in certain circumstances.

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(1), a veteran receiving the maximum rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(o) or (p) or at the intermediate rate authorized between the rates authorized under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(n) and 38 U.S.C. § 1114(o) and at the rate authorized under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) who is in need of regular aid and attendance or a higher level of care is entitled to an additional allowance during periods that he or she is not hospitalized at the United States Government's expense.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k), (n), (o), (p), (r); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(h)(1).  After meeting that threshold requirement, 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(1) is warranted when the evidence additionally shows that the veteran is also entitled to aid and attendance on a factual basis.  The regular or higher-level aid and attendance allowance is payable whether or not the need for regular aid and attendance or a higher level of care was a partial basis for entitlement to the maximum rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (o) or (p), or was based on an independent factual determination.

SMC(r)(2) (higher special aid and attendance) applies when, as a result of a service-connected disability, a veteran otherwise entitled to SMC at the (l) rate needs in-home personal health-care services provided by either 1) a person who is licensed to provide such services, or 2) a person who provides such services under the regular supervision of a licensed health-care professional. SMC (t) only applies where there is a traumatic brain injury (TBI).

To be awarded SMC(r)(1), under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, the Veteran must be entitled to SMC at the rate authorized under subsection (o), the maximum rate authorized under subsection (p), or at the intermediate rate authorized between the rates authorized under subsections (n) and (o) and at the rate authorized under subsection (k).  The Veteran must also be in need of regular aid and attendance. See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r).

For SMC(r)(2), once the aforementioned threshold is met, the Veteran must show that, in addition to the need for regular aid and attendance, he is in need a higher level of care as specified.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(2).

Analysis

As an initial matter, in order for the Veteran to be awarded SMC at a higher rate pursuant to subsection (r), he must be entitled to SMC at the rate authorized under subsection (o), the maximum rate authorized under subsection (p), or at the intermediate rate authorized between the rates authorized under subsections (n) and (o) and at the rate authorized under subsection (k).  38 U.S.C. § 1114(r).

The Board finds that the Veteran is not currently entitled to SMC(o), or the intermediate rate between (n) and (o) plus (k).  Therefore, the Veteran does not meet the threshold criteria for either branch of SMC(r).

Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for SMC(r) must be denied because the Veteran does not meet the threshold criteria.

The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service to our country.  However, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and entitlement to SMC based on the need for the special aid and attendance of another person is not warranted.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gernand, Timothy A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.