Citation Nr: A25033033
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240603-445030
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for rhinitis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's GERD is not related to his military service, to include his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or his toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1987 to November 1991.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

As such, with respect to the rhinitis and GERD issues, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 7, 2023, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Similarly, with respect to the IBS issue, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 7, 2023, AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review (HLR).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Finally, with respect to the sinusitis issue, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 30, 2023, AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for service connection for GERD, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for IBS and sinusitis and the claim for an initial compensable rating for rhinitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In this case, while a year has not passed since the April 2024 HLR rating decision continuing to deny service connection for IBS and sinusitis, as the Board is remanding these claims it finds that waiting a few days to allow for a potential request to switch dockets serves no useful purpose but to further delay adjudication of the Veteran's claims.  Stated differently, proceeding with a remand to cure pre-decisional errors constitutes harmless error.

The Board acknowledges that the VA examiners submitted materials that contained a hyperlink to content that is not otherwise part of the record on appeal.  While the Board could review evidence submitted via hyperlink, because hyperlinked information may not be static, the Board would be unable to determine whether what the Board saw when it accessed the hyperlinked information was what the what the examiner intended to rely on.  As the Board cannot create evidence, what was found at the hyperlinked address would not be part of the record.  In turn, the Court would be unable to perform meaningful appellate review of evidence that is not in the record.  Given the foregoing, the Board advises that hyperlinked references were not reviewed.

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed GERD is related to his environmental exposures during his military service.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for direct service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Regulations provide that compensation may be paid to any Persian Gulf War veteran "suffering from a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness (or combination of undiagnosed illnesses)."  38 U.S.C. § 1117.  These may include, but are not limited to, muscle pain, joint pain, neurologic signs or symptoms, and symptoms involving the respiratory system.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (b).  Objective indications of a chronic disability include both "signs," in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(3).

A qualifying chronic disability means a chronic disability resulting from any of the following, individually or in combination: (A) an undiagnosed illness; (B) the following medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illnesses that are defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome; (2) fibromyalgia; (3) IBS; or (4) any other illness that the Secretary determines meets the criteria in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section for a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness; or (C) any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (d) warrants a presumption of service-connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(i).

As GERD is a diagnosed disorder it cannot be considered undiagnosed illnesses. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1)(ii).  Such is also not considered to be medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illnesses.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(i)(B)(3); see Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 83 (2018).  Thus, presumptive service connection under § 3.317 is not warranted.

Importantly, as the Veteran has been diagnosed GERD, service connection may be granted on a direct basis.  Nevertheless, the evidence is persuasively against finding that a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's GERD and his service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

The Veteran was not treated for any GERD symptoms during his military service and was found to be non-symptomatic as to any disorders upon physical examination and his own reports at separation in October 1991.  Indeed, his "in service element" for this issue is the acknowledged TERAs during his military service.

In this regard, after reviewing the relevant medical records, the service department records, interviewing the Veteran, and reviewing his lay statements, an October 2023 VA examiner found that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's GERD was related to the TERAs during his military service.  Initially, the clinician noted review of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity worksheets, but did note that a TERA memorandum was not located in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs), which is not expected.  The examiner further reported reviewing medical risk factors and that in the Veteran's case, his outside risk factor of obesity far outweighed the risk of the acknowledged TERA in regard to causative factors of his GERD. 

Significantly, there is no medical opinion of record that contradicts the October 2023 examiner's opinion.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertion that his GERD is related to his military service.  The Board finds, however, that he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case as the cause of gastrointestinal disorders is a matter not capable of lay observation and requires medical expertise to determine.  Indeed, the question of causation involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  Opinions regarding the diagnosis and etiology of gastrointestinal disorders are complex and generally beyond the competency of a lay witness.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the opinion of the October 2023 examiner who has greater medical training than the Veteran and exercised medical expertise in rendering his opinion, which he supported with a reasoned rationale.

In sum, as GERD is not an undiagnosed illnesses or MUCMI, service connection under the presumptive provisions of 38 C.F.R. §3.317 are not for application. Further, service connection for pursuant to direct service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 is not warranted as there is no evidence the Veteran's disorder is directly related to service, to include TERAs.  Accordingly, the claim is denied. In reaching the above conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, however, as the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. 

§ 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran's remaining claims must be remanded to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

2. Entitlement to service connection for IBS.

While an October 2023 VA examination failed to reveal a diagnosis of IBS, the RO failed to obtain an opinion as to whether the Veteran's reported symptoms of intermittent constipation and diarrhea could represent an undiagnosed illness or a MUCMI related to service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Thus, remand is warranted to obtain such an opinion.

3. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.

4. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for rhinitis.

An October 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with non-chronic sinusitis and based a concurrent nexus opinion entirely on the fact that the Veteran's currently diagnosed sinusitis was not presumptively related to service.  The examiner did not discuss whether the Veteran's diagnosis was directly related to service, or whether such was caused or aggravated by his service-connected rhinitis.  Remand is required to obtain these opinions.

Regarding the claim for an initial compensable rating for rhinitis, the Veteran's representative argued in an August 2024 submission that the October 2023 examination report is inadequate as the clinician did not complete a section regarding symptoms of a deviated septum.  Specifically, a December 1988 STR indicated the Veteran may have suffered a traumatic deviated septum during service.  While neither the Veteran nor his representative have argued that the Veteran's rhinitis in any way caused his deviated septum, the Board agrees that the non-completion of this section of the report raises a question as to the thoroughness of the examination.  Thus, remand is required for another examination to determine the severity of the Veteran's rhinitis.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his IBS symptoms. 

The examiner should address the following:

(a.) Identify any symptoms that the Veteran relates to IBS, to include intermittent diarrhea and constipation.

(b.) Determine whether such symptomatology can be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.

(c.) The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether there are any intestinal symptoms that are not attributable to a known clinical diagnosis.  If so, the examiner must then provide an opinion as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the symptoms are due to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness due to service in the Persian Gulf.

All opinions must be supported by conclusions and a medically supported rationale.  

The examiner is asked not to provide any hyperlinks as part of the rendered opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to address the issue of entitlement to service connection for sinusitis and the current rhinitis symptoms.  The examiner should complete the entire disability benefits questionnaire.  The examiner should then respond to the following:

(a.) State the Veteran's current diagnosis referable to sinusitis and document all symptoms of his rhinitis.  Again, the clinician should complete the entire disability benefits questionnaire.

(b.) Is it approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sinusitis is directly related to his military service to include his TERAs?

(c.) Is it approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sinusitis was caused by his service-connected rhinitis?  

(d.) Is it approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sinusitis was aggravated by his service-connected rhinitis? 

All opinions must be supported by conclusions and a medically supported rationale.  

The examiner is asked not to provide any hyperlinks as part of the rendered opinion.

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Sosna, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.