Citation Nr: A25033359
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 190819-29218
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1971 to August 1975 and from August 1980 to September 1992 with additional service in the United States Air Force Reserve.

A rating decision was issued under the legacy system on November 2, 2018, and the Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement. On July 2, 2019, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a statement of the case (SOC). The Veteran opted the claim into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), by submitting an August 19, 2019, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, identifying the July 2019 SOC.  Therefore, the July 2019 SOC is the decision on appeal.  

In the August 19, 2019, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on February 13, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2019 SOC, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or Veteran's representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. §?20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the July 2019 SOC and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability to include PTSD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability to include PTSD.

The Veteran contends that he has PTSD which was caused by driving under heavy gun fire and transporting deceased military personnel during a three-week deployment to Tan Son Nhut, Vietnam from a temporary duty location in Guam in 1973. See VA 21-526EZ (November 2018); Hearing Transcript (February 2024). He reports that his psychiatric symptoms include nightmares and violent reactions during restless sleep and upon awakening. See VA 21-0781 (November 2018).

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability to include PTSD is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2019 decision on appeal.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that medical records show various acquired psychiatric assessments. Given this, the Board has recharacterized the claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD more broadly as service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder to include PTSD. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (holding that when a claimant makes a claim, he/she is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled). See also, Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2009) (generally, the scope of a disability claim includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by a veteran's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other evidence of record).

First, VA's duty to assist includes obtaining records in the custody of a federal department or agency; VA may end its efforts to obtain records if VA concludes that the records sought do not exist or that further efforts to obtain these records would be futile. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c)(1)(C); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  

Here, several entries in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) refer to his records being received and reviewed at a variety of Army Post Offices (APOs); those addresses are typically used for overseas mail delivery. See generally STR - Medical (February 2015) Indeed, one such entry, dated October 1973, corresponds with the timeframe during which the Veteran contends he was called to temporary duty (TDY) in Guam and then deployed to Vietnam from that TDY location. See id. Additionally, a performance report, dated August 1982, specifically refers to the Veteran's overseas service in the Philippines. Military Personnel Record (MPR) (April 2024). However, no military orders or specific records regarding overseas service for the Veteran have been associated with the claims file. In fact, a close review of the claims file reveals that requests for information regarding the Veteran's service were limited to verification of service dates and STRs; it does not appear that all service personnel records - beyond service dates and medical records - have been requested. See VA 21-3101 (December 1992). 

Further, correspondence from the Veteran to his representative at the time reflects that the Veteran was receiving Social Security Administration (SSA) disability. See Correspondence (June 2003) (November 2002). See also Third Party Correspondence (June 2003). VA has a duty to obtain SSA records when it has actual notice that a veteran has applied for SSA benefits. See Murincsak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 363 (1992); see also Golz v. Shinseki, 590 F.3d 1317, 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (VA's duty to assist includes obtaining relevant SSA records). However, no current records from the SSA have been associated with the record prior to the July 2019 decision on appeal. In light of this, the record appears to be incomplete, and such evidence may support the Veteran's claim. As such, remand is necessary to obtain any of the Veteran's relevant federal records including SSA records and service personnel records.

Second, VA's duty to assist claimants in the development of their claims includes obtaining an examination and/or opinion when necessary to decide the claim.       38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Here, VA treatment records (VATRs) reflect diagnoses of at least the following since his separation from service: adjustment disorder with depressed mood; unspecified depressive disorder; unspecified anxiety disorder; recurrent major depression; and histories of both combat and operational stress and alcohol abuse. CAPRI (March 2015) (August 2018). Service treatment records reflect that the Veteran's psychiatric was normal on entry (1970, 1980) and separation (1975) from service. See STR - Medical (February 2015). However, in 1972, the Veteran was referred to medical services on account of behavior changes in service. At that time, the Veteran reported that "before he came into service he used to be easy going and never get upset, but since he has been in the service he gets up tight very easily and has great mood swings from happiness to wanting to hurt people," that he "kicks the door of the guard gate house," or "takes his car out and speeds it up and down the highway," and that he preferred "a room by himself because he doesn't like crowds and always tries to avoid crowds." STR - Medical (February 2015). While the Veteran was cleared to return to work after that referral, later in his career, STR's dated January 1981, reflect that the Veteran self-referred for alcohol abuse treatment. STR - Medical (February 2015). The Veteran's medical records reveal a history of alcohol abuse and several marriages than ended in divorce after separating from service. See e.g., CAPRI at 4 (August 2018). See also Hearing Transcript (February 2024). Thus, prior to issuing the decision on appeal, the AOJ had a duty to obtain a medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disorder that had its onset in service-stated differently, a current mental disorder that was first manifested in service as evidenced by the foregoing behaviors. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006).

Further, prior to the decision on appeal, the records reasonably raised entitlement to service connection for a mental disorder as secondary to service connected disability. Generally, VA must investigate theories of service connection that are reasonably raised by the record or raised by a sympathetic reading of the claimant's filing. DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 53 (2011). Here, the record reasonably raises the theory that the Veteran's psychiatric disabilities are secondary to pain associated with his service-connected back and neck disabilities. For instance, a VATR, dated September 2018, discusses, in the context of the Veteran's pain condition due to his spine and resulting radiculopathy, recommending psychological counseling "to address the "comorbid psychological affects of pain." CAPRI (October 2018). Further, the Veteran was referred for mental health treatment in April 2013 due to the Veteran's report of possible PTSD symptoms after he discussed psychiatric symptoms including tearfulness and nightmares which began or worsened when "all of his medical issues started." CAPRI (August 2018). Furthermore, the Veteran has reported inability to concentrate and memory loss in the context of treatment for his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities. See Correspondence (November 2002); Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility (October 2008). Thus, the Board finds the AOJ had a duty to obtain a medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is secondary to his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities prior to the rating decision on appeal. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83-86 (2006). See also DeLisio, 25 Vet. App. at 53 (2011).

Finally, prior to the decision on appeal, the Veteran identified specific in-service stressor events that were not verified by the AOJ. Specifically, the Veteran reported an in-service stressor described as driving under heavy gun fire and transporting deceased military personnel during a three-week deployment to Tan Son Nhut, Vietnam from a temporary duty location in Guam in 1973. See VA 21-526EZ (November 2018). The record does not show that this stressor event has been conceded or that the AOJ attempted to verify the occurrence.

Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the duty to assist errors on the part of the originating agency in satisfying its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, which occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

It is noted that the Board has not found that AOJ had a duty to obtain a PTSD examination and opinion prior to issuing the decision on appeal. This is because there was not a verified stressor event prior to the rating decision on appeal, which would have then triggered VA's duty to obtain an examination and opinion addressing the Veteran's contention that he has PTSD due to in-service stressors. 

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions. Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain the Veteran's complete service personnel records. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file. 

2. Obtain the Veteran's federal records from the Social Security Administration. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

3. Attempt to corroborate the Veteran's alleged in-service stressors including transport of deceased military personnel and driving under heavy gun fire in Vietnam in 1973. If more details are needed, contact the Veteran to request the information.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a psychiatric examination to address his diagnosed mental disorders.  The entire claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  The phrase "at least as likely as not" means the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal.

The clinician should address:

(a.) Whether the Veteran has a diagnosed mental disorder that, at least as likely as not, had its onset in service-or was initially manifested in service by behavior changes 

Consider STRs showing his (1) becoming "up tight very easily," (2) having "great mood swings from happiness to wanting to hurt people," (3) kicking "the door of the guard gate house," (4) taking "his car out" and speeding "it up and down the highway," (5) that he preferred "a room by himself because he" didn't "like crowds and always" tried "to avoid crowds," and (6) abusing alcohol. 

(b.) Whether the Veteran has a diagnosed mental disorder that is at least as likely as not (1) caused by or the result of pain associated with his service-connected back, neck, and/or radiculopathy  disabilities; or (2) aggravated by his service-connected back, neck, and or radiculopathy disabilities. Explain.

Consider that the Veteran was referred for mental health treatment in April 2013 due to the Veteran's report of possible mental health symptoms after he discussed psychiatric symptoms including tearfulness and nightmares which began or worsened when "all of his medical issues started." CAPRI (August 2018); the Veteran's report of inability to concentrate and memory loss in the context of treatment for his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities. See Correspondence (November 2002); Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility (October 2008).

 

 

 

C.A. SKOW

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Duncan-Gould, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.