Citation Nr: A25033146
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240222-421309
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lower back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service with the United States Air Force from August 1986 to May 1989.

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an October 2022 decision. In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior October 2022 decision.  

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims above, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids

See section 3. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability

See section 3. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for lower back disability

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is necessary to fulfill a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.

The VA has a duty to assist Veterans in obtaining records. In particular, the VA will make as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records from a federal department or agency. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). The VA also has the duty to notify the Veteran if they are reasonably certain that records do not exist or further attempts to find them would be futile. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e)(1).  

The Veteran reported that he had additional treatment in service, including treatment during his time in basic training. In particular, the Veteran reported that he had treatment for blood in his rectum and that he was seen by more than one doctor. See VA 21-526EZ received May 2022. While some service treatment records were obtained, the records appeared limited.  

 

As there may be outstanding, relevant federal records, a remand is required to allow the VA to obtain these records or to determine if they are unavailable and properly notify the Veteran. 

The Board also finds that the Veteran should have received VA examinations with opinions prior to the decision on appeal. 

The VA must provide an examination when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i) (2018).

Here, the Veteran reported that he had hemorrhoids during service, and that they continued until today. See VA21-526EZ received May 2022. His current treatment records show he has been diagnosed and treated for hemorrhoids. He also reported he injured his shoulder playing basketball, lifting weights, and wrestling other airmen on base. See VA 21-526EZ received October 2022. He has imaging of his left shoulder showing arthritis and other abnormalities. See Medical Treatment Record- Non-Government Facility received October 2022. Also, service records show he complained of shoulder pain. See STR-Medical received August 2014. As for his low back, the Veteran reported the condition was caused by injuries in service. He stated that he fell running away from an explosion and injured his back. He also stated that he was involved in a car accident and injured his back and neck around November 1986. See VA 21-526EZ received May 2022. His private treatment records show arthritis in his lumbar spine as well as a diagnosis of lumbar spinal stenosis. See Medical Treatment Record- Non-Government Facility received October 2022  

Considering the totality of the evidence, the record contains insufficient competent medical evidence, to decide the claims. The last requirements of the McLendon analysis are satisfied and the VA must provide competent medical opinions as to the left shoulder, back, and hemorrhoids claims.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take all appropriate actions to attempt to obtain potentially missing service treatment records. Please note that the Veteran reported seeing two doctors during basic training about hemorrhoids. 

All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file.  The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e). 

2. After obtaining any missing records, the AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination by a medical expert with the right ability and experience to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's low back disability. All relevant evidence of record should be reviewed by the examiner before providing an opinion. The examiner should take a full history from the Veteran and make note of the history in his or her report. The examiner should also perform all indicated tests and studies and should completely document the examination including all the diagnoses noted during the examination in his or her report. Please note that the record includes some private treatment records. Then the examiner should provide his or her opinion as to:

(a.) Is it at least approximately as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the back disability including arthritis had its onset during active service or within one year of separation from service, or, otherwise resulted from active military service?  

In so opining, the examiner must consider and discuss that the Veteran reported he fell running away from an explosion and injured his back during service. He also reported he was involved in a car accident and injured his back and neck around November 1986. See VA 21-526EZ received May 2022.

(b.) A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

3. After obtaining any missing records, the AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination by a medical expert with the right ability and experience to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left shoulder disability. All relevant evidence of record should be reviewed by the examiner before providing an opinion. The examiner should take a full history from the Veteran and make note of the history in his or her report. The examiner should also perform all indicated tests and studies and should completely document the examination including all the diagnoses noted during the examination in his or her report. Please note that the record includes some private treatment records. Then the examiner should provide his or her opinion as to:

(a.) Is it at least approximately as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the left shoulder disability including arthritis had its onset during active service or within one year of separation from service, or, otherwise resulted from active military service?  

(b.) In so opining, the examiner must consider and discuss that the Veteran reported he injured his shoulder playing basketball, lifting weights, and wrestling other airmen on base. See VA 21-526EZ received October 2022

(c.) A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered. If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

4. After obtaining any missing records, the AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination by a medical expert with the right ability and experience to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hemorrhoids condition. All relevant evidence of record should be reviewed by the examiner before providing an opinion. The examiner should take a full history from the Veteran and make note of the history in his or her report. The examiner should also perform all indicated tests and studies and should completely document the examination including all the diagnoses noted during the examination in his or her report. Please note that the record includes some private treatment records. Then the examiner should provide his or her opinion as to:

(a.) Is it at least approximately as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the hemorrhoids condition had its onset during active service or otherwise resulted from active military service?  

(b.) In so opining, the examiner must consider and discuss that the Veteran reported he had hemorrhoids during basic training, he was seen by a doctor, and that he was sent to another doctor. He also reported that the condition continued to persist until today. See VA 21-526EZ received May 2022.

(c.) A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Parnell, C. E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.