Citation Nr: A25033094
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241223-498450
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need of regular aid and attendance is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, including as secondary to hypertension, a lumbar spine disability, or major depressive disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the loss of use of a creative organ is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities at least as likely as not result in his needing the regular aid and attendance of another person.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to SMC based on the need of regular aid and attendance have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1971 to October 1991.

In July 2024 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of December 2023 and June 2024 rating decisions.  The supplemental claim identified the issues for review as entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ and SMC based on the need for aid and attendance.  The December 2023 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for hypertension and applied a noncompensable initial rating.  The June 2024 rating decision granted an effective date of September 20, 2011 for service connection for hypertension.  

In October 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal.  The October 2024 rating decision denied an initial compensable rating for hypertension.  Within the body of the October 2024 rating decision, the AOJ discussed and denied entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ and entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance.  Entitlement to SMC can be inferred from a claim seeking an increased rating.  See Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991) (Veterans may claim SMC or entitlement may be raised by the record).  The October 2024 rating decision addressed each claim on the merits indicating a favorable finding that that new and relevant evidence had been received to warrant readjudication of each issue.  The AOJ's favorable findings are binding on the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

In March 2024, the Veteran's representative submitted an additional document which included legal arguments as to the claims.  This document included a waiver of the Veteran's right to submit additional evidence and a waiver of his right to select a different Board review docket (Direct or Hearing) under the provisions of 38 C.F.R.§ 20.202(c)(2).

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for SMC based on the need for aid and attendance considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension, entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, and entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The issue of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, including as secondary to hypertension, a lumbar spine disability, or major depressive disorder, is added to the claim and addressed in detail below.  See Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203 (2021).

1. Entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance 

A veteran may be entitled to additional SMC benefits where there is an established need for regular aid and attendance.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b)(3).  Requiring aid and attendance means that a person is helpless or so nearly helpless as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person.

A veteran will be considered to be in need of regular aid and attendance if by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities he or she (1) is blind or so nearly blind as to have corrected visual acuity of 5/200 or less in both eyes, or concentric contraction of the visual field to 5 degrees or less; (2) is a patient in a nursing home because of mental or physical incapacity; or (3) establishes a factual need for aid and attendance under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

The criteria to be considered in establishing a factual need for aid and attendance include: the inability of a claimant to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); inability of claimant to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  Moreover, it is only necessary that the evidence establish that the claimant is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need.  Determinations that a claimant is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance will not be based solely upon an opinion that the claimant's condition is such as would require him or her to be in bed. They must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others.  Id.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Here, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-2680 (Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance) in July 2024.  The form was completed by P. N., a nurse practitioner.  P. N. noted the Veteran's service connected low back disability limited his forward flexion.  As a result he needed assistance when putting on shoes, socks, and pants.  She also noted his service connected depression affected his concentration and memory.  As a result, he required assistance taking daily medications.  In July 2013, the Veteran's wife submitted a statement asserting the Veteran would not take his depression medication without her assistance.  She also stated the Veteran would go for days without showering without her prompting him to take a shower and would spend all day wearing pajamas if she did not set out clothes for him.  In November 2015, a VA back examination documented the Veteran's report that he sometimes needed his wife's assistance to dress (shoes and socks) because his ability to bend forward was limited by back pain.  In November 2015, a VA mental disorders examiner found the Veteran's major depressive disorder did not cause significant impairment of self-care.  In a May 2016 statement, the Veteran's wife recounted the Veteran would not dress, shower, or take medications without daily prompting from her to do so.  When the Veteran's back condition flared up, he needed her assistance to get out of bed, use the bathroom, and get dressed.  In a July 2024 statement, the Veteran's wife asserted the Veteran required her daily assistance with dressing and getting out of bed.  During major flare ups of his back condition, he required assistance using the toilet.  Due to problems with memory and motivation, the Veteran needed help taking his medications.  

The July 2024 VA Form 21-2680 is the only expert evidence that explicitly addresses the criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  As a layperson, the Veteran's wife is competent to describe the assistance she provides to the Veteran.  The Board finds her statements are credible as they are consistent over the appeal period and consistent with the medical evidence.  The Board finds his service-connected lumbar spine and depression disabilities at least as likely as not result in him being in need of regular aid and attendance of another person to dress, shower, and take medications.  When reasonable doubt is resolved in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for entitlement to SMC based on the need of regular aid and attendance have been met, resulting in a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.  The AOJ will assign the effective date in the first instance to ensure the Veteran is afforded due process.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is remanded.  

Under the AMA, the Board must remand any appeal that cannot be granted in full for correction of a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  VA's duty to assist includes assisting the claimant in the procurement of evidence to substantiate all substantially complete claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  As to records from a federal department or agency, VA will make as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records, including those from VA medical facilities, and will end its efforts to obtain these records only if VA concludes that the records sought do not exist or that further efforts to obtain those records would be futile.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension.  Records of his blood pressure readings over the appeal period (from September 2011) and prior to the appeal period are relevant to determining the appropriate rating under the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.  They are particularly relevant to determining whether the Veteran had "a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more."  Id.  Medical records associated with the claims file show the Veteran received medical treatment, which included blood pressure readings, at Department of Defense (DoD) medical facilities after he retired from active service in October 1991.  However, the post-service DoD medical records currently associated with the claims file appear to be incomplete.  There is no indication the AOJ requested DoD medical records prior to the October 2024 rating decision now on appeal.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The claim must be remanded to correct this error.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c)(2), 20.802(a).  

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, including as secondary to hypertension, a lumbar spine disability, or major depressive disorder, is remanded.

In Bailey, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2), it is not necessary for a claimant to file a formal secondary service connection claim for additional complications related to a service-connected disability when such residual complications are reasonably raised by the record during the rating period for the primary disability, explaining VA's duty to maximize benefits requires it to exhaust all schedular alternatives, including entitlement to secondary service connection, when evaluating a disability.

The duty to assist requires VA to provide an examination when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or signs and symptoms of a current disability, the record indicates that the disability or signs and symptoms of disability may be associated with military service, and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).

Private medical records, including December 2011 records from the Veteran's primary care physician, Dr. S. H., confirm a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction.  In August 2013, Dr. S. H. completed a VA mental disorders disability benefits questionnaire and noted the Veteran experienced sexual dysfunction related to his depression and medications used to treat depression.  In July 2024, the Veteran submitted medical literature noting a link between hypertension and erectile dysfunction.  In a July 2024 statement, the Veteran's wife reported the Veteran's doctor told them his erectile dysfunction was due to his lumbar spine disability and his depression (including medications).  The issue of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction as secondary to his service connected hypertension, depression, or back disability is raised by the record.  The medical evidence of record is inadequate to evaluate the etiology of the erectile dysfunction.  The AOJ's failure to obtain an etiology opinion for erectile dysfunction is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The claim must be remanded to correct this error.  Id.

3. Entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ is remanded.  

The issue of entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ is intertwined with remanded claim for service connection for erectile dysfunction.  The SMC claim must be remanded with the service connection claim.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's post service (after October 1991) Department of Defense medical records (federal records).  Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any private treatment provider (including Dr. S. H.) who may have records relevant to his claims (including records documenting his blood pressure readings) which are not yet associated with the claims file.  Make two requests for the authorized records from any medical treatment provider identified unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. Provide the entire claims file to an appropriate clinician.  After reviewing the entire file, the clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was (a) caused by; or (b) aggravated by his service-connected hypertension, lumbar spine disability, or major depressive disorder. 

The opinion provided must explicitly address both causation and aggravation to be deemed adequate, acknowledging these are separate inquires that require different rationales.  In this context, the examiner must be advised aggravation means any increase in disability, i.e., additional functional impairment in earning capacity, resulting from the secondarily claimed condition due to the primary disability.  There is no requirement that such increase be permanent in nature.  An opinion that simply states there is no anatomical or biological connection between the conditions without addressing whether there is additional functional impairment in earning capacity will be deemed insufficient to facilitate an informed decision on the Veteran's claim.

If the clinician determines that an additional examination is needed to provide the requested opinions, schedule an examination.

4. Readjudicate the issue of entitlement to SMC based on the loss of use of a creative organ.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeanne Celtnieks

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.