Citation Nr: A25033361
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-434941
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not involve loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet, loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands, permanent impairment of vision in both eyes, severe burn injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ankylosis of one or both knees, or ankylosis of one or both hips.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a certificate of eligibility for financial assistance in the purchase of an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.808, 17.156.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1970 to December 1971.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office rating decision. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment. 

Financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only. 38 U.S.C. § 3902(a)(b). Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted where one of the following exists as the result of an injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active service: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, meaning central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury precluding effective operation of an automobile; (5) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; or, (6) for adaptive equipment only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. 38 U.S.C. § 3901; 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.

"Loss of use" is not specifically defined under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808. Regulations pertaining to special monthly compensation for loss of use of a hand or foot state that loss of use is held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. The determination should be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability to grasp, manipulate objects, balance, or propel oneself forward. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a)(2), 4.63. 

The Veteran is service connected for atherosclerotic heart disease, posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder, tinnitus, candidal infection of the skin and photodermatitis, bilateral hearing loss, and hypothyroidism.

The Veteran has not asserted that his service-connected disabilities involve diagnoses or symptoms that meet the eligibility criteria detailed above. Rather, it appears that the Veteran seeks automobile adaptation due to his wife's illness and physical challenges. The Veteran submitted an application for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment in October 2023. He did not mark any qualifying disabilities on the form; however, in November 2023, he submitted a letter from a physician attesting that the Veteran's wife required a lift chair and wheelchair-accessible vehicle for medical reasons. 

The Board has reviewed the record to determine whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities cause functional impairment that could meet the eligibility criteria for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only. The record does not support such a finding. The record does reflect that the Veteran has some limitation in mobility, but that he remains able to balance, take recreational walks, golf, and perform all activities of daily living. See Aid and Attendance or Housebound Examination, February 2024 (indicating that the Veteran "cannot tolerate any moderately strenuous activities such as walking 4 MPH," but that the Veteran is able to perform his own self-care without any limitations, has no complaints of poor balance, has no functional restrictions in strength and coordination of the upper extremities, and has no functional restrictions of the lower extremities); VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System MOVE Note, February 2024 (stating that the Veteran can take his wife out in her wheelchair and walk outside in nice weather); ); VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System Psychiatry Note, October 2023 (indicating that the Veteran plays golf). Therefore, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in loss of use of a foot or hand, or any other symptoms that satisfy the eligibility criteria.

While the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's circumstances, eligibility for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, is determined by the existing laws and regulations. In other words, the benefits cannot be granted based upon need or usefulness alone. As the competent and probative medical evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet any of the criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808, the claim for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, must be denied.

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Karp, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.