Citation Nr: A25033440
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240919-475162
DATE: April 10, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 40 percent for right upper extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1981 to October 2001.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 2023 higher-level review rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

Initially, a June 2022 rating decision adjudicated the claim, and the AOJ awarded service connection for radiculopathy right upper extremity and assigned a 40 percent rating, effective February 16, 2022.  The Veteran then requested Higher-Level Review of the June 2022 rating decision and in the October 2023 Higher-Level Review decision on appeal, the AOJ found a clear and unmistakable error had been made and awarded an earlier effective date of November 23, 2020 for the initial 40 percent rating for right upper extremity radiculopathy.  

In her September 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran requested direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ.  Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of June 9, 2022 -the date of the rating decision subject to Higher-Level Review.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.301, 3.2601(f).  If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after June 9, 2022, the Board did not consider it.  If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  

Here, the Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination in March 2022, which addresses the Veteran's right upper extremity neurological symptoms.  The examiner noted the Veteran's reports of constant significant neck stiffness and sharp/burning neck pain of 5/10, popping neck sensation, and numbness to the first three fingers of right hand.  The examiner noted objective findings of muscle strength testing normal (5/5) in all areas except decreased 4/5 elbow extension, normal reflexes, and decreased sensory testing.  The examiner also noted severe paresthesias/dysesthesias and numbness as radicular symptoms in the right upper extremity with involvement of the C5/C6 and C7 nerve roots on the right side.  Additionally, the Veteran was afforded a simultaneous hand and fingers VA examination.  The Veteran reported difficulty with gripping, grasping, holding during the episodes of numbness and tingling of all digits of right hand and a history of dropping a gallon of milk.  The Veteran also reported current symptoms of intermittent numbness and tingling of right hand with overuse and that her right ring finger locks.  In the "Remarks" section, the examiner indicated that the Veteran "may benefit from a peripheral neurological exam."  However, no such examination was conducted, and the AOJ's failure to obtain such an examination in response to the examiner's comment was a pre-decisional error, particularly given that the available VA examinations do not address what degree of incomplete paralysis or complete paralysis is present involving the C5/C6 or C7 nerves.  Thus, the Board finds that a peripheral nerve examination is needed on remand to correct this pre-decisional error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA peripheral nerves examination to determine the current nature and severity of her right upper extremity radiculopathy disability.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner should confirm that such records were reviewed.  All findings should be reported in detail.

The examiner should detail all neurologic symptoms consistent with the applicable rating criteria for right upper extremity radiculopathy, including any functional effects associated with the disability.

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asante, Ruby

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.