Citation Nr: A25033718
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240906-471485
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified insomnia and mixed anxiety and depressive disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1981 to January 1994. In September of 2024, the Veteran filed a notice of disagreement (NOD) in which she requested the direct review lane under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) review system in response to a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Under direct review, no development may be undertaken; the Board of Veterans' Appeals considers the same record as the RO in rendering a decision. The only exception is if, as here, the Board finds that there was pre-decisional error by the RO.

In that regard, the Board observes that a VA clinician authored a negative nexus opinion in September of 2023 in regard to the Veteran's claim. It was provided that, "[t]he pre-military mental health history is: None The military mental health history is: None. The post-military mental health history is: Experienced anxiety after service, went to be seen about 4-5 years after separating. Prescribed Paxil along with one other she can't remember, but not for many years. Prescribed trazadone a few years ago but not since 2021 due to gastric problems. She is currently awaiting results of an MRI. Endoscopy revealed GERD. Got prescribed melatonin 1 mg, then 2 mg, but mediocre results. Also uses Nyquil but feels groggy the next morning. Anxiety less frequent than in the past, she keeps busy at work, also to deal with fatigue and irritability. Attended a group for anxiety/sleep at the VA twice before COVID hit in 2019 with [the Veteran]. During her deployment to Somalia they slept out in the open, 2.5 - 3 months, had to booby trap their quarters; gunfire all night, the morgue was nearby, they were never attacked but always had to be alert and ready. States she is not inclined to pursue counseling at this time due to 'not wanting to spill my guts to someone else.' 2/15/23 Sleep Clinic note diagnosis Chronic insomnia sleep disturbance multifactorial 4/18/19 PCMHI functional assessment: 'Veteran reports history of depressive and anxious symptoms ongoing for the past five years.' 9/10/1993 STR physical: Denied any history of depression or excessive worry or frequent trouble sleeping 5/21/1984 STR noted veteran had 'difficulty going to sleep occasionally. She feels depressed, been having some adjustment problems at work. been in the unit about one month.' A: adjustment disorder 9/27/1982 STR: handwritten, only partially readable note stated: 19 y/o B female c/o headaches slight nausea and weakness since May 82. Pt states its gotten worse. Also f/u from 15JU82 for 1st toe R foot toe nail. CC: patient states 'head feels heavy' x 4 months. c/o feeling weak. states it lasts for 10-15 minute occurs once weekly. PE Exam canals clear __ normal. nose- __ throat. __ ___ ___. Eyes - PERRLA. ___ - normal. 2 year normal __ __ Pass depression. Plan: refer to mental hygiene. DD214: Veteran served from Sep 1981 to Jan 1994. The claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. Rationale is the veteran served from Sept 1981 to Jan 1994. The only possible evidence of a mental health problem in service is two service notes- 9/27/82 noted she was feeling depressed when having health issues for 4 months (no diagnosis). The other 5/21/1984 documented an adjustment disorder when at a new unit for one month. By their nature, adjustment disorders typically resolve as the stressor ends or a person adjusts to their situation. This is consistent with the veteran not seeking mental health treatment during that time and marking that she had no history of mental health problems during later physicals (e.g. 9/10/1993). In 2019 the veteran reported depressive and anxiety symptoms for the past 5 years. There is no evidence suggesting this started or was connected to her adjustment difficulty or depressive feelings in service decades prior."

Notably, while the clinician reconciled the statement that the "other 5/21/1984 documented an adjustment disorder" in stating that "adjustment disorders typically resolve as the stressor ends or a person adjusts to their situation", that individual did not reconcile the "possible evidence of a mental health problem in service [that] is two service notes- 9/27/82 [which] noted she was feeling depressed when having health issues for 4 months". Overall, the provided rationale relied primarily on a purported lack of continued notations within the Veteran's service treatment records as the basis of the provided rationale. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner solely relied on the lack of notations of an injury in service to conclude that there is no relationship between the Veteran's current disability and his military service). Significantly, the Veteran in this case has made specific allegations that have not yet been properly considered, to include asserting that, "the constant battles/firefights has caused me to have nightmares", that she, "lived [in] a field /warehouse environment [in] which I was exposed to lizards, roaches, mice and rats, and that she, "worked numerous 24 hour shifts without sleep or rest which has thrown my circadian rhythm out of sync [and] I have serious anxiety attacks still to this day". See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Further, while the clinician concluded that there was, "no evidence suggesting this started or was connected to her adjustment difficulty or depressive feelings in service", the Board observes that the Veteran's claimed condition is being considered, in part, as "unspecified insomnia", and this opinion does not reconcile the clinician's previous assertion that the "5/21/1984 STR noted veteran had 'difficulty going to sleep occasionally'".

Given the foregoing, the September 2023 VA opinion contains an insufficient rationale. As the August 2023 VA opinion is also insufficient, the failure to have obtained an additional VA opinion represents a pre-decisional error that necessitates a remand. 

In addition, the Board observes that while it was noted in the September 2023 VA opinion that the Veteran attested to "currently awaiting results of an MRI", there do not appear to be any records related to this associated with the claims file. As such, it should be ensured that appropriate efforts are undertaken to obtain any outstanding relevant VA and/or private treatment records prior to an additional decision being authored on the merits.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Make the appropriate efforts to obtain any outstanding relevant VA and/or private treatment records relevant to the claim being remanded, to include any pertaining to the previously mentioned MRI.

2. Thereafter, obtain a VA opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed unspecified insomnia and mixed anxiety and depressive disorder condition from an appropriately situated clinician. The necessity of an examination is at the discretion of the clinician and should be afforded only if such is necessary to provide the requested opinions. The entire claims file, including a complete copy of this remand and the Veteran's lay assertions, should be made available to and be reviewed by the clinician, and it should be confirmed that such records were available for review. The clinician is asked to opine as to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed unspecified insomnia and mixed anxiety and depressive disorder condition manifested in service or is otherwise related to her active service, to include as a result of any in-service exposure to environmental toxins. In so opining, the statements made in the July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ as noted above should be specifically considered and reconciled to the extent possible.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions. Rationale cannot be solely predicated solely on the absence of in-service evidence but must consider the broader evidentiary picture, including lay evidence. It is emphasized that all conclusions reached should wholly address and reconcile to the extent possible the lay contentions recorded in the record. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation, and the clinician is additionally asked to reconcile to the extent possible any conflicting evidence or opinions of record. A clear basis for all opinions should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board, to include whether the Veteran's claimed condition has manifested in a presentation that aligns with the contentions that have been made. If the clinician is unable to provide any of the requested information without resorting to speculation, he or she should so state, and further explain why it is not feasible to provide a medical opinion.

3. Thereafter, adjudicate the claim after consideration of the pertinent evidence.

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.