Citation Nr: A25033107
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-435688
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right knee disability is denied.

Service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record fails to establish a right knee disability was incurred in service, manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of service or a service-connected disability.

2. The evidence of record fails to establish a left knee disability was incurred in service, manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of service or a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are not met for service connection for a right knee disability. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria are not met for service connection for a left knee disability. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army National Guard from August 2005 to August 2011, including a period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from September 2005 to February 2006 and a period of active duty from April 2009 to April 2010.

In August 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (Appeals Modernization Act or AMA), Pub. Law 115-55, which created a new claims and appeals process for pursuing VA benefits. All initial rating decisions issued after February 19, 2019, are promulgated under the AMA. The rating decisions on appeal were issued in May 2023 and July 2023 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the AMA applies. 

In his timely April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 and July 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions. If the evidence was submitted after this time, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

1. Service Connection for a Right Knee Disability

2. Service Connection for a Left Knee Disability

Because analysis of the appealed issues involves application of identical law to congruent facts, the Board will address these issues together.

Legal Criteria

Service connection may be established for a disability that results from personal injury that is suffered, or disease contracted, in the line of duty, in the active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, to establish service connection for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in service, there must be competent evidence of (1) the current existence of the disability for which service connection is being claimed; (2) incurrence of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) a nexus or connection (causal link) between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred in service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed Cir. 2004). 

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that (1) a current disability exists and (2) the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. Id.; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

Lay statements may serve to support a claim for service connection by supporting the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation. 38 U.S.C. § 1153(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When there is an approximate balance (nearly equal) of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). 

Factual Background

The Veteran is currently service connected for five disabilities: (1) posttraumatic stress disorder; (2) allergic rhinitis; (3) right shoulder dislocation and labral tear; (4) residual scars associated with right shoulder; and (5) sinusitis.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not contain any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for a left or right knee condition. His post-service VA records reflect complaints of bilateral knee pain beginning May 22, 2019; however, no specific trauma has been reported. See May 2019-February 2023 VA treatment records. In a statement submitted by the Veteran, he attributes his bilateral knee issues to his back disability, which, to date, has been denied service connection. "I started having knee problems after my back problems. I think the problems with my back have changed my body mechanics and put excess strain on my knees. I have never had an injury to my knees that could explain my problems, so this is the only thing that makes sense to me." See January 2023 statement. 

In support of his claim, the Veteran provided a statement from a chiropractor who reports seeing the Veteran in February 2021 for an examination and treatment of persistent discogenic pain of the spine, hip, knee, and foot since 2009. The chiropractor opined that these injuries were sustained from falls, impacts, and carrying heavy gear while the Veteran was in the Army. See February 2021 chiropractic note. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for knee and lower leg conditions in March 2023. During the examination the Veteran reported the onset of his knee pain as 2018 and attributing it to "the wear and tear of his military activities such as running and hiking with heavy packs." See March 2023 VA examination. He further reported that his left knee pain has been progressively getting worse since onset. Id. The examiner rendered a negative causal linkage opinion, finding the Veteran's knee disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. See March 2023 VA opinion. The examiner relied on the absence of data supporting a nexus between the Veteran's current diagnosis and his military service. Id. "Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." Id. A secondary service connection opinion was not provided. 

In the May 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied service connection for the left knee but favorably found the Veteran has a current left knee disability. In the July 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied service connection for the right knee but favorably found the Veteran has a current right knee disability.

Analysis

The Veteran seeks service connection for his current bilateral knee disability. As discussed below, the Board concludes that a causal link has not been established between the disability and active-duty service or a service-connected disability; thus, service connection for his bilateral knee disability is not warranted.  

The AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has been diagnosed with left and right knee disabilities and the Board has no reason to disturb those findings. What remains for consideration is whether the evidence shows that the Veteran's current bilateral knee disability can be attributed to a qualifying event, injury, or disease that had its onset during active-duty service, or that it was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

As previously noted, the earliest record in the Veteran's file evidencing knee complaints is May 2019. There is no specific evidence indicating, nor has the Veteran asserted, that his knee issues began during service or within a year of separation from service. Instead, according to the March 2023 VA examiner, the Veteran explicitly reported that the onset of his knee pain began in 2018 and that it has progressively worsened since onset - not that it began in service and has worsened since service or shortly thereafter. 

The Board assigns little probative weight to the February 2021 chiropractor's statement, as it is almost wholly inadequate for evaluating the Veteran's claim. First, while the chiropractor notes that the Veteran presented for knee pain, the focus of the one-paragraph "opinion," is the Veteran's back condition. Further, the chiropractor does not elaborate on how he reached his conclusion that the Veteran's spine, hip, knee, and foot pain were caused by "falls, impacts and carrying heavy gear" during service, nor does he clarify when the pain for each specific body part first manifested. He instead provides a conclusory statement and ambiguously references a 2009 onset date. Moreover, the chiropractor does not note what Veteran-specific files/materials he reviewed, if any, in connection with the examination and forming his opinion. He also failed to cite to any medical bases upon which he relied. Finally, the reporting by the chiropractor is inconsistent with the claims file, including the reported onset date of 2018 during the Veteran's March 2023 VA examination, the initial reporting of knee issues in his medical records in May 2019, and his January 2023 statement attributing his knee condition to his back disability.

The Board affords greater weight to the VA examination and opinion, as they are more congruent with the rest of the evidence and are based upon both a review of the Veteran's records and an in-person examination. The Board notes that only a direct service-connection opinion for the left knee was provided by the VA examiner. However, this does not render the opinion inadequate, as both knees were assessed by the examiner and the examination report reflects that the Veteran attributed most, if not all, of his current symptoms to his left knee. Further, a negative causal linkage opinion was provided for the left knee, so it reasonably follows that an opinion specific to the right knee would also find no causal link to service.

The Board observes that the Veteran has raised the possibility of service connection on a secondary basis. The Board must assess all theories of entitlement raised within, or reasonably inferred from, the record. However, while the Veteran theorizes in his January 2023 statement that his bilateral knee condition is due to his back disability, he is not service connected for a back or similar musculoskeletal disability. While a secondary service connection opinion was not obtained, the Veteran is not currently service-connected for a musculoskeletal disability that could have caused or aggravated his bilateral knee condition. The only musculoskeletal disability the Veteran is currently service connected for is a dislocated right shoulder. The Veteran has not asserted, nor does the record evidence, that his right shoulder disability is in any way connected to his bilateral knee disability. 

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's reports, does not question his credibility, and understands that his disabilities have significant effects on his daily life. Should he subsequently become service connected for a back or similar musculoskeletal disability, the Veteran is encouraged to file a claim seeking secondary service connection.  

Thus, while the Board recognizes that the Veteran has a documented history of bilateral knee pain, he simply has not shown that this disability may be attributed to his military service or a service-connected disability, and the appeal for service connection for this disability must, by law, be denied. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

Therefore, the appeal for service connection for a bilateral knee disability must be denied.

 

 

Veterans Law Judge

M. MILLS

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Samantha A. Meadows

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.