Citation Nr: A25033921
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-426421
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 20 percent, but no greater, for left cubital tunnel syndrome, is granted.

Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no greater, for right cubital tunnel syndrome, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's left cubital tunnel syndrome has been manifested by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

2. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's right cubital tunnel syndrome has been manifested by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating of 20 percent, but no greater, for left cubital tunnel syndrome, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.120, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8516.

2. The criteria for a rating of 30 percent, but no greater, for right cubital tunnel syndrome, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.120, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, DC 8516.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from July 2006 to July 2011 and December 2016 to October 2017. The Veteran was honored with multiple decorations for their service, including the Army Achievement Medal; Army Good Conduct Medal; National Defense Service Medal; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; Korean Defense Service Medal; Army Service Ribbon; Overseas Service Ribbon; and Driver and Mechanic Badge with driver-wheeled vehicles (six clasp). The Board is grateful to the Veteran for his honorable service to our Nation!

The matter comes before the Board on appeal from a rating decision issued in April 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2022 rating decision that was subsequently subject to a Higher Level Review by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §?20.301.  

Additionally, the Board notes at the time of the VA Form 10182, the Veteran was service connected for left and right cubital tunnel syndrome under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8516, at a 10 percent rating effective November 8, 2021, but also service connected for left and right cubital tunnel syndrome with limitations of extensions under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5207 at a 10 percent rating effective November 8, 2021, and left and right cubital tunnel syndrome with impairment of supination and pronation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5213 at a noncompensable rating effective November 8, 2018. Although such conditions are related to the Veterans service connected left and right cubital tunnel syndrome on appeal and were within the April 2023 rating decision, the April 2023 rating decision found a duty to assist error for such claims that required further clarification before adjudication. Additionally, the Veteran is currently in a Higher Level Review process with the AOJ regarding such claims as of March 18, 2025. As such, the Board will not be addressing such claims at this time as they are not properly before the Board. 

1. Entitlement to a rating of 20 percent, but no greater, for left cubital tunnel syndrome.

2. Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no greater, for right cubital tunnel syndrome.

The Veteran contends that his left and right cubital tunnel syndrome are entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent, because the record clearly shows both conditions have moderate pain and numbness with severe parasthesia and dysesthesias throughout the appeal period. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. 

All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Where the Veteran is appealing the initial assignment of a disability rating, the severity of the disability is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

Where a claimant appeals the denial of a claim for an increased disability rating for a disability for which service connection was in effect before, he filed the claim for increase, the present level of disability is the primary concern, and past medical reports should not be given precedence over current medical findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 57-58 (1994).  

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.

The Veteran's left and right cubital tunnel syndrome is currently rated at 10 percent effective November 8, 2018, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8516.

Under DC 8516, for the ulnar nerve, a 10 percent rating is warranted for incomplete paralysis that is mild. Id. A 30 percent rating (major extremity) and 20 percent rating (minor extremity) is warranted for incomplete paralysis that is moderate. Id. A 40 percent rating (major extremity) and 30 percent rating (minor extremity) is warranted for incomplete paralysis that is severe. Id. A 60 percent rating (major extremity) and 50 percent rating (minor extremity) is warranted for paralysis that is complete; the "griffin claw" deformity, due to flexor contraction of ring and little fingers, atrophy very marked in dorsal interspace and thenar and hypothenar eminences; loss of extension of ring and little fingers, cannot spread the fingers (or reverse), cannot adduct the thumb; flexion of wrist weakened. Id. 

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to a varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for mild, or at most, the moderate degree. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in VA regulations, but the Board does find the following definitions: "mild" is generally defined as "not severe," Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 1173 (11th ed. 2003); "moderate" is defined as "tending toward the mean or average amount," Id. at 798; and "severe" is generally defined as "of a great degree." Id. at 1140. Additionally, the Board must arrive at an equitable and just decision after having evaluated the evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

Additionally, the terms "major" and "minor" are used in the rating criteria to refer to the dominant or non-dominant upper extremity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.69. As the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran is right-hand dominant, the ratings pertinent to his major side are for application in evaluating his right cubital tunnel syndrome and minor side are for application in evaluating his left cubital tunnel syndrome. 

At the start of the appeal period in October 2021 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application and VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim regarding an increased rating for his left and right cubital tunnel syndrome. Within the Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran reported nerve pain and losing feeling throughout both elbows, which did not always hurt but regularly flared up and was severe enough to wake him up at night.

In November 2021 the Veteran underwent two VA examinations for his left and right cubital tunnel syndrome. The first exam was for peripheral nerves where the examiner noted the Veteran had intermittent pain that was moderate in both the left and right upper extremity; parenthesis and/or dysesthesias that was severe in both the left and right upper extremity; and numbness that was moderate in both the left and right upper extremity. It was also noted that the Veteran's ulnar nerve was impacted bilaterally with incomplete paralysis, with functional impact of pain with repetitive elbow movement. Additionally, there was normal muscle strength noted, normal reflex, no trophic changes, and all other nerves were normal. 

The second November 2021 VA examination was for elbows and forearms. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's elbow pain started in 2008 and that he currently experienced pain bilaterally with numbness in his bilateral pinky fingers and ring fingers. It was noted the Veteran experienced bilateral flare-ups that were severe, lasting a few minutes that were precipitated by daily tasks and arm movements, with them only being alleviated with rest. All of the Veteran's range of motion (ROM) measurements were noted as normal within the examination. Additionally, there was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or surgery noted.

For the entirety of the period on appeal, a 20 percent rating is warranted for the service connected left cubital tunnel syndrome and 30 percent is warranted for the service connected right cubital tunnel syndrome. Throughout the appeal period, it is clear that the Veteran's left and right cubital tunnel syndrome resulted in no more than moderate incomplete paralysis, as the medical records and lay testimony reflect moderate intermittent pain, moderate numbness, and severe parenthesis and/or dysesthesias, with flare-ups sometimes being severe enough to wake up the Veteran at night. Further, the Veteran has provided competent and credible reports of pain, numbness, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias during the VA examinations. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

The Veteran is not, however, entitled to a rating in excess of a 20 percent for his service connected left cubital tunnel syndrome and in excess of 30 percent for his service connected right cubital tunnel syndrome. The evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran's left and right cubital tunnel syndrome more nearly approximate severe incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve under DC 8516. As indicated above, the Veteran has normal muscle strength, normal reflex, no trophic changes, and no atrophy. Even with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements regarding his left and right upper extremity neuropathy symptoms, they do not rise to the characterization of an overall level of severe incomplete paralysis.  No examiner has ever characterized the Veteran's left and right upper extremity neuropathy as severe incomplete paralysis or complete paralysis, and the clinical findings do not suggest as much. 

Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the service connection claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Therefore, the Board finds that a 20 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for service connected left cubital tunnel syndrome and a 30 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for service connected right cubital tunnel syndrome for the entire appeal period. However, insofar as the Board has denied a higher rating for the disability on appeal, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against such aspect of the claim. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard, and the increased rating claim must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

The Veteran claimed that he is entitled to service connection for his lumbosacral strain, as such condition is a direct result of his back injuries in service. 

In the April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran's STRs showed a qualifying event, injury, or disease in service on June 8, 2010, that noted lower back pain and diagnosed the Veteran with a lower back strain. Additionally, the examiner favorably found the Veteran had a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain per the October 2020 VA examination. As there is no evidence that these findings are clearly and unmistakably erroneous, the Board is bound by them. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Therefore, the only question left for the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's claimed condition and in service diagnosis. 

Here, the Veteran has only had one VA examination. The VA examination in October 2020 diagnosed the Veteran with lumbosacral strain. The examiner reported the Veteran's back condition had its onset in 2010 when the Veteran got his taser certification and caught a prong in his left lower back and left buttock, causing exceeding pain at lower back that was so sharp if he sneezed he wanted to cry, which resulted in him seeking medical attention and being given a pain killer. The Veteran also stated that after that incident the sharp sneezing pain has gone away, but the muscle aches and pain when walking have not. The Veteran reported that it was not hard to walk and every 15 to 30 minutes he has to sit down and take a break, with his pain being a 4 out of 10 and using a pillow for his lower back when sitting. The examiner stated that strains follow a consistent pattern of destruction phase, repair phase, remodeling phase, meaning they are more than likely temporary in nature. Specifically, he found that mechanical strains can be due to spine, intervertebral discs or surrounding tissues. However, the examiner found in this Veteran's ROM of the spine normal, but pain to palpation of right and left lumbar back was noted. However, since 2010, the examiner found the Veteran had complained of back pain that varied from lumbar and thoracic over the years, thus his back complaints were not always of lumbar back since he reported onset in 2010. Therefore, the examiner opined the Veteran's diagnosed of low back strain is less likely than not (less than 50 percent) incurred in or caused by back strain during service.

However, the Board finds that the October 2020 VA examination is not sufficient for adjudication of the claimed conditions. The October 2020 VA examiner relied solely on the July 2010 incident in service when there were many incidents listed in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs). The Veteran had multiple incidents of back pain reported in service, including on June 8, 2010, July 8, 2010, July 12, 2010, and October 2017, with additional incidents of continued back pain reported between his two periods of active service from July 2011 to December 2016. Further, the October 2020 VA examiner failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding his ongoing back pain since service, relying solely on the lack of medical treatment for their decision. Thus, a remand is required to obtain an adequate examination and opinion.

Therefore, the Board finds the AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain an adequate VA examination and opinion addressing the Veteran's claims. Thus, a remand is necessary for a new examination to address such issues. 

Furthermore, the Veteran submitted additional lay statements, and a study called, "Underreporting of Musculoskeletal Injuries in the U.S. Army," from Sports Health, after the October 2020 VA examination. As such, the new VA examination should directly address such evidence submitted by the Veteran. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed lumbosacral strain.

Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to provide responses to the following:

(a.) Determine each diagnosis regarding the Veteran's claimed back condition.

(b.) The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed back condition is related to his military service. Specifically, the examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his experiences in and out of service, the Veteran's STRs, the Veterans medical records between the Veteran's active duty service periods from July 2011 to December 2016, and the study submitted by the Veteran.

The examiner also is advised the basis for a negative opinion must not be based solely on the lack of evidence of any back condition in the Veteran's service treatment records or a lack of medical records demonstrating a continuity of care after service. 

The examiner is advised that a lack of documentation is not dispositive of the question, and a nexus opinion cannot be based solely on the absence of documentation of in service findings or continuity of care thereafter.

Any opinions offered should be accompanied by the underlying reasons for the conclusions.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hageman Gaina, Samantha L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.