Citation Nr: A25033265
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240718-457833
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for a chronic thoracolumbar strain (back strain) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition (right leg nerve condition), to include as secondary to a chronic thoracolumbar strain, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record indicates forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine measuring 30 degrees or less; unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or the entire spine is not indicated.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for a chronic thoracolumbar strain (back strain) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2011 to September 2014.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a January 2024 rating decision issued by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In July 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, electing the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for an increased rating for a back strain, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis, bilateral knee strain, and a right leg nerve condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to a 40 percent rating for a back strain, effective August 31, 2023.

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ increased the Veteran's back strain rating from 10 percent disabling to 20 percent, effective August 31, 2023.

The Board finds that the evidence of record supports a higher rating of 40 percent.

On August 31, 2023, VA received an Intent to File a Claim from the Veteran. On September 1, 2023, the Veteran subsequently filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, requesting an increased rating for his back strain.

Legal Criteria 

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations should be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

The veteran's entire history is considered when assigning disability ratings. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). A review of the recorded history of a disability is necessary to make an accurate rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.41. The regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings where such current findings are adequate and relevant to the rating issue. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994); Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31 (1999). The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

The effective date provisions for awards of increased disability compensation include a general rule - an award based on a claim for increase of compensation "shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefore." 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a). The corresponding VA regulation expresses this rule as the "date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later." 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (the claimant is entitled to the benefit-of-the-doubt when competing evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal"; exact equipoise is not required to trigger the favorable benefit-of-the-doubt rule).

Analysis

The Veteran's back strain is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237. Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id. at Note 1.  

Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching." Id. at Note 5. Additionally, fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis. Id.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint." The spine has no opposite joint.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

The Board finds that the evidence of record supports an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's back strain.

On September 1, 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran reported symptoms of aching, throbbing, and shooting pain, causing him to walk unevenly. He also stated he has muscle spasms 4-5 times per week. Leaning forward, back, and turning increase his pain and he tries to avoid or limit activities that aggravate his pain such as prolonged walking, standing, sitting, running, jogging, using stairs, yard work, sports, lifting and carrying objects, and exercising. He reported flare ups that can cause pain rated a 9 out of 10. 

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA examination. The examiner noted a 2012 diagnosis of a chronic thoracolumbar strain. The Veteran reported a worsening of his condition with mid to low back pain, stiffness, and occasional shooting pain. The Veteran reported weekly flare-ups that last a day, causing increased pain and described as moderate. He stated that it becomes hard to move during a flare-up. Overall, the Veteran reported that his back strain makes it difficult to do yard work and play on the floor with his son. Active range of motion (ROM) measurements were: forward flexion to 50 degrees; extension to 20 degrees; left and right lateral flexion to 20 degrees; and left and right lateral rotation to 20 degrees. Pain was noted during all active movements. Passive ROM testing was not performed due to it's potential to cause severe pain. Crepitus and moderate localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the mid to low back was noted. Repetitive use ROM testing did not cause additional loss of function or ROM, and the Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time. The examiner estimated ROM after repeated use over time and during flare-ups, with pain causing the following reduced ROM: forward flexion to 30 degrees; extension to 10 degrees; left and right lateral flexion to 10 degrees; and left and right lateral rotation to 10 degrees. 

Localized tenderness and muscle spasms not resulting in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour were noted. Additional factors contributing to disability were interference with sitting and standing and pain with prolonged sitting and standing. Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory testing was normal, as was the straight leg raising test. No ankylosis, radiculopathy, or intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) was noted. See October 2023 VA examination. 

As the evidence of record indicates forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine measuring 30 degrees or less during flare-ups and repeated use over time, a 40 percent rating is warranted. 

As for a rating in excess of 40 percent, the Board finds the evidence of record persuasively weighs against such a rating. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to pain and flare-ups. However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by the statements that it is difficult to move would not result in symptoms more nearly approximating unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or the entire spine.

Consideration has also been given to assigning a rating under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  However, the Veteran does not have IVDS, and the evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes. 

Accordingly, an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher for the Veteran's back strain is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

At the outset, the Board is combining the Veteran's left foot condition and right foot condition claims to a bilateral plantar fasciitis claim, as the evidence of record indicates the same current diagnosis for each foot.

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding of a diagnosis of a disability of bilateral plantar fasciitis.

On September 1, 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran stated during service, he injured his feet from physical training (PT) exercise and a training accident. He reported constantly standing for long periods of time and carrying a heavy ruck during marches wearing boots. The Veteran stated he had excruciating pain at the bottom of his feet when trying to walk and continued to experience pain after trying arch supports. He stated his current symptoms include pain and limited movement in both feet with the addition of weakness in his right foot. The Veteran reported prolonged standing, running, jogging, jumping, and side-to-side movements exacerbate his foot pain. 

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA examination. The examiner noted a 2023 diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis. The Veteran stated that he developed foot issues in service in 2012, with current symptoms of bilateral foot pain and stiffness. The pain was described as a dull, constant pain and that it is difficult to walk for long periods. Pain was noted during passive motion, active motion, and weight-bearing. The examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis is related to or incurred in service "as there are no active duty records documenting . . . foot issues." 

The Board finds the October 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate, and a remand is necessary.  A medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against any contrary opinions. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007). Where VA provides the Veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The absence of medical documentation in service treatment records as the sole rationale for a negative medical opinion is inadequate. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). A medical opinion or "medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two." Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008). 

Under the AMA, when the Board identifies a duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., a pre-decisional duty to assist error), the Board will remand the appeal back to the AOJ with instructions to correct the error. See 38 C.F.R. 3.159(c), 20.802(a). Following correction of the error, the AOJ must readjudicate the issue or issues. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2502. After the AOJ readjudicates the issue or issues, a claimant may choose to file a new appeal to the board from such readjudication or request higher-level review (HLR) or a supplemental claim with the AOJ. 

In the present case, a duty to assist error exists in the inadequacy of the medical opinion of record. The examiner based the opinion solely on a lack of active-duty records and did not address the Veteran's statements during the examination and accompanying his claim that he began having pain in his feet during service. 

Failure to obtain an adequate medical examination prior to issuance of the decision on appeal is a duty to assist error that necessitates remand.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee strain is remanded.

At the outset, the Board is combining the Veteran's left knee condition and right knee condition claims to a bilateral knee strain claim, as the evidence of record indicates the same current diagnosis for each knee.

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding of a diagnosis of a disability of a bilateral knee strain.

On September 1, 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran stated during service, he injured his feet from PT exercises, a combat-related incident, and a training accident.  He reported constantly bending down or jumping off of trucks, carrying a heavy ruck during marches, and bending to pick up rounds off of the ground or trucks. He stated he did not go to sick call as it was seen as being weak and has had issues with his knees since service. The Veteran reported stiffness, cracking, pain, and weakness. Pain becomes worse with stair climbing, high-impact activities, prolonged walking, running, jogging, squatting, jumping, quick side-to-side movements, or carrying heavy things. He also reported occasionally wearing a knee brace depending on which knee is painful. 

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA examination. The examiner noted a 2023 diagnosis of a bilateral knee strain. The Veteran stated that he developed knee issues in service in 2012, with current symptoms of bilateral knee pain and popping. The examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral knee strain is related to or incurred in service "as there are no active duty records documenting knee issues. . .." 

For the same reasons as the above bilateral plantar fasciitis claim, the Board finds the October 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate.  In the present case, a duty to assist error exists in the inadequacy of the medical opinion of record. The examiner based the opinion solely on a lack of active-duty records and did not address the Veteran's statements during the examination and accompanying his claim that he began having pain in his knees during service. 

Failure to obtain an adequate medical examination prior to issuance of the decision on appeal is a duty to assist error that necessitates remand.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity (leg) nerve condition, secondary to a back strain, is remanded.

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding of the primary disability, a back strain, being service connected. 

On September 1, 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran stated after developing his back strain, he began to experience numbness, tingling, and pain in his legs. He stated he frequently experiences shooting pain, numbness, and tingling from his low back to his calf. Flare-ups occur several times a month lasting half an hour. The Veteran stated that he tries to limit movements that cause a worsening of symptoms such as bending forward, leaning back, and bending to either side. The pain also makes it difficult to sit and walk for prolonged periods, play sports, run, jog, and use stairs. 

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA examination. The examiner did not render a diagnosis. The Veteran stated he developed shooting pain in 2012 with intermittent pain currently. Only the left leg being affected was noted by the examiner. The examiner opined that there is no objective evidence for a nerve condition and no nexus was provided. 

The Board finds the October 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate, and a remand is necessary.  Here, the examiner did not address the Veteran's reports of pain, numbness, and tingling provided in the September 2023 lay statement or reconcile the difference of reported symptoms and affected leg in the lay statement versus the disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ). 

As such, a duty-to-assist error exists and a remanded is necessary for an addendum medical opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis. If the examiner deems necessary, schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the VA examiner should be performed. The examiner must review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this remand. The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis is related to or otherwise began during his active-duty service in the U.S. Army? 

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. 

A complete rationale with discussion of medical literature for any opinion expressed must be provided. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee strain. If the examiner deems necessary, schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the VA examiner should be performed. The examiner must review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this remand. The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral knee strain is related to or otherwise began during his active-duty service in the U.S. Army? 

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. 

A complete rationale with discussion of medical literature for any opinion expressed must be provided. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

3. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right lower extremity nerve condition. If the examiner deems necessary, schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the VA examiner should be performed. The examiner must review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this remand. The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right lower extremity nerve condition, if any, is related to or otherwise began during his active-duty service in the U.S. Army? 

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right lower extremity nerve condition is proximately due to or caused by the Veteran's service-connected chronic thoracolumbar strain?

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right lower extremity nerve condition is aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected chronic thoracolumbar strain?

The examiner should specifically address and reconcile the Veteran's reported symptoms in the lay statement provided September 1, 2023, and the lack of noted symptoms in the October 2023 VA examination.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. 

The term aggravation is defined as a chronic and permanent worsening of the underlying condition versus a temporary or intermittent flare-up of symptoms.

If aggravation has occurred, the examiner should comment on when the onset of aggravation took place and whether the file contains sufficient medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation to establish a baseline level of severity of the right lower extremity nerve condition. If a baseline is established, the examiner should comment on how much the right lower extremity nerve condition has worsened in severity, if at all, from the time the baseline was established to the current level of severity. 

The examiner is cautioned to not combine the causation and aggravation facets of secondary service connection as [under governing caselaw] they are independent concepts requiring separate findings and rationale. That is, a VA medical opinion cannot provide the same rationale to both the causation and aggravation elements and must distinguish between the two theories, as they are separate.

A complete rationale with discussion of medical literature for any opinion expressed must be provided. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the 

?

record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training)

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Saul, P.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.