Citation Nr: A25033197
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241014-481312
DATE: April 10, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to service connection for blurry vision.

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

3. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot disorder.

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for blurry vision is DENIED.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is DENIED.

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder is REMANDED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that a chronic vision disability began during active service or otherwise was caused by service.

2. The evidence of record does not show a diagnosis for an acquired psychiatric disorder during the pendency of this appeal. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for blurry vision have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the Armed Forces from June 1980 until June 1991. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May and August 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May and August 2024 rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decisions, the Board did not consider it in its Decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

For the claims decided, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision.

The Board has reviewed all evidence of record regardless of whether it is discussed in detail in the Decision.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

I.

Legal Criteria - Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in active military service.  This means that the facts establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces, or if preexisting such service, was aggravated therein.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Establishing direct service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service event, disease, or injury and the present disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge). Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

A veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise.  Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

II.

Analysis - Blurry Vision

The Veteran contends that she has a disability characterized by blurry vision that was incurred in, or otherwise caused by, her exposure to gases during service.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) include a single notation in October 1985 of a complaint of blurry vision after working at her clerical job for about an hour.  The examiner noted an impression of emmetropia.  No further complaints were noted in service, and at her June 1991 separation examination, the Veteran denied any issues with her eyes and was evaluated as having 20/25 and 20/20 vision in her right and left eyes, respectively.  

Post-service, October 2019 VA treatment notes reflected that the Veteran denied any blurring in her vision but stated that she wore glasses daily.  In June 2024, she was afforded a VA examination and reported that she began experiencing blurred vision many years after gas chamber exposures in service, and that her vision was blurred both near and fear.  She stated that she was dependent on glasses in her daily life.  The examiner found that her uncorrected distance vision was 20/50 in the right eye, and 20/40 in the left eye; her corrected distance vision was 20/20 bilaterally; her uncorrected near vision was 20/100 in the right eye, and 20/70 in the left eye; and that her corrected near vision was 20/20 bilaterally.  

The examiner found that her pupils were normal, she did not have any anatomical loss, astigmatism, diplopia, normal slit lamp examinations, and normal internal eye examinations, bilaterally.  The examiner opined that the Veteran did not exhibit any pathology to warrant a diagnosis or condition that could be related to her active-duty service, to include any toxic exposures.  

To the extent that the Veteran has a diagnosed refractive error of the eyes, the refractive error is a congenital or developmental defect and not a disease or injury within the meaning of applicable legislation.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(c), 4.9.  

In the absence of superimposed disease or injury, service connection may not be allowed for refractive error of the eyes, including myopia, presbyopia, and astigmatism, even if visual acuity decreased in service, as this is not a disease or injury within the meaning of applicable legislation relating to service connection.  Id.  

Thus, VA regulations specifically prohibit service connection for refractory errors of the eyes unless such defect was subjected to a superimposed disease or injury which created additional disability.  See Vet. Aff. Op. Gen. Couns. Prec. 82-90 (July 18, 1990) (cited at 55 Fed. Reg. 45, 711) (Oct. 30, 1990) (service connection may not be granted for defects of congenital, developmental or familial origin, unless the defect was subject to a superimposed disease or injury).  

In this case, there is no lay or medical evidence to suggest a superimposed disease or injury on the refractive errors of the eyes.  There is also no evidence of a separate disorder of the eyes for which service connection can be granted.  All available VA and private treatment records have been reviewed and failed to show any diagnosable eye disorder with the exception of refractive error.  The Board affords significant probative weight to the available treatment records as well as the June 2024 VA examiner's opinion, after examining the Veteran, and finding no eye pathology.  

Therefore, after a careful review of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for service connection fails because the most probative evidence of record does not show a diagnosis for any eye pathology.  Where the record evidence does not establish that the Veteran currently has the disorder for which service connection is sought, service connection for that disorder is not authorized under the statutes governing veterans' benefits.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 144 (1992).

Accordingly, the Board finds that there is no disability during the relevant appeal period.  As the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claim is denied.  

II.

Analysis - Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran contends that she has an acquired psychiatric disorder which is a result of her active-duty service.  Specifically, she has asserted that she has anxiety which occurred as a direct result of her military service and has been aggravated since.  

In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim; symptoms described; and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim.  Id. at 5.  In light of the Court's decision in Clemons, the Board has re-characterized the issue on appeal as entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.   This will provide the most potentially favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the Court's holding in Clemons.  Id. 

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's STRs are silent as to any reports of anxiety, or any psychiatric symptoms during service.  At her June 1991 separation examination, she explicitly denied any nervous trouble.

Similarly, post-service, the Veteran's available private and VA treatment records do not contain any psychiatric diagnoses.  In May 2016 VA treatment notes, for the first time, she requested a mental health appointment for depression.  She denied any thoughts of harming herself but stated that she was receptive to medication if warranted.  In June 2016 VA treatment notes, the Veteran underwent an outpatient psychosocial assessment.  She denied engaging in combat, or having any deployments during service, as well as any behavioral issues, with the exception of a single Article 15 for not changing a tire on her vehicle.  She reported to the examiner that she was a little bit stressed because she was not currently working and had always worked.  The Veteran explicitly stated that she was doing okay until she became unemployed in November 2015.  

The Veteran denied any past psychiatric history, any history of suicidal acts or self-harm, any history of violence or assault, and any substance abuse.  She reported a difficult childhood due to being teased, but that it improved in middle and high school, a marriage of 21 years, and two children with whom she maintained close relationships.  She stated that her current stressors were almost solely financial, but that she did okay because she was able to rely on her retirement and income from renting her home.  After interviewing and evaluating the Veteran, the examiner found that she did not have a mental health diagnosis, noting that she was simply experiencing some psychosocial stressors due to unemployment.  The examiner gave the Veteran their business card and noted that she could make contact to schedule another appointment, if necessary, but that a single appointment seemed to suffice for the time being.  Thereafter, there was no evidence of additional psychiatric appointments or complaints.

The evidence does not establish the first element of service connection, a current disability.  The medical evidence of record post-service spans decades and includes both VA and private treatment records and there is no evidence of a chronic mental health disability, nor any reasonably attributable symptoms.  Instead, the only mention of a psychiatric issue in the Veteran's record resulted in an evaluation which found no evidence of a mental health diagnosis.  

The Board has considered that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to assess the status or etiology of any psychiatric disorder.  In McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), the Court set forth the criteria considered when determining whether a VA examination is necessary to assist in establishing service connection on a direct basis.

The Court held that a VA examination is warranted when there is:

(1) competent evidence of a current disorder or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disorder; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and (3) an indication that the disorder, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disorder, may be associated with the Veteran's active military service, but that (4) insufficient competent medical evidence is on file for the VA Secretary to make a decision on the claim.

Id. at 81.

In this case, however, the Board finds that there is no competent evidence of a current disorder, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disorder, and that the claim does not survive the first element of analysis under McLendon.  Id.  

Specifically, despite the available treatment records spanning decades, and the Veteran undergoing a psychological evaluation, there is no evidence of persistent symptoms or a mental health diagnosis.  Even when considering the Veteran's reports of depression, the June 2016 VA examiner found no evidence of a diagnosis, finding only that she had situational and circumstantial stress.  

Additionally, the Veteran was directed to contact the examiner should she experience any further trouble with her mental health, and there is no evidence that she made any follow up appointments.  The Board affords significant probative weight to the June 2016 outpatient evaluation, as it considered the Veteran's reports of depression and a complete evaluation was completed, but no evidence of persistent symptoms or a diagnosis was found.  

Therefore, after a careful review of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for service connection fails because the most probative evidence of record does not show a diagnosis of a mental health disorder.  Where the record evidence does not establish that the Veteran currently has the disorder for which service connection is sought, service connection for that disorder is not authorized under the statutes governing veterans' benefits.  Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225; Rabideau, 2 Vet. App. at 144.

REASONS FOR REMAND

III.

Bilateral Foot Disorder

The Veteran contends that she has bilateral foot disorders which are a result of her active-duty service.  Specifically, she asserts that her foot pain began during service and has persisted since that time.  

The RO has made favorable findings that the Veteran has current diagnoses of bilateral flat feet, hallux valgus, hallux rigidus, and degenerative arthritis.  The RO has also conceded participate in toxic exposure risk activity.  The Board is bound by the favorable findings of the RO in the absence of clear and unmistakable evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

The Veteran's STRs also show complaints of, and treatment for, bilateral foot pain.  Besides consistent treatment for bilateral ingrown toenails, the Veteran's STRs also show a June 1981 complaint of right foot and left toe pain for approximately two weeks.  An impression was given of sole issues, and she was advised to wear different shoes for 48 hours.  In December 1985, she reported pain in her feet after slipping on ice.  Finally, in October 1990, she was seen at the podiatry clinic with some pain, swelling, erythema, and drainage in her left foot.  

Thus, the first and second elements of direct service connection are met, and the remaining question before the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's active duty and her current bilateral foot disorders.

Here, the record contains a single etiological opinion.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2024.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders were due to her active-duty service.  The examiner reasoned that the there was a lack of evidence in service to support direct service connection.  The examiner noted that there were multiple STRs found for bilateral ingrown toenails but that this condition affected only the toenails and did not cause the development of hallux valgus, hallux rigidus, or degenerative arthritis.  The examiner noted that there was no evidence found in service to support any claims for bilateral foot issues which would lead to these conditions, and that medical notes finding these conditions were from 2019, nearly thirty years following service. 

After careful review, the Board concludes that the June 2024 VA opinion in the record is not adequate for adjudication.  Specifically, the June 2024 VA examiner found no evidence of foot treatment in the STRs, noting that she was only treated for recurring ingrown toenails, and that an ingrown toenail would not cause the current diagnoses.  However, the examiner did address the multiple references to bilateral foot pain, discussed above, which show the Veteran complaining of bilateral foot pain after a slip and fall incident, the impression of sole issues, and other instances of unexplained foot and toe pain.  

Thus, the Board cannot afford significant probative weight to the June 2024 VA opinion as the reasoning was based upon an incomplete factual premise.  Additionally, the examiner did not provide an opinion based on the Veteran's conceded toxic exposures.  Thus, the June 2024 VA opinion is inadequate, and an addendum opinion should be obtained.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (holding that once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought).

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Another VA examination should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner.  Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to address the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders are related to any incident of her active-duty service, to include TERA during the Veteran's active military service.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner is asked to consider and discuss the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA. 

In rendering an opinion, the examiner is directed to properly consider, and address, all the relevant foot treatment noted in the Veteran's STRs. 

In considering any lay statements of record, the clinician should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed.  

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

They should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

	 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yacoub, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.