Citation Nr: A25033270
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240520-442538
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable rating for testicular cancer, status post chemotherapy and surgery, with erectile dysfunction, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for gall bladder removal, liver cancer, and gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 50 percent for anxiety disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for acute respiratory failure and pulmonary embolism is denied.

Entitlement to a higher level of special monthly compensation for loss of use of creative organ is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran is assigned the maximum schedular rating available for loss of his right testis, and he has been granted special monthly compensation for loss of use of a creative organ.

2. The Veteran is assigned the maximum schedular evaluation for gallbladder removal.  He does not have does not have vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  

3. The Veteran's anxiety disorder is productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

4. The Veteran's acute respiratory failure and pulmonary embolism is not manifested by chronic pulmonary thromboembolism requiring anticoagulant therapy or following inferior vena cava surgery without evidence of pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular dysfunction; or at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

5. The Veteran is in receipt of the maximum rating of special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a compensable initial rating for testicular cancer, status post chemotherapy and surgery, with erectile dysfunction, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.115a, 4.115b, Diagnostic Codes 7528-7524.

2. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 30 percent for gall bladder removal, liver cancer and gastroesophageal reflux disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7343-7318.

3. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 50 percent for anxiety disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.  

4. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 30 percent for acute respiratory failure and pulmonary embolism have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602-6817.  

5. The criteria for entitlement to a higher level of special monthly compensation for loss of use of creative organ have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2016 to February 2024.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In a May 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review lane.  The docketed letter in this case was sent to both the Veteran and to the Veteran's attorney. 

As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issues on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by the applications of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321.

When the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for in a Diagnostic Code, a zero percent evaluation will be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

1. Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for testicular cancer, status post chemotherapy and surgery, with erectile dysfunction, is denied.

The Veteran's service-connected testicular cancer, status post chemotherapy and surgery, with erectile dysfunction, has been assigned a noncompensable evaluation. The disability is evaluated under Diagnostic Codes 7528-7524.  The Veteran has also been granted entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC), pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) for loss of use of a creative organ effective from February 28, 2024.

Diagnostic Code 7528 provides the rating criteria for malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system. A note provides that if there has been no local reoccurrence or metastasis, residuals are to be rated as voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant.  In this case, there is no evidence of reoccurrence or metastasis and thus, this disability must be rated on the predominant residual.

Thus, the Veteran has been rated under Diagnostic Code 7524, which provides a noncompensable rating for the removal of one testis, and a 30 percent rating for both. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b. An accompanying Note states that, in cases of the removal of one testis as the result of a service-incurred injury or disease, other than an undescended or congenitally undeveloped testis, with the absence or nonfunctioning of the other testis unrelated to service, an evaluation of 30 percent will be assigned for the service-connected testicular loss. The Note also provides that a testis which is undescended or congenitally undeveloped is not a ratable disability.

In a June 2023 VA male reproductive organs conditions examination report, the Veteran reported that he underwent surgery for right-sided testicular cancer in December 2022.  He reported experiencing daily testicular pain with prolonged walking and sitting.  The examiner noted that the right testicle had been removed.  There was no renal dysfunction due to the testicular cancer.  There was no voiding dysfunction.  There was erectile dysfunction.  There was no retrograde ejaculation.  The Veteran did not have a history of chronic prostatitis, urethritis, epididymitis, orchitis, or urinary tract infections.  Physical examination of the penis was normal.  The left testicle was normal, and the right testicle was absent.  The left epididymis was normal with right side absent.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's cancer treatment had been completed and that his cancer was in remission.  Chemotherapy was completed in March 2023.  There were no residuals or complications due to the cancer or treatment of the cancer other than that was discussed above.           

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted.  Diagnostic Code 7528 provides the rating criteria for malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system.  A note provides that if there has been no local reoccurrence or metastasis, residuals are to be rated as voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant. In this case, there is no evidence of reoccurrence or metastasis, or voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction.

The Veteran underwent surgery for right-sided testicular cancer in December 2022.  There is no evidence showing that the Veteran has had both testes removed.  Thus, a compensable evaluation would only be warranted under Diagnostic Code 7524 if the remaining testicle is nonfunctioning.  Importantly, the primary symptom reported by the Veteran was pain in the left testicle.  The Board recognizes that the accompanying note to Diagnostic Code 7524 indicates that a 30 percent rating will be assigned if there is absence or nonfunctioning of the other testis unrelated to service. However, in this case, the left testicle is present with no abnormalities.  

The Board again notes that the Veteran has been granted SMC for loss of use of a creative organ as a result of this disability.  Although the disability is rated as noncompensable under the schedular rating criteria, SMC is intended to compensate the Veteran for any reproductive impairment caused by his service-connected testicular cancer.

In sum, an initial compensable rating for testicular cancer, status post chemotherapy and surgery, with erectile dysfunction, is denied.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.  

2. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for liver cancer, gallbladder removal and gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

The Veteran is assigned a 30 percent rating for liver cancer, gall bladder removal and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 Diagnostic Code 7343-7318.  The Board notes that at the time of the issuance of the March 2024 rating decision, GERD did not have its own diagnostic code, and the RO rated it by analogy to Diagnostic Code 7346 for hiatal hernia.    

Ratings under Diagnostic Codes 7301 to 7329, inclusive, 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348, inclusive, are not combined with each other.  A single evaluation is assigned under the Diagnostic Code that reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114. 

Changes to the rating schedule for digestive system disabilities became effective on May 19, 2024.  The amended criteria, if favorable to the Veteran's claim, can only be applied for the period from the effective date of the regulatory change; however, the old regulations will be considered for the periods both before and after the change was made.  Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Both before and after the amendment, under Diagnostic Code 7343, pertaining to malignant neoplasms of the digestive system, a 100 percent rating is assigned for active cancer, and six months after discontinuance of such treatment, the disability will be rated based on residuals.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Code 7343.

Prior to May 19, 2024, under Diagnostic Code 7318, a 10 percent rating is warranted for removal of the gallbladder with mild symptoms and a 30 percent rating is warranted for removal of the gallbladder with severe symptoms.

From May 19, 2024, Diagnostic Code 7318, Cholecystectomy (gallbladder removal) provides for a noncompensable rating when the removal of the gallbladder does not cause symptoms; a 10 percent rating when there is intermittent abdominal pain and diarrhea characterized by one to two watery bowel movements per day; and a 30 percent rating characterized by recurrent abdominal pain (post-prandial or nocturnal); and chronic diarrhea characterized by three or more watery bowel movements per day.

Prior to May 19, 2024, GERD was not specifically listed in the rating schedule and as noted above, the Veteran's GERD is rated by analogy under Diagnostic Code 7346 for hiatal hernia.  A 10 percent rating is assigned with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity; a 30 percent rating is assigned for persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; and, a 60 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

Effective May 19, 2024, GERD is listed in the rating schedule and is assigned under Diagnostic Code 7206.  A noncompensable rating is assigned for a documented history without daily symptoms or requirement for daily medication; a 10 percent rating is assigned for a documented history of esophageal stricture(s) that requires daily medications to control dysphagia otherwise asymptomatic; a 30 percent rating is assigned for a documented history of recurrent esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than 2 times per year; a 50 percent rating is assigned for a documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires at least one of the following: dilatation 3 or more times per year, dilatation using steroids at least one time per year, or esophageal stent placement; and an 80 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia with at least one of the symptoms present: aspiration, undernutrition, and/or substantial weight loss as defined by § 4.112(a) and treatment with either surgical correction of esophageal stricture(s) or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube).  38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7206.  

In a June 2023 VA liver conditions examination report, the examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with metastatic liver cancer and underwent surgery two times in December 2022.  The Veteran reported experiencing daily symptoms of an aching sharp right-sided abdominal pain with accompanying nausea and regular symptoms of daytime fatigue.  The fatigue was reported as occurring with moderate exertional activities.  The Veteran did not have signs or symptoms attributable to chronic or infectious liver disease.  There were no signs or symptoms attributable to cirrhosis of the liver, biliary cirrhosis or cirrhotic phase of sclerosing cholangitis.    

In a June 2023 VA gallbladder examination report, the examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment for testicular cancer also included gallbladder removal in December 2022.  The Veteran reported having intermittent sharp right-sided abdominal pain with accompanying nausea.  The Veteran reported having severe symptoms related to the gallbladder.  There were no symptoms related to the pancreas.  There were no benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases related to the gallbladder.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms or scars related to the gallbladder condition.   

In a June 2023 VA GERD examination report, the Veteran reported that on most days he experiences reflux, a burning substernal chest and throat pain, pyrosis and postprandial cough.  He took Omeprazole for treatment of his GERD.  The examiner noted the following symptoms:  persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, and substernal pain.  There was no esophageal stricture, spasm of the esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus.  There were no symptoms related to the pancreas.  There were no benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases related to GERD.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms or scars related to GERD.     

As noted above, a 30 percent rating is the maximum schedular evaluation available under Diagnostic Code 7318 (prior and revised rating criteria), for removal of the gallbladder.  

The Board finds that as the Veteran does not have an esophageal stricture, the prior rating criteria are the most favorable to the Veteran's claim and will assess his GERD disability according to the rating criteria in effect prior to the May 2024 revisions.

Under that criteria, the Veteran's GERD is not productive of vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health as contemplated by the higher, 60 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7346.   

Accordingly, an initial rating higher than 30 percent for gall bladder removal, liver cancer, and GERD is not warranted.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.   

3. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 50 percent for anxiety disorder is denied.

The Veteran's anxiety disorder is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 9400.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130. All psychiatric disabilities are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders.  

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when the psychiatric disorder results in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such an unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

On VA mental disorders examination in June 2023, the following psychiatric symptoms were noted:  anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  The Veteran was cooperative and readily responded to all questions posed to him.  He was oriented times four and his thinking was logical and linear.  He did not present with delusional thinking, nor did he report experiencing auditory or visual hallucinations.  His mood was euthymic.  The examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an increased rating is not warranted for the Veteran's anxiety disorder.  In pertinent part, the evidence reflects that the Veteran did not experience symptoms such as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, or near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively. The Veteran did not exhibit impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, or neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.

Rather, the Veteran's current symptoms, as reflected on the VA examination report, more nearly manifest as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Accordingly, the evidence persuasively weighs against a rating higher than 50 percent for anxiety disorder and the claim for a higher initial rating is denied. 

In sum, an initial rating higher than 50 percent for the Veteran's anxiety disorder is not warranted.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.   

4. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for acute respiratory failure and pulmonary embolism is denied.

The Veteran's respiratory disability is rated as 30 percent disabling under Diagnostic Codes 6602 (bronchial asthma) and 6817 (pulmonary vascular disease).  

Under Diagnostic Code 6817, a 30 percent rating is warranted pulmonary vascular disease when the condition is symptomatic, following resolution of acute pulmonary embolism.

A 60 percent rating is warranted where there is chronic pulmonary thromboembolism requiring anticoagulant therapy or following inferior vena cava surgery without evidence of pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular dysfunction.

A higher, 100 percent, rating would be warranted if there is primary pulmonary hypertension, or; chronic pulmonary thromboembolism with evidence of pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular hypertrophy, or cor pulmonale, or; pulmonary hypertension secondary to other obstructive disease of pulmonary arteries or veins with evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy or cor pulmonale.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6817.

Under Diagnostic Code 6602, a 60 percent rating is warranted for bronchial asthma when there is FEV-1 of 40 to 55-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or; at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or; intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

A 100 percent rating is warranted under Diagnostic Code 6602, when there is FEV 1 of less than 40 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of less than 40 percent, or; or more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or; required daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immune suppressive medications.

Ratings under diagnostic codes 6600 through 6817 and 6822 through 6847 will not be combined with each other.  Where there is lung or pleural involvement, ratings under diagnostic codes 6819 and 6820 will not be combined with each other or with diagnostic codes 6600 through 6817 or 6822 through 6847.  A single rating will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.96(a).  VA will evaluate coexisting service connected respiratory disabilities covered by § 4.96(a) under the criteria enumerated in the predominant disability's Diagnostic Code.  Id. 

In a June 2023 VA respiratory conditions examination report, the examiner noted that the Veteran had acute respiratory failure secondary to chemotherapy treatment.  The Veteran reported experiencing daily symptoms of cough, chest discomfort, and shortness of breath when he attempted to perform moderate exertional activities for more than several minutes.  He indicated that his respiratory condition did not require the use of oral or parenteral corticosteroid medications.  He did indicate the use of daily inhalational bronchodilator therapy.  He did not use antibiotics or outpatient oxygen therapy.  The Veteran was unable to perform pulmonary function testing due to the collapse of his lung condition within the past six months.  Exercise capacity testing was nor performed.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have multiple respiratory conditions.  The examiner determined that the Veteran's pulmonary embolism was symptomatic, following resolution of acute pulmonary embolism.      

Based on the foregoing, a higher, 60 percent rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 6817.  The medical evidence does not show that the Veteran's respiratory condition is manifested by chronic pulmonary thromboembolism requiring anticoagulant therapy or following inferior vena cava surgery without evidence of pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular dysfunction.

A higher rating under Diagnostic Code 6602 is also not warranted.  In this case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's reported use of daily inhalational bronchodilator therapy; however, the rating criteria explicitly distinguishes "inhalational" therapy from "systemic" therapy.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602. Therefore, the use of inhaled corticosteroids, therefore, does not constitute the use of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids for VA purposes.  Thus, the evidence does not show monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or; intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids to warrant a higher 60 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6602.  

In sum, an initial rating higher than 30 percent for the Veteran's acute respiratory failure and pulmonary embolism is not warranted.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.   

Special Monthly Compensation

SMC is a special statutory award granted in addition to awards based on the schedular evaluations provided by the diagnostic codes in VA's Rating Schedule.  Claims for SMC are governed by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) through (s) and 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350 and 3.352.  SMC is payable at a specified rate if the veteran, as the result of service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss of use of one or more creative organs.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k), 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a).

The rate of SMC compensation is a specific value that is adjusted annually, independent of any other awarded compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).  The annual adjustment is made by the United States Congress through statutory action and not the Department of Veterans Affairs, which has no control over the amount established or set by Congress.

5. Entitlement to a higher level of special monthly compensation for loss of use of creative organ is denied.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was granted SMC for loss of use of a creative organ, effective February 28, 2024.  He seeks a higher level of compensation.  However, the Board finds that an increased rating for SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ is not warranted, as the law does not provide for a higher rate of SMC for loss of use of a creative organ.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).

Because SMC rates are determined by statute and are not subject to the Board's discretion, the Board is specifically prohibited from granting benefits that are not authorized by law.  See 38 U.S.C. § § 7104(c); McTighe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 29, 30 (1994).  Therefore, the claim must be denied as a matter of law. Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).

In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.   

In each of the increased ratings questions addressed above, the Board has considered whether extraschedular consideration is supported by the evidence, but finds that application of the regular schedular standards is adequate to rate this single service-connected disability and that the disability is not so exceptional or unusual as to render the schedular standards impractical.  Thus, extra-schedular consideration is not warranted in this case.  38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1).

 

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Henriquez, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.