Citation Nr: A25033430
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240906-471982
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record weighs in favor of a finding that the Veteran's current major depressive disorder began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder, have been met. 38 U.S.C.§§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1987 to April 1994.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 RO decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder

The Veteran seeks service connection for major depressive disorder. He contends that his major depressive disorder is the result of events and conditions that he experienced while serving as a military police officer. In the alternative, he contends that his service-connected tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss have aggravated his condition.

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Secondary service connection requires: (1) a service-connected disability; (2) a nonservice-connected disability; and (3) evidence that the nonservice-connected disability is either (a) proximately due to or the result of the service-connected disability or (b) aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected disability and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disability. Id.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the claimant. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

In the August 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, recurrent, mild, according to a June 2023 VA examination. This favorable finding is binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

With the first element of service connection, current disability, satisfied, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's major depressive disorder began during active service or is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or alternatively, is proximately due to or aggravated by a service-connected disability. There is evidence in favor of and against the claim.

As to the second element of service connection, an in-service event or injury, the Veteran asserts that while he was in service the conditions of his environment and work caused him to develop depression. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that as a military police officer, every day he encountered individuals at their worst, people would lie right to his face or break rules that he had to hold them accountable for, all their issues and bad choices would fester in his mind, and a co-worker committed suicide while they were in the military police station together. He asserts that while on active duty, he started having trouble sleeping, started to self-medicate with alcohol, and his personal relationships were affected. He stated that he did not seek treatment while in service because friends he knew who requested treatment were labeled as weak or incompetent. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

In support of his claim, in April 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement from a former coworker who also served as a military police officer. This individual stated that he and the Veteran discussed the things they saw, witnessed, and did in the service that were harmful and dangerous and that affected their sleep and personal relationships to this day. The Board finds that the second element of service connection, an in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, has been satisfied based on the Veteran's and his coworker's credible statements.

With regards to causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury, the third element of service connection, the veteran submitted a medical opinion dated in March 2022 from a private psychologist who interviewed the Veteran. The psychologist opined that the Veteran's depressive disorder with anxious distress is at least as likely as not due to service, deployments, and traumatic exposures during service as a military police officer. The examiner explained that the Veteran reported that during service he experienced withdrawal, depression, and difficulty establishing and maintaining relationships and that he continues to experience depressed mood, sleep impairment, distressing dreams related to military trauma, intrusive thoughts, anxiety, and loss of motivation and interest and he has utilized alcohol as a coping mechanism.

Also in favor of the claim, in June 2023, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's depression was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner explained that there is no evidence of mental health issues, specifically depression prior to the military and based on the Veteran's records and self-reported symptoms, his diagnosis of major depressive disorder originated in the military. This opinion was based on a review of the Veteran's claims file and an interview with the Veteran. The Board assigns high probative value to his opinion as it contains clear rationale and is consistent with the evidence of record.

The Board notes that a July 2024 VA mental health functional assessment noted that the Veteran reported that since his military service, "things have messed with my head...some of the things we did. I didn't talk about it with anyone," consistent with his March 2023 statement and the June 2023 VA examination mental health history.

Evidence against the claim includes two VA medical opinions. The RO requested clarification from the June 2023 examiner, stating that the Veteran's available service treatment records do not show any depression or complaints of depression during service. The examiner responded that while the Veteran does meet the criteria for major depressive disorder, there are no records to support that the diagnosed major depressive disorder is related to military service, therefore, it is less likely than not that the diagnosed major depressive disorder is due to military service. The Board assigns no probative value to this second opinion because it ignores the Veteran's statement that he did not seek treatment in the service because he did not want to appear weak or incompetent. An examiner must consider the veteran's lay assertions when rendering an opinion. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007). Additionally, "[w]hen assessing a claim, the Board may not consider the absence of evidence as substantive negative evidence." Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011).

In January 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's depression is less likely than not proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus. The examiner explained that there is no evidence of depression prior to 2022, and March 2022 and June 2023 VA examiners did not discuss depression as related to hearing loss or tinnitus. The Board finds this opinion to be competent and credible but assigns it no probative value as it relates to whether there is a direct causal link between the Veteran's depression and military service.

The only probative medical opinions of record are in favor of a link between the Veteran's current major depressive disorder and military service. Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence of record is in favor of finding that the Veteran's major depressive disorder was incurred in or caused by his military service.

Because there is not an approximate balance in the weight of the evidence, the doctrine of reasonable doubt does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder is granted.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Wolfe, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.