Citation Nr: A25033300
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240719-456726
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected Parkinson's disease with tremors is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's Parkinson's disease with tremors more nearly approximates no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for Parkinson's disease with tremors have not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6204; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8514.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1977 to December 1980 and from November 1986 to March 1990.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The Veteran selected the Direct Review lane when she submitted a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, in July 2024. In the direct review lane, the Board reviews the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision for each issue. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that the Veteran submitted additional evidence in July 2024 with her VA Form 10182, including a statement as well as additional medical evidence. However, as the Veteran selected the direct review lane, this evidence is ineligible for review. Under the direct review lane, the Board may only consider evidence up until the time of the July 2024 rating decision.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected Parkinson's disease with tremors

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  However, separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found.  This practice is known as "staged" ratings." Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The relevant temporal focus for adjudicating an increased rating claim is on the evidence concerning the state of the disability for the time period beginning one year before the claim was filed until VA makes a final decision on the claim. Id.

When evaluating a service-connected disability based on limitation of motion, the Board must take into consideration functional loss due to pain under 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 and functional loss due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. § 4.45. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see Johnson v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 7 (1996). A finding of functional loss due to pain must be supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40; Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80, 85 (1997). Nonetheless, a rating higher than the minimum compensable rating is not assignable under any diagnostic code relating to range of motion where pain does not cause a compensable functional loss. Rather, the "pain must affect some aspect of 'the normal working movements of the body' such as 'excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance,' "as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, before a higher rating may be assigned. See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 37 (2011).

The Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease in the July 2024 rating decision on appeal, rated as 30 percent disabling effective September 2022. 

The Veteran's Parkinson's disease is currently rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8000-8514. Under Diagnostic Code 8514, a 30 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the musculospiral nerve (radial nerve) on the major (dominant) side. A 50 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis. A 70 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis with drop of hand and fingers, wrist and fingers perpetually flexed, the thumb adducted falling within the line of the outer border of the index finger; cannot extend hand at wrist, extend proximal phalanges of fingers, extend thumb, or make lateral movement of wrist; supination of hand, extension and flexion of elbow weakened, the loss of synergic motion of extensors impairs the hand grip seriously; total paralysis of the triceps occurs only as the greatest rarity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8514.

The term "incomplete paralysis" used in reference to evaluation of peripheral nerve injuries indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves.

The words "slight," "moderate" and "severe" as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. It should also be noted that use of terminology such as "severe" by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue. All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.  For reference and illustrative purposes, the Merriam-Webster dictionary defines "mild" as small of its kind or in amount; "moderate" as tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension; and "severe" as "of a great degree." See https://www. merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mild; www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ moderate; www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.

Neurological disorders are ordinarily to be rated in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory, or mental function. In rating peripheral nerve injuries and their residuals, attention is given to the site and character of the injury, and the relative impairment in motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023. The VA examiner noted no motor manifestations, tremors, muscle rigidity or stiffness, mental manifestations, loss of sense of smell, sleep disturbance, difficulty swallowing or chewing, urinary problems, constipation, or sexual dysfunction. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran's Parkinson's disease does not impact her ability to work. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2024. The VA examiner noted mild motor manifestations, moderate tremors in the bilateral upper extremities, and moderate muscle rigidity and stiffness in the bilateral upper extremities. There was no evidence of mental manifestations. There was also no evidence of loss of smell, sleep disturbances, difficulty chewing or swallowing, urinary problems, constipation, or sexual dysfunction. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran's Parkinson's disease does not impact her ability to work.  

Following a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's service-connected Parkinson's disease is not warranted. 

At no point have the Veteran's tremors or rigidity been described as more than moderate. See January 2024 VA Examination Report. In order to warrant the next higher 50 percent rating, the Veteran must exhibit severe incomplete paralysis. 

The Board has also considered the lay statements submitted by the Veteran. However, the Board finds that those symptoms are consistent with moderate disability. Therefore, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted at any time during the appeal period.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Slaughter, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.