Citation Nr: A25033500
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 241216-494191
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial increased rating in excess of 50 percent for service connected obstructive sleep apnea is denied.  

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) based on service connected disabilities is granted.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is not manifested by chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or requirement of a tracheostomy.  

2. The Veteran is prevented from obtaining or maintaining substantially gainful employment on account of his service-connected disabilities.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for obstructive sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6847.  

2. The criteria for TDIU rating based on service-connected disabilities have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1968 to December 1973.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In December 2024, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), selecting the Evidence Lane.  By choosing the Evidence Lane, the Veteran opted for the opportunity to submit additional evidence without a Board hearing.  In deciding the appeal, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction's (AOJ) decision on the issue or issues on appeal and evidence submitted by the appellant or his or her representative with the NOD or within 90 days following receipt of the NOD.  Thus, the Board will review evidence as of the date of the September 2024 rating decision and received within 90 days of the December 2024 NOD.  

Here, the Board notes that on the day of submitting his December 2024 NOD, the Veteran also submitted a statement describing the severity level of his conditions as well as a November 2024 private vocational assessment within the evidentiary review purview window, and this evidence shall be considered in the adjudication of the claim.  

Increased Ratings

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an initial increased rating in excess of 50 percent for service connected obstructive sleep apnea.  

Disability ratings are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from disability incurred or aggravated during service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

VA has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable through the assertions and issues raised in the record and explain the reasons and bases for conclusions.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where service connection has already been established, and increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of the disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  However, evidence to be considered in the appeal of an initial assignment of a disability rating is not limited to that reflecting the then current severity of the disorder.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).  

Generally, the effective date of an award of an increased rating is the date of receipt of a claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  If the earlier date that the claimed increase in disability had occurred was factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record within one year prior to the receipt of claim, the effective date is the date such increase occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).  

Separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.   38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  

The Board will consider whether staged ratings should be assigned to compensate for times when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the pendency of the claim.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007).  

The Board has reviewed all the evidence in the record.  Although the Board has an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no requirement that all of the evidence submitted by the Veteran or obtained on his behalf be discussed in detail.  Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim.  See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) and Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).  

Although the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms and events he personally witnessed or took part in, he is not competent to opine as to the etiology of his own medical diagnoses.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Lay testimony is competent as to features or symptoms, but not etiology, of an injury or illness.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  

VA shall consider all information lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  To deny a claim on its merits, there must be a showing that the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

1. Entitlement to an initial increased rating in excess of 50 percent for service connected obstructive sleep apnea is denied.  

After a review of the record, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms are wholly considered by the currently assigned 50 percent rating, and an initial increased rating in excess of 50 percent must be denied.  

The Veteran's sleep apnea is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97 Schedule of ratings, respiratory system, DC 6847, Sleep Apnea Syndromes (Obstructive, Central, Mixed).  Under DC 6847, a 50 percent rating is warranted when sleep apnea requires use of a breathing assistance device such as a continuous airway pressure (CPAP) machine.  A 100 percent disability rating is warranted for sleep apnea which results in chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale; or requires tracheostomy.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6847.  

Accordingly, to warrant a higher rating, the evidence must demonstrate that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea causes a chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale or require tracheostomy.  However, the medical evidence of record fails to demonstrate these findings consistent with DC 6847.  

The Board has further considered whether the evidence demonstrates that the manifestation of the Veteran's symptoms permits an increased rating under various respiratory system evaluation pertaining to bronchitis, asthma or emphysema under DCs 6600, 6602, 6603.  However, the record further fails to demonstrate that the Veteran has bronchitis, asthma or emphysema.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97 DCs 6600, 6602, 6603.  Further, the evidence fails to demonstrate that the Veteran has chronic pleural effusion or fibrosis or the applicable criteria for a 60 percent rating under DC 6845.  The evidence also fails to demonstrate that the Veteran has sarcoidosis or the applicable criteria for a 60 percent rating under DC 6846.  Thus, these DCs of the respiratory system will not be further discussed.  

Turning to the evidence of record, a September 2022 VA sleep apnea examination confirms a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  The clinician indicated that the examination for sleep apnea does not require a face to face examination and all of the pertinent history was available.  The clinician noted that the Veteran has been fitted with a CPAP machine.  The clinician reported that the Veteran does not use continuous medication required for control of a sleep disorder.  The clinician reported that the Veteran requires use of a CPAP machine.  The clinician indicated that the Veteran does not currently have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to any conditions related to obstructive sleep apnea.  The clinician indicated that the Veteran does not have any scars (surgical or otherwise) or treatment of any conditions related to obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner noted that a May 2022 sleep study revealed moderate obstructive sleep apnea with an apnea-hypopnea index between 15 and 20 per hour and that his lowest desaturation was to 79 percent.  The examiner did not find any other significant test findings and/or results.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea does not impact his ability to work.  

VA medical record reflect that the Veteran has past visits with a respiratory therapist.  An October 2022 VA medical center treatment record (VATR) notes a bilateral equal air entry, no wheezing and no rales present upon pulmonary/chest review.  A January 2023 VATR notes that a respiratory evaluation was negative for cough and shortness of breath.  The record further notes that respiratory system was clear to auscultation.  A May 2024 VATR reveals that assessment of the Veteran's respiratory system was negative for cough, shortness of breath and wheezing.  A June 2024 VATR reflects that upon physical examination, the Veteran's lungs indicated non labored respirations.  

A June 2024 VA sleep apnea examination confirms a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  The clinician noted that the Veteran's current symptoms are daytime sleepiness and tiredness.  The clinician reported that the Veteran does not require the use of continuous medication for control of a sleep disorder.  The clinician reported that the Veteran requires use of a breathing assistance device such as a CPAP machine.  The clinician indicated that the Veteran does not currently have any findings, signs or symptoms attributable to sleep apnea nor any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to any conditions related to obstructive sleep apnea.  The clinician indicated that the Veteran does not have any scars (surgical or otherwise) or treatment of any conditions related to obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner did not find any other significant test findings and/or results.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea does not impact his ability to work.  

Here, the Board finds that neither that the subjective lay evidence of record nor the objective medical evidence of record as found in the VATRs and examinations reveal symptoms consistent with chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or; requires tracheostomy as required for a 100 percent rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6847.  

Upon reviewing the relevant evidence of record, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 50 percent for sleep apnea is not warranted.  Illustratively, the evidence of record demonstrates that while the Veteran has reported daytime sleepiness and tiredness, and use of a CPAP machine, the evidence of record fails to reflect that the Veteran presented with chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or; required tracheostomy at any time during the period appeal.  The objective evidence simply does not support such a finding.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6847.  

Salient, the subjective evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran has not alleged that at any point during the appeal period, he has experienced chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale or required a tracheostomy.  Id.  On the other hand, the evidence demonstrates that all of the Veteran's reported symptoms have been contemplated by the 50 percent rating, including requiring the use of a CPAP.  Id.  

Summarily, the Veteran has not had chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention, cor pulmonale, or a tracheostomy, which is required for a higher rating.  As such, his symptoms are wholly contemplated and compensated by the 50 percent rating criteria under DC 6847, and entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for sleep apnea is not warranted.  

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97 DC 6847.  

2. Entitlement to a TDIU rating based on service connected disabilities is granted.  

Here, the Veteran contends that he is entitled to individual unemployability due to his service connected disabilities.  

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that in his December 2024 NOD, the Veteran asserted that he is entitled to an increased rating for sleep apnea on the basis of entitlement to individual unemployability and referenced Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  

In this case, the Board notes that the September 2024 rating decision solely awarded service connection for obstructive sleep apnea at a 50 percent rating effective August 8, 2022.  

The RO has not developed nor adjudicated a claim of entitlement to a TDIU rating, especially in grating the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea in the September 2024 rating decision.  

Yet, the Veteran thereafter filed a timely NOD to initiate appellate review of the "downstream" issue of the compensation level assigned for the disability.  Seri v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 441, 447 (2007); see also Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  

In this regard, the issue as to an appeal is moot only if the granting of the claim would not lead to any effectual relief whatsoever to the appellant, such as preserving the possibility of an earlier effective date or ancillary benefits.  See Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 136-48 (2024); Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 204 (2021).  

Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating may be reasonably inferred from the evidence of record.  Rice, 22 Vet. App. at 452.  A request for a TDIU, whether expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate "claim" for benefits, but rather, can be part and parcel of a claim for an initial or increased rating for a disability.  Id.  

Thus, in adjudicating the current appeal for a higher rating, the Board follows the Court's holding in Rice, which held that a claim for a TDIU rating may be part of a rating issue when the TDIU claim is either expressly raised by a Veteran or reasonably suggested by the record.  In this case, comparable to the facts in Rice, a TDIU claim has been raised by the Veteran and the entirety of the evidence of record; thus, the Board finds that Rice attachment of TDIU to a rating issue is applicable in this case.  Id.  

Thus, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating is properly before the Board.  

A TDIU rating may be assigned when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  

For the Board to assign a TDIU rating in the first instance, the Veteran must have a single service-connected disability rated at least 60 percent disabling, or two or more service-connected disabilities with at least one disability rating of 40 percent or greater and a combined rating of 70 percent or higher.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  The existence or degree of nonservice connected disabilities will be disregarded if the above-stated percentage requirements are met and the evaluator determines that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him incapable of substantial gainful employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  

But for the above purpose of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable, (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident, (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g. orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric, (4) multiple injuries incurred in action, or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  Id.  

If a Veteran fails to meet the threshold minimum percentage standards enunciated in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a), rating boards should refer to the Director of Compensation and Pension Service for extraschedular consideration all cases where the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b); see also Fanning v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 225 (1993).  

A TDIU determination, either on a schedular or extraschedular basis, requires that the Veteran be unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  The service-connected disabilities, employment history, educational and vocational attainment, and all other factors having a bearing on the issue will be addressed in both instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a), (b).  

Total disability will be considered to exist when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.340.  If the total rating is based on a disability or combination of disabilities for which the Rating Schedule provides an evaluation of less than 100 percent, it must be determined that the service-connected disabilities are sufficient to produce unemployability without regard to advancing age.  38 C.F.R. § 3.341(a).  "Substantially gainful employment," in this context, is that which is more than marginal in nature.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  

The central inquiry is "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  Neither nonservice-connected disabilities nor advancing age may be considered in the determination.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.19 (2016); Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).  

The ultimate question of whether a Veteran is capable of substantial gainful employment is not a medical one; that determination is for the adjudicator.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Thus, while a VA examiner's opinion is not dispositive, the observations of the examiner regarding functional impairment due to the service-connected disability goes to the question of physical or mental limitations that may impact a Veteran's ability to obtain and maintain employment.  Additionally, any determination made by the Social Security Administration (SSA) as to a Veteran's eligibility for SSA disability is not binding on the Board in reaching its determination of whether a TDIU is warranted.  See Collier v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 412 (1991).  

The sole fact that a claimant is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough.  A high rating in itself is a recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain and keep employment.  The question is whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by the employment, not whether the Veteran can find employment.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).  

Here, the record reflects that the Veteran is service connected for PTSD with residuals of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) to include insomnia and intermittent dizziness/vertigo at a 70 percent since March 29, 2012, obstructive sleep apnea at a 50 percent rating since August 8, 2022, tinnitus at a 10 percent rating since August 27, 2013, gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD) at a 10 percent rating since February 22, 2023 and at noncompensable rating for bilateral hearing loss, hypertension and posttraumatic migraine headaches.  The Veteran's combined evaluation rating is 90 percent from August 8, 2022.  Accordingly, the Veteran meets the criteria for consideration of a TDIU rating on a schedular basis.  

Turning to the lay and medical evidence of record, with reference and incorporation to the evidence discussed above, an October 2022 VATR mental health note reflects that the Veteran complained of insomnia, anxiety, restlessness, difficulty relaxing and irritability.  The Veteran denied any recent or current suicidal ideation, intent or plans or prior suicide attempts, but reported having some passive thoughts of not wanting to live in the context of the pain from his psoriasis, which he says got to his head.  

The October 2022 VATR reflects that now that the Veteran had retired from owning a paint company, he found odd jobs around the house.  

The Veteran underwent a PTSD examination in May 2023, at which time a diagnosis of PTSD with alcohol dependence was confirmed.  The psychologist opined that the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment was best summarized as occupational and social impairment with reduced liability and productivity.  The psychologist found that the Veteran presented with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, direction or recent events, circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech, speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  Behaviorally, the psychologist reported that the Veteran was cooperative and described near social isolation.  

A November 2024 private vocational assessment notes the Veteran's educational history consists of a general equivalency diploma.  

Occupationally, the vocational assessment reflects that the Veteran's occupational history is painter and lineman.  A.N. described the Veteran's work as a full time painting contractor from 1982 to October 2019 and eventually being self-employed with his own workers.  A.N. explained the Veteran's occupation work demands require sustaining focus and attention for at least two hours at a time throughout the workday.  

Behaviorally, A.N. found that the Veteran could not sustain the occupation work demands of maintaining focus and attention for at least two hours at a time throughout the workday as a result of his service connected conditions.  A.N. described that the Veteran would exceed the tolerance levels.  

Paramount, A.N. discussed the fundamental impact of the symptoms of the Veteran's service connected disabilities on his ability to work.  Specifically, A.N. detailed that the Veteran arrived at the point of being too angry and frustrated with employees enough that they quit or he fired them until he was working on his own again.  A.N. noted that the Veteran explained that he could not keep up with the work on his own and got frustrated in dealing with customers as well, so he stopped working all together.  A.N. indicated that the Veteran explained that he felt that he had a mental breakdown and could no longer continue with the outbursts and low tolerance nor could he deal with others.  A.N. noted that the Veteran has not attempted to go back to work and that he is okay with being by himself with his dogs and not having to deal with people on a regular basis.  

A.N. found that a January 2023 TBI consult documents symptoms of poor concentration, slowed thinking and forgetfulness that are always present and make the Veteran unable to perform at work.  A.N. also referenced the opinion found in the May 2023 VA PTSD examination.  A.N. found that due to these distracting symptoms, the Veteran would not be able to sustain attention on work tasks for even two hours.  

A.N. opined that the records are consistent with an individual who was disabled and more likely than not unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment, including unskilled sedentary employment, as a result of his service connected conditions since at least August 8, 2022.  

In this case, while the September 2022 and June 2023 VA clinicians opined that that the Veteran's service-connected obstructive sleep apnea does not impact his ability to work, the Board finds that the clinicians' rationale is flawed, as there is no discussion of the lay evidence and treatment records.  Significantly, the June 2024 examination itself reflects that the Veteran reported current symptoms of daytime sleepiness and tiredness.  The clinician did not discuss whether these symptoms have any impact on the Veteran's ability to perform painting or lineman duties, particularly to sustain focus and attention for at least two hours at a time throughout the workday.  These symptoms are taken in light of A.N.'s findings that the Veteran's would exceed this tolerance levels as a result of his service connected conditions for his required occupation work demands.  

Furthermore, A.N. described that TBI symptoms of poor concentration, slowed thinking and forgetfulness are always present and make the Veteran unable to perform at work and found that due to these distracting symptoms, the Veteran would not be able to sustain attention on work tasks for even two hours.  

Essentially, the Veteran's employability is significantly limited due to his service-connected obstructive sleep apnea, described above, and PTSD with residuals of a TBI, to include physical and mental symptoms of insomnia and intermittent dizziness/vertigo demonstrate symptoms which include daytime sleepiness, tiredness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, direction or recent events, circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech, speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant, disturbances of motivation and mod, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  

The Board finds that these combined symptoms of his service connected conditions interfere with the Veteran's occupational responsibilities of painter and lineman to sustain focus and attention for at least two hours at a time throughout the workday.  

Accordingly, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad, 5 Vet. App. at 529.  

The evidence demonstrates that these symptoms render him render him unlikely capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by the employment.  Id.  

Based on the foregoing, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that entitlement to a TDIU rating based on service connected disabilities is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.  

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.