Citation Nr: A25033259
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240312-423190
DATE: April 10, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II (DMII).

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for DM II is DENIED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran had active service at Camp Lejeune for more than 30 days. 

2. The evidence of record weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's DM II began during, or was due to, his active-duty service, to include his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for DM II have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.303.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the Armed Forces from October 1979 until March 1984.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 RO decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision.

The Board has reviewed all evidence of record regardless of whether it is discussed in detail in the Decision.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

I.

Legal Criteria - Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for direct service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In the alternative, service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for certain diseases associated with exposure to contaminants (defined as the volatile organic compounds trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), benzene, and vinyl chloride) in the on-base water supply located at Camp Lejeune, even though there is no record of such disease during service, if the qualifying disease manifests to a compensable degree at any time after service in a veteran, former reservist, or a member of the National Guard, who has no less than 30 days (consecutive or nonconsecutive) of service at the United States Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune in North Carolina, during the period from August 1, 1953 to December 31, 1987.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(7).

The following diseases are deemed associated with exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune: kidney cancer, liver cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, adult leukemia, multiple myeloma, Parkinson's disease, aplastic anemia and other myelodysplastic syndromes, and bladder cancer. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f).  For disabilities not presumed by regulation to be due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, a veteran may still establish service connection by showing that any such disability is directly and causally linked to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, or any other incident or injury in service.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

II.

Analysis - DM II

The Veteran contends that he has DM II which is a result of his exposure to a contaminated water supply while stationed at Camp Lejeune.  The RO has rendered favorable findings confirming a diagnosis of DM II and conceding the Veteran's exposure to contaminated water during his service at Camp Lejeune.  The Board is bound by the favorable findings of the RO in the absence of clear and unmistakable evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  Thus, the first and second element of service connection have been established, and the remaining question before the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's DM II and his active-duty service.  

To address the first theory of entitlement, the Board concludes that presumptive service connection is not established based on exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  Specifically, DM II is not a condition for which presumptive service connection can be granted based on service at Camp Lejeune.

The Veteran is competent to report his symptoms.  Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  This is beyond cavil.  Id.  The Veteran did not report any DM II or any reasonably attributable symptoms during service, at service separation, or for many years following service, specifically, until approximately 2004.  He has also not provided or submitted any statements asserting that he experienced onset of DM II during service, or shortly thereafter.  Thus, as there is no evidence of DM II during service, or within one year of separation, and DM II is not a presumptively service-connected condition, the Board concludes that the requirements of presumptive service connection are not met.

However, the lack of presumptive service connection does not preclude the Veteran from establishing service connection with proof of direct causation. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994).  

The Board will now consider this theory of relief.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) were completely silent as to any diagnoses of DM II or any reasonably attributable symptoms.  He was afforded a VA examination in September 2023.  At that time, his diagnosis of DM II was confirmed with a 2004 diagnosis date.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's DM II was a result of his active-duty service, to include exposure to PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, or benzene after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments, and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure activities.  

The examiner reasoned that after reviewing medical literature and all available documents, a medical literature review failed to show that DM II was caused by the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposures, to include PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene.  The examiner cited to six separate medical articles which discussed the toxic exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and known associated disorders.  

Here, the evidence of record, to include the June 2024 VA examination and opinion, persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's DM II was related to his active-duty service.  Specifically, the examiner provided the etiological opinion after examining the Veteran, evaluating the record, and researching and citing to multiple medical articles, finding that there is no evidence of a causal relationship between any incident of the Veteran's active-duty service and the development of DM II, to include exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  

In reaching this conclusion, the examiner considered the Veteran's statements, his STRs, medical literature, accepted medical principles, and the Veteran's treatment history.  The examiner also considered the Veteran's exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, citing the specific toxic chemicals which are known to have existed in the water supply at that time.  After considering all the available facts and evidence, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's DM II was related to any incident of his active-duty service.  The Board affords significant probative weight to this opinion as it was well-reasoned, researched, and cited to specific medical literature.  Additionally, there is no opinion or evidence of record which serves to contradict or refute these findings.  

The Board is tasked with weighing all record evidence, and, in the Board's view, it stands persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's DM II began during service, was due to his active-duty service, or was otherwise related to the conceded exposure to contaminated water while stationed at Camp Lejeune.  Accordingly, as the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claim is denied.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yacoub, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.