Citation Nr: A25033267
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-446098
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1977 to July 1980.

This matter comes on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision that in relevant part denied entitlement to a TDIU.  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a TDIU

The Veteran is seeking entitlement to a TDIU.  He has reported that his functional impairment due to his service-connected disabilities, particularly his depressive, anxiety and insomnia disorder with alcohol dependency, have rendered him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.  

During the course of the appeal, the Veteran had one disability (depressive, anxiety and insomnia disorder with alcohol dependency) rated at least 40 percent and a combined rating due to depressive, anxiety and insomnia disorder with alcohol dependency; hearing loss; tinnitus; and erectile dysfunction of at least 70 percent.  In turn, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities satisfy the schedular criteria for a TDIU.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  The evidence of record shows that the Veteran last worked as a truck driver in June 2023 when he retired voluntarily.  

Therefore, the remaining inquiry is whether such disabilities render the Veteran unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.  Factors such as employment history, as well as educational and vocational attainments, are for consideration.  The Board emphasizes that a total rating based on individual unemployability is limited to consideration of service-connected disabilities.  

The Board further notes that the ultimate question of whether a Veteran is capable of substantial gainful employment is not a medical one; rather, that determination is for the adjudicator.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  However, medical examiners are responsible for providing a full description of the effects of disability upon the person's ordinary activity.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10; Floore v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 376, 381 (2013).

After reviewing the totality of the evidence, when resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence of record shows that the Veteran is precluded from substantially, gainful employment due to the functional limitations caused by his service-connected disabilities.  There is no evidence indicating that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction precludes gainful employment.  Nevertheless, with respect to the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus, the Veteran was last afforded a VA examination in May 2022 to address the severity of these disabilities.  The examiner found that both the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus impacted his ability to work.  The examiner noted that as to his hearing loss, the Veteran stated others have to tell him things repeatedly over and over again.  Additionally, he stated that he needs to lean in with his left ear in order to hear others and he relied on lip-reading.  With respect to his tinnitus, the Veteran reported that gurgling noises can interfere with speech and changes in loudness.  He reported difficulty falling asleep and taking melatonin to help him sleep.  He also stated that when he does not take melatonin, he averages about four hours of sleep.

Importantly, in support of his claim, in September 2023, the Veteran submitted private opinion with respect to his psychiatric disorder.  The private psychiatrist noted that the Veteran had stopped working because of physical and mental issues.  The examiner opined that with reasonable medical certainty the Veteran is not capable of sustaining gainful employment at this point.  In summary, the examiner observed that the Veteran experienced difficulty attending to or is easily distracted from the task at hand.  His focus and concentration are not good resulting in unfinished projects.  He also had significant difficulty accepting supervision or receiving instructions without becoming angry.  The Veteran also could not tolerate being around people and had significant difficulty functioning around other people.  He also felt tired due to poor sleep.  Further, he is so depressed and has difficulty sustaining energy and motivation to complete assignments at work.

The subsequent September 2023 VA mental disorder examination had similar findings and also determined that the Veteran's disorder would negatively impact functioning in any occupational environment.  The Veteran reported having pervasive problems getting along with other people, with problems with verbal anger outbursts at other people, as well as problems with withdrawing from and avoiding other people.  He would likely have problems with anger outbursts in any work environment, including problems getting along with customers, co-workers, and supervisors.   He discussed having current problems with anger outbursts at strangers (road rage and at the grocery store) despite having minimal contact with other people.  The Veteran additionally described multiple symptoms that would negatively impact productivity and reliability in work environments.  He reported low energy, loss of interest, and difficulty concentrating that slow productivity or result in tasks not being completed at all in simple activities of daily living, such that the Veteran reported problems consistently completing chores on his own.  

The Veteran's difficulty concentrating would likely also negatively impact his ability to be reliable in his work such that mistakes and errors are more likely in this context.  Regarding current daily activities, the Veteran described watching TV and mowing the lawn and otherwise having minimal activities and minimal contact with people.  Overall, the Veteran would likely have problems with getting along with people at jobs and completing work-related tasks if he was working currently in any work environment.  The examiner found that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work.  

The Board observes that the evidence shows that even if contact with other people is minimal such as when driving a truck, difficulty in concentrating as well as issues with road rage would severely impair his ability to continue this type of work.  In sum, when considering the totality of the functional impairment caused by his service-connected disabilities as described above, as well as taking into consideration his work history, education and experience, and when resolving all doubt in his favor, the Veteran would be precluded from substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities.

?

In conclusion, when resolving all benefit of the doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board must conclude that the Veteran is unemployable due to his service-connected disabilities and, in turn, entitlement to TDIU is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  In order to afford the Veteran his full due process, the AOJ will assign the effective date when effectuating the decision herein, and the Veteran will have the opportunity to appeal the effective date assigned. 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.N. Moats, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.