Citation Nr: A25033095
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240712-455784
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating for nasal fracture with residual scar (NFS) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1987 to November 1991 and from September 1996 to June 1997. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The Veteran timely appealed the rating decision by filing a July 2024 Decision Review Request. The Veteran elected Direct Review of his claim by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, only the evidence associated with the record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision will be considered on appeal. 

When entitlement to a benefit cannot be established without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination or reexamination, an original claim for compensation is to be decided based on the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.655(b). When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied. Id. Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, or death of an immediate family member. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.655(a).

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in February 2024. However, the Veteran did not attend examination, and the facility reportedly was unable to contact him.  The Board notes that the original examination request included an address, two phone numbers, and an email address for the Veteran.  It is unclear which if any of these methods was used to attempt to contact him regarding the exam.

The February 2024 rating decision denied the claim for an increase rating. The Veteran submitted the July 2024 Decision Review Request but did not include an explanation for not attending the examination. The Veteran also did not request to reschedule a new one. In August 2024, the Veteran's representative submitted an Appellate Brief. In the Appellate Brief, the representative argued the Veteran could not be contacted to ensure he was notified of a request to attend an examination. The Veteran believes that if granted a new examination, the evidence from the examination would warrant an increase in rating. The Board finds that the Veteran has presented good cause for missing the scheduled examination, given that it is unclear whether appropriate methods were used in an attempt to contact him in connection with the exam. Remand is necessary so the Veteran can be scheduled for an examination to evaluate the severity of his disability, as he has shown good cause for missing his examination and as a new examination has yet to be scheduled.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Contact the Veteran to verify his phone number and address on file. Reschedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the level of severity for his service-connected NFS. A complete copy of the claims must be provided for the examiner to review. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability. The examiner must review the claims folder, including this remand, and this fact must be noted in the accompanying medical reports. The examiner should acknowledge such review in the examination report and any medically indicated tests conducted. 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Harris

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.