Citation Nr: A25033103
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-450430
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (claimed as concussion in automobile accident) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's symptoms of tinnitus are contemplated by the 10 percent rating assigned, and exceptional or unusual circumstances regarding the Veteran's tinnitus were not present at any time during the claim period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a higher rating than the 10 percent assigned for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260; Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1999 to November 2008.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for an increased rating, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As an initial matter, the Board has considered the recent holding by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (generally, the Board may not Decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later). In the Veteran's immediate case, a year has not yet passed from the time of the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. Having said that, the Veteran has not given any indication that he desires a docket switch. Regarding the claim for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus, the Board has chosen to proceed with the adjudication of the claim because in this particular instance, the law is dispositive as to that issue. Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994) (where the law is dispositive, the claim must be denied due to a lack of legal merit). In arguendo, were the Veteran to request a docket switch, neither a Board hearing nor additional submitted evidence would alter the determinative fact that the Veteran is currently in receipt of the highest possible disability rating allowed by law. Therefore, for the sake of judicial economy and in an attempt to provide the Veteran with a timely decision as to his appeal for that issue, the Board finds it appropriate to adjudicate the claim herein.

Furthermore, because the service connection claims on appeal are being remanded for the reasons set forth below, the Board recognizes that a formal Decision is not being reached as to those claims, and therefore the Veteran is not being denied any due process rights pursuant to Williams. Thus, the Board will proceed accordingly.

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

The Veteran seeks a higher rating for tinnitus, currently rated at 10 percent disabling. Diagnostic Code 6260 provides that recurrent tinnitus will be assigned a 10 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.87. Only a single evaluation will be assigned for recurrent tinnitus, whether it is perceived in one ear, both ears, or the head. Id. at Note (2).

At a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus was intermittent, affected his bilateral head, and occurred twice a week for all day. 

The Board concludes that the difficulties the Veteran described associated with his tinnitus are encompassed within and contemplated by the rating criteria for tinnitus, in which a maximum 10 percent rating is assigned for tinnitus. The February 2024 VA examiner did not find that the Veteran had uncharacteristic tinnitus, and the Board does not find that the Veteran's self-reports about his tinnitus inform of an unusual form of tinnitus. Because the maximum schedular rating is already assigned for the Veteran's tinnitus, a higher rating is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.86, Diagnostic Code 6260. As the Veteran is already in receipt of the maximum rating available under the applicable code, a higher rating must be denied as a matter of law. See Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (concluding that the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) erred in not deferring to VA's interpretation of its own regulations, 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 (b) and Diagnostic Code 6260, which limits a veteran to a single disability rating for tinnitus, regardless of whether the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral).

The Veteran has not indicated, and the record does not otherwise indicate an exceptional or unusual impact on functioning associated with the Veteran's tinnitus, and hence consideration of an extraschedular rating for tinnitus is not warranted. See Floyd v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 88, 96 (1996); 38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1). Because the evidence is persuasively against the claim for a higher rating for tinnitus for the entire claim period, a staged extraschedular rating is also not warranted, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Hart, supra; Lynch, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (claimed as concussion in automobile accident) is remanded.

In March 2022, the Veteran appeared for a VA examination. The examiner noted a past diagnosis of parietal headaches in 2007 but found no current diagnosis, stating the headache disability had resolved. In a May 2024 opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed headache disability was less likely than not related to service, because The Veteran's report of headache pain was subjective only.

In a May 2024 VA respiratory examination, the Veteran indicated that he currently had difficulty breathing and experienced wheezing, limiting his physical activity. He also relayed that he had been prescribed inhalers in the past. Despite these complaints, the examiner found not current diagnosis of a disability and wrote that the Veteran's respiratory condition did not require inhaled medications. Service treatment records show the Veteran endorsed bronchitis and the past use of an inhaler. Despite this, the examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion on the basis of no current diagnosis.

In a November 2023 VA TBI examination, the examiner declined to offer a formal diagnosis of a TBI. The examiner wrote:

"Veteran reported a motor vehicle accident on his way to the base for duty in 2007. He also reported that he hit his head several times doing down decks (2000-2003). He felt dizzy afterward. He reported that ringing in his ears causes migraines. There is no documentation of a TBI, concussion or head injury found in the records available in the records. The reported [motor vehicle accident] is not found in the records. No CT head or MRI brain found. No neuropsychological evaluation found. No behavior health records found."

The Board notes that the Veteran relayed to the examiner that he was diagnosed and treated by a private provider for a mental health condition. The Board observes there are private treatment records associated with the claims file on November 2023, that clearly show the Veteran was being treated for a mental health condition. Additionally, the Veteran's separation examination shows he endorsed a head injury and dizziness or fainting spells, explaining he experienced a motor vehicle accident in 2007. See September 2008 Exit Examination. The examination is inadequate as it does not consider this relevant information.

Further, the Board notes that a Veteran may be service connected for pain (or potentially other relevant symptomatology) when it reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018). In addition to obtaining outstanding treatment records, upon remand the Veteran should be afforded new VA examinations in which the examiner considers Saunders when determining whether the Veteran's has headache, TBI, and/or a respiratory disability that can be service connected.

Board finds that the failure to obtain adequate VA medical examinations with opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting remand under the AMA and implementing regulations. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headache condition. The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.

Based on review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Obtain a detailed history of the headache symptoms and identify any currently diagnosable condition associated with the Veteran's claimed head pains. If the Veteran does not have a diagnosable headache condition, but has pain (or other relevant symptomatology) only, determine whether that pain causes functional loss of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(b.) For each diagnosed condition, or for pain (or other relevant symptomatology) that causes functional loss, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's headache condition had its onset in or is related to service. The examiner must address the September 2008 exit examination showing a history of a head injury.

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's TBI condition. The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.

Based on review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Obtain a detailed history of the TBI symptoms and identify any currently diagnosable condition associated with the Veteran's claimed symptoms. If the Veteran does not have a diagnosable TBI condition, but has pain (or other relevant symptomatology) only, determine whether that pain (or other relevant symptomatology) causes functional loss of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(b.) For each diagnosed condition, or for pain (or other relevant symptomatology) that causes functional loss, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's TBI condition had its onset in or is related to service. The examiner must address the September 2008 exit examination showing a history of a head injury. The examiner is also directed to the private treatment records showing mental health treatment.

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's respiratory condition. The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.

Based on review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Obtain a detailed history of the respiratory symptoms and identify any currently diagnosable condition associated with the Veteran's claimed symptoms. If the Veteran does not have a diagnosable respiratory condition, but has symptoms, determine whether those symptoms cause functional loss of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(b.) For each diagnosed condition, or for respiratory symptoms that causes functional loss, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's respiratory condition had its onset in or is related to service. The examiner must address the May 2024 VA respiratory examination he currently had difficulty breathing and experienced wheezing, limiting his physical activity. Additionally, the examiner's attention is directed to the February 2005 Report of Medical History in which the Veteran reported a history of coughing. 

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. E. Geary

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.