Citation Nr: A25033407
Decision Date: 04/10/25	Archive Date: 04/10/25

DOCKET NO. 240903-471992
DATE: April 10, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain, degenerative arthritis, and degenerative disc disease (lumbosacral spine disability), and to include as due to obesity as an intermediate step, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in service, is otherwise related to service, or was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include a service-connected disability causing obesity as an intermediate step, or participation in a toxic exposure risk activity ("TERA").

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, claimed as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral spine disability, and to include as due to obesity as an intermediate step, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1168, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310; VAOPGCPREC 01-17 (January 6, 2017).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1988 to October 1992.

This case comes before the Board from a September 2023 rating decision, which denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran appealed the decision to the Board. In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review. In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Veteran asserts that his obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected disabilities. In an April 2023 statement, the Veteran said that his musculoskeletal disability of the lumbar spine keeps him from exercising. The Veteran said he takes medications for the disability, and he is prevented from being able to sleep on his side. He also stated that the pain from his musculoskeletal disabilities made it difficult for him to fall or stay asleep. The Veteran reported that he had trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings; daytime fatigue; and difficulty completing tasks.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). The three-element test to establish service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). The controlling regulation has been interpreted to permit a grant of service connection not only for a disability caused by a service-connected disability, but for the degree of disability resulting from aggravation of a non-service-connected disability by a service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). In other words, service connection may be granted for a disability found to be proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disease or injury.

In an opinion issued by VA's General Counsel, the General Counsel determined that obesity cannot be service connected on a direct basis and obesity cannot qualify as an in-service event for service-connection purposes. However, the General Counsel determined that obesity may serve as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). VAOGCPREC 1-2017. In such case, that evidence would need to reflect: (1) a service-connected disability or disabilities that caused the veteran to become obese; (2) the obesity was a substantial factor in causing another disability; and (3) the disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities. Id.

In a decision by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), it held that while obesity is not itself recognized as a disability by the Secretary of VA, it may be recognized as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a disability claimed as secondary to that service-connected disability, based on the service-connected disability causing or aggravating the obesity. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306-07 (2020).

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. The reasons follow.

The record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. For example, the June 2023 VA examination report shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. The AOJ conceded that there was evidence of a current disability, which finding is binding on the Board. Thus, the facts establish a current disability, and the first element of direct and secondary service connection is met.

As to the evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, the Veteran's service treatment records do not show a disease or injury indicative of obstructive sleep apnea. Neither the Veteran nor his representative have made allegations that sleep apnea had its onset in service, but rather that the service-connected lumbar spine disability caused the Veteran to gain weight due to not exercising. The AOJ considered direct service connection, and thus the Board will as well. The June 1988 and November 1988 Reports of Medical Examination showed that the Veteran was clinically normal in the nose and mouth and throat. In the corresponding Reports of Medical History, the Veteran denied a history of frequent trouble sleeping. Additionally, the September 1994 and December 1997 Reports of Medical Examination showed that the Veteran was clinically normal in the nose and mouth and throat. Additionally, the September 1994 and December 1997 Reports of Medical History, the Veteran denied a history of frequent trouble sleeping. While these were completed after the Veteran's service discharge, they tend to show that obstructive sleep apnea did not have its onset in service, and service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on a direct basis is not warranted.

As to secondary service connection, the Veteran is service connected for degenerative arthritis to include lumbosacral strain and degenerative disc disease of the lumbosacral spine. Thus, to this extent, the second element of a secondary service-connection claim is met.

As to evidence of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea being due to or related to service, the Board finds that the facts persuasively weigh against this element of a direct service connection claim. An August 2019 VA medical treatment record showed that the Veteran reported he had polysomnography testing as part of a work evaluation roughly two years ago, and was told he did not have sleep apnea. The first noted diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea was in April 2023, which is more than 30 years after the Veteran's separation from service and is evidence that tends to show the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea did not have its onset during service or is otherwise related to service. 

VA obtained a medical opinion in connection with the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea in September 2023. The September 2023 VA examiner stated that the Veteran was not diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea until June 2023. The examiner said that in review of BMI's documented throughout record does not identify obesity. Specifically, the examiner wrote that a BMI greater than or equal to 30 is considered obese. Even most recent BMI documented, as reported on Stop Bang Questionnaire, is noted at 28.6 which is considered overweight. Therefore, the examiner concluded that the claimed condition of obesity or sleep apnea is less likely than not related to service.

The Board finds the September 2023 VA examiner's findings and opinion to be probative evidence against a causal relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and his service. The examiner provided rationale for the opinion, which was based on a review of evidence and the application of medical principles and a review of medical literature. The Board notes that there is no competent evidence to weigh against the September 2023 VA examiner's opinion. Thus, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on a direct basis.

As to evidence that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was proximately caused or aggravated by the service-connected disabilities, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against this element of secondary service connection. Throughout the Veteran's VA medical treatment records, it showed that the Veteran exercised despite his lumbar spine disability. For instance, in October 2019, the Veteran reported that he continued to exercise, which helped his pain due to his lumbar spine disability. In April 2020, the Veteran reported that his nutrition was "pretty good," that he exercised four to five times a week, and that he slept approximately five to six hours a week. In a November 2020 VA medical treatment record, the Veteran's treating physician noted that he considered the Veteran to have a polycythemia vera diagnosis per WHO criteria. However, the examiner noted that the Veteran had a complex history that may be contributing to his overall presentation (exogenous testosterone, multiple "workout" supplements, thick neck). The physician noted that the differential diagnosis of complicating comorbidities, including undiagnosed sleep apnea and exogenous sources (although those were eliminated). In July 2021, the Veteran reported that he was doing well, working full time, and exercising. In December 2022, the Veteran reported that he was able to perform some daily activities better. He stated that he continued to go to the gym and work in his woodshop. Moreover, in January 2023 and March 2023, the Veteran reported that he remained active and was able to exercise regularly. 

To the extent that the Veteran described not being able to exercise due to his lumbar spine disability and that such had contributed to his weight gain, the Board does not find his statements credible, as these statements are inconsistent with what is documented within the VA medical treatment records. The Veteran's allegation of his inability to exercise due to his lumbar spine disability is outweighed by contemporaneous post-service records, where he reported back pain but also reported that he exercised four to five times a week. The facts documented within the VA treatment records refute his allegations. 

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from Zeyad Morcos, M.D. Dr. Morcos concluded that the Veteran's weight gain is due to his service-connected lumbar spine disability and that the overweight condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current obstructive sleep apnea. Dr. Morcos stated that the Veteran had a known service-connected disability, which can lead to and/or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating, which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure, which leads to and/or promotes weight gain. Furthermore, Dr. Morcos stated that the medical literature has documented that weight gain is known to predispose patients to and directly cause obstructive sleep apnea. He stated that it was described from a pathophysiological perspective how obstructive sleep apnea is associated with weight gain, exacerbates hyperglycemia, and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, and promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome, with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the obstructive sleep apnea. 

The Board finds that Dr. Morcos' opinion that found a positive nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities is of no probative value. For instance, Dr. Morcos did not consider the relevant record of evidence, instead it is evident that Dr. Morcos considered only the lay statements of the Veteran, which statements the Board has found not credible. A review of the opinion showed that Dr. Morcos did not consider the Veteran's VA medical records that showed that the Veteran maintained an exercise regimen despite his lumbar spine disability. Thus, the Board finds that Dr. Morcos did not consider all the relevant evidence of record when formulating his opinion, and his opinion is not adequate. Furthermore, Dr. Morcos' opinion concluded that the Veteran's obesity was due to his musculoskeletal disabilities; however, the cited medical literature that showed the Veteran was at a higher risk for obesity, not that the musculoskeletal disabilities caused the Veteran's obesity.

In June 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained related to the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability. The examiner explained that obstructive sleep apnea is a soft tissue obstruction in the upper airway. The examiner said there was no physical connection whatsoever between the spine and soft tissue obstruction in the upper airway.

In September 2023, another VA medical opinion was obtained. The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability. The examiner stated there was no current medical literature that supported a relationship between the development of obstructive sleep apnea and degenerative disc disease. The examiner stated that obstructive sleep apnea is caused by pharyngeal narrowing and closure during sleep, and likely multiple factors play a role in the pathogenesis. The examiner stated sleep-related reduced ventilatory drive and neuromuscular combined with anatomic risk factors are likely to play a significant role in upper airway obstruction during sleep. The examiner said anatomic factors that promote pharyngeal narrowing include large neck circumference, soft tissue, bone, or vessels. Furthermore, the examiner said many of these structures can lead to increased surrounding pressure of the upper airway resulting in pharyngeal collapsibility and/or insufficient space to accommodate the airflow in a portion of the upper airway during sleep. In addition, the examiner stated that the upper airway muscle tone plays a role as when it decreases, a repetitive total or partial airway collapse results. The examiner said that the most common cause of obstructive sleep apnea in adults was obesity, male sex, and advancing age. The severity of obstructive sleep apnea decreases with age when adjusting for BMI.  The examiner concluded the obstructive sleep apnea is less likely than not secondary to Veteran's service-connected degenerative disc disease of lumbar spine.

The September 2023 VA examiner also stated the Veteran was not obese per CDC guidelines for body mass index. Furthermore, the VA examiner stated that the most effective way to lose weight and combat obesity is diet therapy, especially to reduce carbohydrates and increase protein. Exercise therapy was the most effective way for muscle retention, especially resistance exercise, which was considered to be more effective than aerobic exercise. Therefore, the September 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's obesity and/or sleep apnea was less likely than not related to his service-connected degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine, as he was not currently obese.

The Board finds the June 2023 and September 2023 VA examiners' findings and opinions to be probative evidence against a causal relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and his service-connected disabilities. The examiners provided rationales for the opinions, which were based on a review of evidence, and the application of medical principles and a review of medical literature. These medical opinions are evidence against the Veteran's secondary theory of entitlement using obesity as an intermediate step.

While the examiners did not specifically address "aggravation," the Board finds that the opinion is distinguishable from the holding in El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013). In that case, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims found that the examiner's opinion that it was "more likely than not that the Veteran's alcohol abuse was related to factors other than the veteran's post-traumatic stress disorder" did not rule out the possibility that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD aggravated his alcohol abuse to some degree. Id. 

In contrast, here, the June 2023 and September 2023 VA examiners opined that that there was no etiological relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and his service-connected lumbar spine disability, with obesity as an intermediate step. Because the examiners clearly opined that there was no medical relationship between the service-connected disabilities and obstructive sleep apnea, the examiners' statements, unlike that of the examiner in El-Amin, rules out the possibility that the service-connected disabilities may aggravate to some degree the non-service-connected disability of obstructive sleep apnea. Thus, the Board finds that the June 2023 and September 2023 VA examiners' medical opinions addressed both causation and aggravation and is, therefore, probative regarding whether the service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated obstructive sleep apnea. At the present time, there is no competent and probative evidence to weigh against the June 2023 and September 2023 VA medical opinions regarding secondary service connection.

On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. Section 303 of this law provides that, if a veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity ("TERA"), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between certain disabilities, including gastrointestinal disorders, and the toxic exposure risk activities during service. 38 U.S.C. § 1168. 

A TERA examination was conducted in June 2023. The examiner stated that the obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. The examiner explained that the Veteran has obstructive sleep apnea with no mention of toxic pathologies, no cancers in the upper airway. Therefore, the examiner concluded the OSA was not related to a TERA. 

The Board finds the June 2023 VA examiner's findings and opinion to be probative evidence against a causal relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and TERA. The examiner provided a rationale for the opinion, which was based on a review of evidence, and the application of medical principles. The Board notes that there is no competent evidence to weigh against the June 2023 VA examiner's opinion related to the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and TERA.

For all the reasons laid out above, the Board finds that the competent, credible, and probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in service, is caused or aggravated by service-connected disability or disabilities, to include as due to obesity or weight gain as an intermediate step, or due to TERA activity. The nexus element for both direct and secondary service connections are not met.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to the lumbosacral spine disability as due to obesity as an intermediate step, is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the service-connection claim with consideration of the theories of entitlement considered herein. The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.