Citation Nr: A25033716
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 230620-359803
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Restoration of a 20 percent rating for cervical spine strain (neck disability) is granted, effective February 7, 2022. 

Restoration of a 20 percent rating for lumbosacral strain (low back disability) is granted, effective February 7, 2022. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for cervical spine strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the available evidence does not establish that there was actual improvement of the Veteran's neck disability under the ordinary conditions of life and work at the time of the reduction here at issue.

2. The weight of the available evidence does not establish that there was actual improvement of the Veteran's low back disability under the ordinary conditions of life and work at the time of the reduction here at issue.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the reduction in the rating for cervical spine strain from 20 to 10 percent, effective February 7, 2022, was not proper. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 5237.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the reduction in the rating for lumbosacral strain from 20 to 10 percent, effective February 7, 2022, was not proper. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1986 to September 2006. His decorations include the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal and the Joint Service Commendation Medal. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The RO, in pertinent part, reduced the ratings for the Veteran's service-connected neck and low back disabilities from 20 to 10 percent, each, effective February 7, 2022. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in June 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims for higher ratings for his service-connected neck and low back disabilities to the AOJ for correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors. The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when those claims are readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Whether the reduction in the rating for cervical spine strain from 20 to 10 percent, effective February 7, 2022, was proper

2. Whether the reduction in the rating for lumbosacral strain from 20 to 10 percent, effective February 7, 2022, was proper

The Veteran challenges the propriety of the reduction of the disability ratings for his service-connected neck and low back disabilities, both having been reduced from 20 to 10 percent. Previously, in a December 2020 decision, the AOJ had increased the ratings for both disabilities from 10 to 20 percent, effective September 16, 2020.

Generally, VA must abide by specific procedural protections that apply when a veteran's rating is reduced. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) allow for reduction in the evaluation of a service-connected disability when considered warranted by the evidence, but only after following certain procedures. See also 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (a disability may require re-ratings over time in accordance with changes in law, medical knowledge, and the veteran's condition).

Specifically, where a reduction in the evaluation of a service-connected disability or employability status is considered warranted, and the reduction would result in the reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, a rating proposing the reduction or discontinuance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The beneficiary must be notified at his or her last address of record of the action contemplated and furnished detailed reasons therefore and must be given 60 days for the presentation of new evidence to show that compensation should be continued at the present level. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).

However, these requirements do not apply if the rating reduction does not reduce the veteran's overall level of compensation. See VAOPGCPREC 71-91 (Nov. 7, 1991) (where the evaluation of a specific disability is reduced, but the amount of compensation is not reduced because of a simultaneous increase in the evaluation of one or more other disabilities, section 3.105(e) does not apply); Stelzel v. Mansfield, 508 F.3d 1345, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that VA was not obligated to provide a Veteran with 60 days' notice before making a disability rating decision effective if the decision did not reduce the overall compensation paid to the Veteran).

In this case, the June 2022 rating decision implementing the rating reductions at issue did not reduce the Veteran's overall level of compensation. Although the decision reduced the rating for his neck and low back disabilities, his combined disability rating remained at 80 percent, effective October 1, 2006. See June 2022 rating decision codesheet. Consequently, the AOJ was not required to follow the notice procedures set out in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).

Notwithstanding the fact that the procedural steps of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply in this case, a rating reduction is not proper unless the veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000). Regulations "impose a clear requirement that VA rating reductions . . . be based upon a review of the entire history of the Veteran's disability." Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1993); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.13. A rating reduction is proper if the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability. The examination reports reflecting such change must be based upon thorough examinations. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421. The evidence must reflect an actual change in the Veteran's condition and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in the use of descriptive terms. 38 C.F.R. § 4.13. If the VA examination report justifying the rating reduction is inadequate, the reduction cannot be upheld. See Tucker v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 201 (1992) (holding that the failure of the examiner in that case to review the claims file rendered the reduction decision void ab initio).

Substantively, the standard to be applied in reviewing a rating reduction decision depends on how long the rating has been in effect. Here, at the time the rating reductions at issue became effective on February 7, 2022, the Veteran's 20 percent ratings for cervical spine strain and lumbosacral strain had been continuously in effect for less than five years.

Where a rating has been in effect for less than five years, as is the case here, and the service-connected disability has not become stabilized, or the disability is likely to improve, the rating may be reduced based upon reexaminations disclosing improvement of the disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c). As noted, however, a rating reduction is not proper unless the Veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. See, e.g., Faust, supra.

Significantly, in a rating reduction case, VA has the burden of establishing that the disability at issue has improved. A rating reduction case focuses on the propriety of the reduction and is not the same as an increased rating case. See Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 286 (1991). In considering the propriety of a reduction, the Board must focus on the evidence available to the adjudicator at the time the reduction was effectuated, although post-reduction evidence may be considered in the context of evaluating whether the condition demonstrated actual improvement. Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-282 (1992).

Amendments to the criteria for rating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system were published in November 2020. See Schedule of Ratings: Musculoskeletal System and Muscle Injuries, 85 Fed. Reg. 76,453 (Nov. 30, 2020). The amendments were made effective as of February 7, 2021, and apply to claims that were pending before VA as of that date, with the provision that the more favorable of the old and new criteria are to be applied.

The Veteran's cervical spine strain and lumbosacral strain have been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237, pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula). The recent amendments did not change the General Rating Formula.

Under the General Rating Formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees, but not greater than 85 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or if the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 120 degrees, but not greater than 235 degrees; or if there is muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or if there is a vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees, but not greater than 60 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or if the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or if there is muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 30 percent rating is warranted when forward flexion of the cervical spine is 15 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine. A 40 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine; or, forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, for favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, and a 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

Normal forward flexion of the cervical spine is zero to 45 degrees, extension is zero to 45 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 45 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 80 degrees. Normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the cervical spine is 340 degrees and of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. Note 2.

For VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (0 degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis. Id. at Note (5).

The assignment of 20 percent ratings for cervical spine strain and lumbosacral strain was based on findings set out in December 2020 VA examination reports. The VA examiner (who conducted examinations of both the cervical and thoracolumbar spine) determined, in pertinent part, that the Veteran had forward flexion of the cervical spine to 30 degrees, and forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 60 degrees. The Veteran reported difficulty with sleeping due to back pain, difficulty with walking, standing, sitting for long periods of time, climbing ladders, bending, and running. As to his neck, he reported difficulty turning his head.

The reduction in the Veteran's ratings stems from his November 2021 claim for increased ratings for his neck and low back disabilities. As part of his November 2021 claim, the Veteran submitted statements in support of his claims for higher ratings, indicating that he suffered from pulling, stabbing, throbbing, aching, burning, and shooting pain in his neck, as well as a sensation of pins and needles. He also reported flare-ups and muscle spasms. He made similar complaints regarding his lumbar spine, and indicated that his lower back problems limited the activities in which he could participate. 

In February 2022, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in connection with his claims for increase. The cervical spine examiner noted that the Veteran suffered from a cervical strain that caused monthly episodes of "excruciating" right-sided neck pain that radiated down the right side of his back and was painful for two to three days. It was also noted that the Veteran reported flare-ups of the cervical spine, that he had forward flexion to 45 degrees, and that there was no evidence of further limitation during flare-ups or with repeated use over time. As to the thoracolumbar spine, an examiner indicated that the Veteran did not report flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine, but reported decreased ability to perform activities of daily living due to chronic low back pain. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had forward flexion to 80 degrees. 

On review, the Board finds that the February 2022 VA examination reports are inconsistent with the Veteran's reports of flare-ups as described in his November 2021 submissions, which renders the reports less than fully adequate. As outlined above, before reducing a Veteran's rating, VA must determine not only "that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred but also that that improvement actually reflects an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work." See Stern v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 51, 56 (2021) (quoting Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 421 (1993)). Here, while the Board acknowledges that the February 2022 VA examination reports suggest that the Veteran's disabilities had "improved" since September 2020, based on forward flexion of the cervical and thoracolumbar spine alone, there was no finding that his conditions had actually improved under the ordinary conditions of life and work.

Ultimately, the Board is not persuaded that the greater weight of the evidence at the time of the reductions established a material improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. The evidence, at a minimum, gives rise to a reasonable doubt on the matter. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The reductions were therefore improper, and the prior 20 percent ratings are restored, effective February 7, 2022. The appeal of these issues is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for cervical spine strain is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his cervical spine strain and lumbosacral strain warrant ratings in excess of 20 percent. See November 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. In that regard, the Board finds that additional development is warranted in order to obtain adequate VA examinations.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that a VA examiner must attempt to elicit information from the record and the Veteran regarding the severity, frequency, duration, and functional loss during flare-ups. Id. at 34-36. If the Veteran has flare-ups and an examination is not conducted during a flare-up, the examiner should estimate functional loss during flare-ups or explain why it is not possible to do so. Id.

As noted above, the Veteran submitted statements in November 2021 in support of his claims for increased ratings, indicating that he suffered from pulling, stabbing, throbbing, aching, burning, and shooting pain in his neck, as well as a sensation of pins and needles. He also reported flare-ups and muscle spasms. He made similar complaints regarding his lumbar spine, including complaints of flare-ups, and indicated that his low back problems limited his activities.

Again, as noted above, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in connection with his claims in February 2022. As to flare-ups, the thoracolumbar spine examiner noted that the Veteran did not report flare-ups. That was reported despite repeated indications of flare-ups on earlier examinations and the Veteran's reassertion of flare-ups as recently as November 2021. As to the cervical spine, the examiner indicated that the Veteran reported flare-ups, and that he would wake up in excruciating neck pain that radiated down the right side of his back; however, when asked to provide an estimated range of motion for the Veteran's cervical spine during flare-ups, the examiner indicated that she could not provide a response.

On review, the Board finds that the February 2022 examination reports were  inadequate for rating purposes. The examiners did not adequately address the Veteran's statements of record and did not provide all of the information necessary to properly rate his disabilities under governing criteria.

In light of the foregoing deficiencies, the AOJ should have obtained new examinations prior to entering a decision on the Veteran's claims. The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange to have the Veteran scheduled for VA examinations of his cervical and thoracolumbar spine. The examiner(s) should provide a full description of the Veteran's associated functional impairments as they relate to the relevant rating criteria.

The examination must include testing for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight bearing and non-weight bearing, if possible. Range of motion results should be recorded in degrees in each of the four aforementioned modes, if possible. In so doing, the examiner must indicate where in the range of motion pain begins. If any of the requested testing is not feasible, the examiner should explain why.

The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding functional loss due to flare-ups and repeated use over time. If the Veteran suffers from such loss, the examiner should express the loss in terms of degrees of additional loss in range of motion (i.e., in addition to that observed clinically), if feasible, taking into account all of the evidence, including the Veteran's competent statements with respect to the frequency, duration, characteristics, and severity of his limitations.

Governing law requires that if the Veteran is not exhibiting functional loss due to flare-ups and/or repeated use over time at the time of examination, examiners will nevertheless offer opinions with respect to functional loss based on estimates derived from information procured from relevant sources, including lay statements of the Veteran. An examiner must do all that reasonably should be done to become informed before concluding that an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation.

That said, if it is the examiner's conclusion that he or she cannot feasibly provide the requested opinion(s), even considering all of the available evidence, it must be so stated, and the examiner must provide the reasons why offering such opinion(s) is not feasible. It must be clear from the report that the examiner has considered all procurable and assembled data before stating that an opinion cannot be reached, and that the inability to provide an opinion reflects a limitation of knowledge in the medical community at large and not a limitation-whether based on lack of expertise, insufficient information, or unprocured testing-of the individual examiner.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Joseph T. Leonard, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.