Citation Nr: A25033105
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250129-503714
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), to include a sleep disorder, is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's GAD, to include a sleep disorder, manifested in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, and no worse.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected GAD, with sleep disorder, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9400. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from December 1966 to December 1970. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 (psychological and sleep disorders) and August 2024 (TDIU) rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Of note, the June 2024 RO rating decision implemented a May 2024 Board decision that granted the Veteran service connection for GAD and his sleep disorder, with the RO assigning an initial disability rating of 50 percent. 

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Additionally, in a correspondence accompanying the Veteran's VA Form 10182, the Veteran's attorney waived any right to select a different Board docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective June and August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or representative, with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

For the denied claim, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Because the Board is remanding entitlement to TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran's appeal has been advanced on the docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C.                   § 7107; 38 C.F.R. § 20.902.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for GAD, to include a sleep disorder, is granted.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for his service-connected GAD, to include sleep disorder, which was service connected with an effective date of January 20, 2021. 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See, 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R.                         §§ 3.321(a), 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its overall history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.41; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Nevertheless, the Board acknowledges that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007). Thus, staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38.C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Board is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran's GAD with sleep disorder is rated under the criteria contained in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). 38 C.F.R.                       § 4.130. Under those criteria, a 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name. Id.

In Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002), the Court held that the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under section 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the DC. Rather, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM).

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) also held that "a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vazquez-Claudio V. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Thus, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126a. The Federal Circuit also explained that in the context of a 70 percent rating, section 4.130 "requires not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Vazquez-Claudio V. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The Federal Circuit indicated that "[a]lthough the Veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Id.

Thus, under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio, at 114-118.

Finally, where multiple acquired psychiatric disorders have been diagnosed and it is not possible to distinguish the symptoms of a service-connected disability from non-service-connected manifestations, all the manifestations will be considered part of the service-connected disability. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998).

The effective date (and commencement of the period on appeal) of the Veteran's initial 50-percent rating is from January 20, 2021. Accordingly, the Board will focus its discussion on the evidence surrounding and following that date. 

In January 2021 the Veteran's spouse submitted a letter on the Veteran's behalf. She confirmed that the Veteran has always struggled with insomnia. She stated that nights when the Veteran sleeps seven to eight hours are few and far between. She further commented that it was hard to plan outings, as the Veteran is always tired. She mentioned the Veteran also struggles with vacations, as he is too tired to drive, and once fell asleep at the wheel and almost ran off the road. She further described that while the Veteran loves to spend time with his granddaughter, he often requires a nap when visiting with her, which disrupts the visit. Moreover, the Veteran's wife stated that although the Veteran was normally a very loving person, when he needs to nap, she will leave him alone. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in  February 2021. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic adjustment disorder, with depressed and anxious mood. The Veteran reported a chronic history of symptoms that began while serving in the military, primarily caused by insomnia and adjustment to service. He indicated that his insomnia started in service while working as a machinist mate. He described that his hours of work were always changing, which prevented him from settling on a normal sleep schedule. The Veteran stated that he has been prescribed trazadone for 15 years, which has helped him sleep, but that lately he has had trouble falling asleep. 

The Veteran also described being preoccupied with not being able to sleep most nights and dealing with his fatigue. The lack of sleep has led to low energy, poor attention and concentration, and a constant state of worry. The Veteran also described being hypervigilant, which includes always checking the doors and windows for safety. He stated that he also avoids movies of war. Further, the Veteran confirmed to have fallen asleep while driving or at a stop sign. Additionally, he stated that without naps, he could not function. 

As for his personal life, the examiner wrote that the Veteran was previously married for 18 years before getting divorced. He has a daughter and granddaughter from his first marriage. After the divorce, he remained single for seven years before getting married again. The Veteran has been married to his current wife for 13 years. He described having close friends that he has made over the years. For hobbies, the Veteran stated that he enjoys photography and golf, although his back pain had been interfering with his golfing. For work, he was employed in the insurance business for 30 years but has been retired for the last six years. 

The Veteran presented as alert, oriented, and of average intelligence. He was groomed and dressed appropriately, along with normal speech rate and tone. The examiner found no indication of a cognitive or thought disorder. The examiner cited the Veteran's mood as anxious and down, with the Veteran being tearful at times in the interview, although the Veteran denied suicidal ideation. Additionally, the examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short- and long-term memory; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or work like setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. However, evidence obtained from the Veteran during this examination would appear to contradict the examiner's finding that the Veteran had an inability to maintain effective relationships, as the Veteran was currently married for 13 years and stated that he had maintained close relationships with friends he had met throughout the years. This examiner concluded that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which equates to a 50-percent rating. 

In February 2022 the Veteran submitted his own personal statement. He described awakening every night at 3 a.m. with the inability to then fall back asleep. He stated that he found it difficult to arise from bed in the morning three to four days a week, as he believed he would be tired the entire day. He described how his irritability had increased, with the Veteran "snapping" at his wife once or twice a week, which led to arguments with her. He also stated that he did not interact with his neighbors as much as he had in the past and avoided situations where he was to interact with others. Further, he described the onset of anxiety during severe storms, with his depression being a daily occurrence. The Veteran also stated that at least once per month he would awaken drenched in sweat. Additionally, the Veteran described how he lacked the motivation to do anything around the house and left things needing to be fixed for weeks until completed. For personal care, he put off shaving and haircuts, sometimes for weeks, finding it at times pointless to keep up his appearance. He also described not being able to enjoy time with his granddaughter, as he is always tired, which increased his depression. He indicated that he had lost interest in everything, to include golf and investing in the stock market. He further stated that on most days he is angry and frustrated due to a lack of sleep and suffered from stomachaches due to anxiety. 

In November 2022 the Veteran underwent another VA examination. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with anxiety. The Veteran had continued to maintain his 15-year marriage. The Veteran was still retired and indicated enjoying playing golf and engaging in photography. 

Regarding his 30-year history of working in the insurance industry, the Veteran described himself as extraordinarily successful, with it common for him to earn over $100,000 per year. He indicated that his issues with sleep had not affected his work performance, as he lived and breathed the business. The Veteran further described that while he still enjoys playing golf and engaging in photography, the challenges that had been a prominent feature of his work life are no longer present. As a result, he indicated only sleeping for four hours a night and that it was common for him to awaken in a sweat and panic, presumably because of his recollection of being at sea on naval vessels.

The examiner described the Veteran as alert, well-groomed, nourished, and oriented to time, place, person, and circumstance. Additionally, the examiner found the Veteran friendly and cooperative throughout the interview, with a normal rate and rhythm of speech. The examiner also noted that the Veteran's thought processes were goal oriented, he had an intact memory in all spheres, and his affect was appropriate to thought content. There were no indications of a disorder in either thought content or processes and no reported delusions, hallucinations, or other signs of distortion in perception. Neither homicidal nor suicidal ideation was present. This examiner only noted symptoms of depressed mood and anxiety. This clinician then concluded that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation, which equates to a 30-percent rating. 

In a July 2023 private psychological evaluation (filed in September 2023), the psychologist diagnosed the Veteran with GAD and insomnia. In addition to reviewing the above-cited examinations and letters, along with the Veteran's treatment records, this examiner highlighted that the Veteran almost fell asleep while driving or at a stoplight, along with falling asleep while watching television and with friends. This examiner concluded that the Veteran suffered from social and occupational impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, family relationships, judgment, cognition, and mood, which equates to a 70-percent rating. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in October 2023. This examiner diagnosed the Veteran with GAD and insomnia disorder. The examiner documented that the Veteran had continued to take trazodone for sleep, which he had been doing for about 20 years. While the Veteran had tried a medication for anxiety, he had not coped well with the side effects. The Veteran denied a history of suicide attempts or hospitalizations for mental health. The Veteran confirmed that he still suffered from early morning awakening followed by an inability to go back to sleep. The Veteran described being constantly tired, which required him to takes naps. The examiner found that the Veteran's lack of sleep led to depressed moods. The Veteran still complained of night sweats, which occurred about once a month on average. The Veteran also described a lack of motivation and a low interest in activities, including golf, which he had played for 50 years.

The examiner found that the Veteran's speech was normal for rate, rhythm, volume, amount, articulation, and spontaneity. The Veteran was described as mildly labile, with his emotions fluctuating from normal to tearful. The Veteran presented as sad and worried, although there were no issues with his thought content. He denied suicidal ideation, death wishes, or homicidal ideation. The examiner found that the Veteran did not suffer from hallucinations or illusions. Additionally, the examiner noted symptoms of depression, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or work like settings. This examiner concluded that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which equates to 50-percent rating. 

In a November 2023 VA treatment record, the Veteran reiterated his complaint of insomnia and awakening at 3:30 a.m. daily. He described being exhausted daily. Because he could not fall back asleep, he indicated napping throughout the day. He described a close relationship with his wife, grandchildren, and other family and friends. He indicated avoiding family or social gatherings with more than four or six people because he could not understand what they are saying, based on his hearing loss. For recreation, the Veteran described riding an elliptical exercise machine and going on walks with his wife on most days of the week. He stated that while he used to enjoy golfing, he now lacked the motivation to engage in this activity. The Veteran further indicated that his depressive symptoms made it somewhat difficult to work, take care of things at home, or get along with others. He stated that on more than half the days, he had little interest or pleasure and feels down, depressed, or hopeless. The Veteran denied suicidal ideation.

In a December 2023 VA treatment record, the Veteran noted that he previously had an accident due to falling asleep while driving. He again denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. Later in December 2023, the Veteran was prescribed low dose mirtazapine, along with his existing trazadone prescription, to help with his lack of sleep. In March 2024, the Veteran reported significant sleep benefit from the mirtazapine, while he believed it was causing weight gain. He indicated now sleeping for up to nine hours per night, but still required naps. He did describe that the naps were now shorter and, on some days, limited to just one. The Veteran did indicate suffering from some irritability and worry over "small" things.

In a January 2025 vocational report, a private vocational rehabilitation counselor opined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevented the Veteran from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment. For his psychological and sleep disorders, the counsel noted symptoms of depressed mood; chronic sleep impairment; lack of motivation; loss of interest; anxiety; memory loss; suspiciousness; hypervigilance; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. While this counselor found that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus contributed to his unemployability, the counselor also concluded that the Veteran's psychological disorders alone resulted in his inability to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment.

The counselor also noted the Veteran's short temper, citing that the Veteran would argue with coworkers and has a history of friends distancing themselves from the Veteran. Regarding the Veteran's fatigue and lack of motivation, the counselor noted that per industry standards, employees are not permitted to be off task for no more than 10 percent of an eight-hour workday and expected to produce a certain, minimum amount of work consistently and reliably. While the counselor arrived at the conclusion that the Veteran's psychological and sleep disorders rendered him unemployable, the Board notes that the counselor failed to discuss the portion of the Veteran's November 2022 VA examination, wherein the Veteran stated that, despite his sleep problems, he was extraordinarily successful throughout his 30-year career in the insurance industry, regularly earning over $100,000 per year. In the November 2022 VA examination, the Veteran indicated that his issues with sleep did not affect his work performance, as he lived and breathed the business.

While several VA and private examiners/counselors have offered opinions concerning the severity of the Veteran's service-connected GAD with sleep disorder, VA adjudicators, not medical examiners, apply legal standards in rendering determinations; therefore, the Board must make an independent evaluation that is not solely based on the examiners' opinions. See, Moore v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 211, 218 (2007), rev'd in irrelevant part, Moore v. Shinseki, 555 F.3d 1369 (2009). 

After engaging in a holistic analysis assessing the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's GAD with sleep disorder, recognizing that the symptoms listed in the rating criteria are non-exhaustive examples, and when looking at the effects determining the impairment level, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, is warranted across the entire period on appeal. 

For symptoms outlined at the 70-percent rating level, the Board finds the symptomology associated with the Veteran's sleeping disorder are analogous to an obsessional ritual that interferes with routine activities. For instance, the Veteran reports awakening at 3:00 a.m./3:30 a.m. most mornings and not able to return to sleep. This requires him to take daily naps, suffer from fatigue, near-continuous depression, and decreases his motivation to engage in activities of daily living, like household chores and fixing things around the house. Further, the Veteran described losing his interest in his hobbies of playing golf and engaging in stock trading. Additionally, the Board finds the most disturbing aspect of the Veteran's symptomology to be reports of falling asleep while driving at stoplights/stop signs, and the indication that there has been one accident. The Board finds this symptomology analogous to spatial disorientation listed at the 70-percent level. Additionally, neglect of personal appearance is noted in the record, as the Veteran indicated he lacked the motivation to shave and have haircuts. 

Going against a possible rating at the 70-percent level, while there is evidence of impaired impulse control in the form of unprovoked irritability (snapping at spouse and arguing), there are no periods of violence. Additionally, regarding a purported inability to obtain and maintain personal relationships, the record clearly shows that the Veteran has been able to maintain his marriage for 15 years, along with the Veteran carrying on relationships with other family and close friends. Moreover, there is an indication in the March 2024 VA treatment record that after being treated with mirtazapine, the Veteran's sleep has returned to nine hours per night. However, it is still indicated that he requires naps and suffers from irritability. Moreover, the Veteran complained of weight gain after taking the mirtazapine prescription, and the record does not indicate whether this medication will be of short or long-term assistance to the Veteran. Moreover, in all his VA examinations, the Veteran has been consistently described as alert, oriented, friendly, and cooperative, with no suicidal/homicidal ideations. Additionally, he has been appropriately dressed and well-groomed with good hygiene. Finally, his speech has been described as normal in volume, rate, and rhythm.

While there is evidence for and against a 70-percent rating, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, and primarily based on the severity of the Veteran's sleep disorder, the Board finds that the higher evaluation of 70-percent disabling more nearly encompasses the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptomology. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Accordingly, the Board finds that the objective evidence demonstrates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies that would be indicative in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, indicative of a 70-percent rating. 

Regarding a rating of 100 percent, the Board does not find evidence of record that indicates the Veteran suffers from symptomology contemplated at the 100-percent rating level. For instance, the Veteran's examinations and medical record do not demonstrate evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name. 

While there is evidence in the record of the Veteran falling asleep while driving and an accident, these instances appear isolated and not of the persistent nature contemplated at the 100-percent level. Additionally, while the Veteran has demonstrated a lack of motivation in performing activities of daily living, there is no evidence of record indicating that he is unable to do so. In fact, the record indicates that the Veteran can golf, engage in photography, fix things around the house, exercise, and play with his granddaughter. Moreover, as to his potential while employed, despite the Veteran's sleep issues, when he was working in the insurance industry, the Veteran described outstanding performance, regularly earning over $100,000 annually. Accordingly, the Board does not find a rating of 100 percent more nearly approximates the Veteran's disability picture. 

Thus, based on the foregoing, the Board finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's GAD and sleep disorder more closely approximate the symptoms associated with a 70 percent disability rating. However, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a rating in excess of 70 percent is warranted. Consequently, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable to a rating in excess of 70 percent, and the claim is denied in that respect. 38 U.S.C.              § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

In October 2022 the Veteran filed a formal application for TDIU, based solely on the Veteran's service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus. The Veteran was not service connected for his GAD and sleep disorder at that time. As the Veteran did not then meet the schedular criteria for TDIU, the RO referred the issue of entitlement of extraschedular TDIU to the Director of the VA Compensation and Pension Service. 

In May 2024, the Director issued an advisory opinion. While the Director conceded that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus conditions could cause occupational limitations, the Director found that the evidence demonstrated that the Veteran was still able to obtain and maintain gainful employment due to his service-connected conditions. In the August 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO denied the Veteran entitlement to extraschedular TDIU based only on his service-connected hearing loss and tinnitus disabilities. 

The Veteran now meets the schedular criteria for TDIU after becoming service connected for his GAD with sleep disorder (70 percent herein), in addition to the Veteran's 50-percent rating for bilateral hearing loss and 10-percent rating for tinnitus. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. Additionally, in January 2025 the Veteran submitted an employability evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation counselor. The counselor opined that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and GAD with sleep disorder rendered him unable to obtain and sustain employment. 

However, the RO has not adjudicated whether the Veteran is entitled to schedular TDIU based on all his current service-connected disabilities, which now includes GAD and a sleep disorder. 

The Veteran has a procedural right to have one review of his appeal by the Secretary under 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a), and AMA amendments do not specifically revoke that right. Since the AOJ has not considered the merit of entitlement to schedular TDIU based on the inclusion of GAD with sleep disorder in the first instance, the Board is precluded from doing so, as such would deprive the Veteran of due process, namely the right to appellate review by the Secretary, colloquially known as the "two bites at the apple" rule. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). 

Thus, to afford the Veteran due process, entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Adjudicate entitlement to schedular TDIU based on the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, which now include GAD with a sleep disorder.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.M. Winchell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.