Citation Nr: A25030768
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240709-453315
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms and overall impairment cause by his service-connected adjustment disorder manifested in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks due to such symptoms as: involved chronic sleep impairment, depressed mood, and anxiety. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 8 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2015 to July 2021.  This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.

Service connection was established for the Veteran's adjustment disorder in a March 2024 rating decision.  A 10 percent rating was established, effective August 21, 2023.  The Veteran appealed the rating, and as such, the period of review is from August 21, 2023 to the date of decision on appeal. 

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based, as far as can practically be determined, on the average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Each service-connected disability is rated on the basis of specific criteria identified by Diagnostic Codes (DCs).  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  When rating the Veteran's service-connected disability, the entire medical history must be borne in mind.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

The Veteran's adjustment disorder is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.  Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d. 112-114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability shall be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations to apply, the higher of the two should be assigned where the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

To be assigned a particular rating, a Veteran need not demonstrate the presence of all, most, or even some, of the symptoms listed as examples in the rating criteria.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  The key element for a rating under the General Formula for Mental Disorders is the degree of social and occupational impairment caused by those symptoms.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders, a 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Code 9440.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation). Id.

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-life setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is provided for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125-4.130.

Turning to the pertinent evidence of record, in January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA medical examination to ascertain the nature and etiology of his mental health disability.  The examiner opined the Veteran has occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms, which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or, symptoms controlled by medication, which meets the 10 percent rating criteria.  As part of the Veteran's social history, the Veteran reported that he married in 2023 and that his relationship with his husband is "good, happy, supportive, and loving."  The Veteran added that he socializes with his friends once every two months.  Although the Veteran described his relationship with his family of origin as strained when he "came out and they are very religious," the Veteran also added that he visits his sister once every two months, and that he corresponds with his parents.  In terms of his education, the Veteran reported that he has completed some college, is currently enrolled in a full-time program, and is earning high average grades (Bs and Cs), and has difficulty with concentration.  In addition to his educational progress, the Veteran reported his current employment as part-time, around 30 hours per week; that he has been employed at a tire shop, personal trainer at a gym, Chick-Fil-A, and has been working at Starbucks for the past 2 months.  The Veteran also reported difficulty with irritability, following the rules, tardiness due to oversleeping, and not meeting standards as inhibitions with his employment.  The examiner listed the Veteran's symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment, and opined the Veteran is competent of managing his financial affairs.  The Veteran reported to not having any legal/criminal concerns.  Additionally, he reported experiencing changes in his appetite/weight, daytime sleepiness, decreased libido, financial problems, anxiety, mood swings, irritability, rapid speech, and memory problems, including morbid thoughts related to "dealing with his family."  The examiner noted the Veteran's sleep initiation took upwards of 3 hours (due to thinking) and that he always feels groggy and needs to set "20 alarms" to wake in the morning. The Veteran described that his sleep issues began "years ago."   The examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of adjustment disorder on January 24, 2018, after meeting a psychologist and then was "kicked out of nuclear school"; that he questioned his worth as he was not doing well, and; reported experiencing suicidal ideation due to receiving an adverse evaluation.  The Board notes this single report of suicidal ideation, and that it was in the past and does not appear to be an ongoing and current symptom.  Moreover, during this medical examination, the Veteran also denied receiving any mental health treatment, suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, plan or intent.  This lack of mental health treatment appears to explain the lack of medical treatment records on the issue in the Veteran's claims file.  On that same note, there is no contention from the Veteran and/or his representative of mental health treatment that substantiates a more severe disability rating, nor have they offered any additional medical evidence to support a higher disability rating.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an increased rating to 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's mental health condition.  Importantly, the Board notes that the VA medical examiner noted the Veteran had experienced symptoms such as depressed mood and anxiety throughout the period on review.  The Veteran also credibly reported chronic sleep impairment which had impaired his ability to perform at his places of employment due to persistent tardiness.  

The Board has considered whether a higher rating of 50 percent is warranted, but the evidence of record does not support this rating.  The January 2024 VA examiner noted the Veteran's thought processes were linear/logical; there was no evidence of thought disorder; no audio visual hallucinations; long and short term memory are intact, and; mood was euthymic with congruent affect.   

As previously explained, neither the Veteran nor his representative have offered any additional medical treatment records documenting symptoms that more approximately manifest to a rating in excess of 30 percent.  

The Board has considered whether a further staged rating is appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder. Hart v. Mansfield, supra. However, the Board finds that his symptomatology related to such disability has been stable and consistent throughout the period on appeal.  Neither the Veteran, nor his representative, have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record in regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

Accordingly,  an increased disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is granted for the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder.  

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.