Citation Nr: A25030958
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-437827
DATE:  April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the service-connected depression resulted in the Veteran becoming obese, the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current sleep apnea, and the sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity resulting from the service-connected depression.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to depression are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1988 until honorable discharge in July 1996.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the Regional Office decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific 

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has one year from the date of the rating decision on appeal to change dockets. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). The period to change dockets ends in April 2025. However, since the claim is being granted in its entirety, the Veteran is not prejudiced by an early Board decision. 

Service Connection

VA provides compensation for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. This is referred to as a "service connection." 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service - the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

The Veteran asserts that the current obstructive sleep apnea disability is secondary to the service-connected depression disorder. See December 2023 and September 2023 Supplemental Claim. The original claim in December 2022 stated that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was due to direct service connection and secondary service connection as a result of depression. 

The Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in the June 2023 February 2024 VA disability benefits questionnaire examinations. This diagnosis is confirmed by the VA treatment records. As a result, the Veteran has met the first element of entitlement to service connection. 

The Board has not identified evidence of sleep problems in the service treatment records or a diagnosis of sleep apnea during service. The June 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea 26 years after service. A February 2011 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had a negative sleep study three to four years prior.

The Veteran has documented service in Southwest Asia from August 1990 to July 1991. See DD-214 and December 2022 Memorandum. As a result, the Veteran has met the second element of service connection due to toxic exposure during service. 

In the June 2023 VA examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran had toxic exposure during service. The examiner provided a negative nexus regarding toxic exposure and found that the obstructive sleep apnea was due to weight gain. 

The Veteran was awarded service connection for depressive disorder in a June 2020 rating decision. See April 2024 Codesheet. An August 2023 VA examination provided a secondary service connection negative nexus opinion. The examiner stated, in part, "The pathophysiology of these conditions are unrelated to one another, i.e. major depressive disorder does not lead to the development of obstructive sleep apnea. The pathophysiology involves collapse of the upper airways/aerodigestive tract during sleep." Another secondary service opinion was obtained in October 2023. The examiner stated, in part, "Sleep apnea and depression are associated conditions but depression is not a nexus for sleep apnea so it is less likely than not that the veteran's sleep apnea was directly due to depression." The examiner also stated, "Veteran's OSA was directly due to obesity." 

The June 2023 VA examiner provided a negative nexus stating as follows, "at the time of his diagnosis [with obstructive sleep apnea] he now had a body mass index of 38.4 which considered obese and his neck circumference of 46. [These] two factor[s] can result in Obstructive Sleep Apnea due to the adipose tissue blocking the air way." 

Another nexus opinion was obtained in February 2024 stating as follows, 

Medical literature shows that there is an increased risk of those with Major Depression Disorder to have OSA but not that Major Depression Disorder can cause OSA. Jane Berry MD, MBA [VAMC Memphis] There is no mental condition which causes Obstructive Sleep Apnea. Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a disease with a clear and specific etiology. It is a common disorder characterized by narrowing or collapse of the pharyngeal airway during sleep. It is caused by anatomical variations in the craniofacial features and/or neck."

See February 2024 VA Examination. As a result, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to service connection based on a theory of direct service connection. Although the VA examiners have found that the Veteran's sleep apnea is not secondary to the service-connected depressive disorder, the analysis does not end there. The Board must address whether the service-connected depressive disorder caused the Veteran's obesity, which in turn was a substantial factor in causing the current disability the obstructive sleep apnea and would not have occurred but for the obesity. 

Generally, obesity is not a disease for service connection purposes. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan 6, 2017). Nonetheless, obesity may be considered an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis. Id. at 2. To grant service connection, the adjudicators would have to resolve the following issues: (1) whether a service-connected disability caused a veteran to become obese; (2) if so, whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability for which a veteran is seeking service connection; and (3) whether the current disability for which a veteran is seeking service connection would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the service-connected disability. Id. at 9-10.

The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has stated, "the first step asks about the connection between a service-connected disability and obesity, while the second and third steps ask about the connection (proximate and but-for causation) between obesity and the disability for which secondary service connection is sought." Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 304 (2020). 

The Board notes that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) has been addressed by the Court in Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating 3.310(b) for the use of the phrase "proximately due to" in the context of aggravation). Specifically, in Spicer, the Court held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 plainly requires compensation when a service-connected disease or injury is a but-for cause of a present-day disability. This broad language applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability. Stated another way, § 1110 provides for compensation for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause. Nothing in the statute limits § 1110 to onset or etiological causes of a worsening in functionality. Thus, the Court in Spicer found the phrase "proximately due to" under 3.310(b) inconsistent with § 1110 and, therefore "unlawful," consequently, for "aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities" it is enough to show that "but for" the service-connected disability the incremental-increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury would not have occurred. Id.

After the above examinations were obtained, a positive nexus opinion was provided by the April 2024 VA examiner. The examiner provided the following rationale to support the positive secondary service nexus opinion: 

According to medical literature, one mechanism that has been proposed to link depression with the subsequent development of obesity is emotional eating. In addition, it is reported that increased BMI and waist circumference were more common in those who had higher emotional eating and slept for shorter periods of time. In obese individuals, the airway is narrowed by fat deposits in the upper respiratory tract; this causes a decrease in muscular activity in the area, which causes hypoxic and apneic episodes, which in turn causes sleep apnea. Therefore, the claimed Obstructive Sleep Apnea is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected Major Depressive Disorder.

See April 2024 VA Examination. Additionally, the Veteran submitted a nexus opinion from a private provider. The private report included a positive nexus statement, which states as follows, in part: 

Obesity is the most common risk factor of obstructive sleep apnea. People with major depressive disorder become less motivated to do exercise so they become overweight which increases their chance to develop obstructive sleep apnea. 75% of cases of sleep apnea are due to obesity. Obesity can also aggravate obstructive sleep apnea. In my opinion, he does not have any other reason to develop obstructive sleep apnea besides obesity.... In my opinion, if he did not have major depressive disorder then he would have developed obesity. The chances that he will have developed obstructive sleep apnea/aggravated would have been minimum to none.

See December 2023 Private Examination. 

The Board notes that the October 2023 VA examination also stated, "Veteran's OSA was directly due to obesity." The Board finds that the Veteran's obesity was an intermediate step to the development or aggravation of the obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran's depressive disorder caused the Veteran's obesity based on the VA examinations above. Additionally, the Board finds that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current disability. The private examiner stated that the obstructive sleep apnea was at least aggravated by the obesity while the October 2023 VA examiner stated that the sleep apnea was directly due to the obesity.

The Board must determine whether the sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the obesity. The Veteran weighed 127 pounds at enlistment. See VA Treatment Records. The June 2020 VA examination for a psychiatric disability stated, "His anxiety started when he was in Germany" and that the Veteran gained 40 pounds in a couple years. The Veteran was discharged in 1996 and diagnosed with sleep apnea in a March 2022 sleep study. See VA Treatment Records. The Veteran weighed less in 2011, 196 pounds, and had a negative sleep apnea test and then weighed significantly more, 267 pounds, in January 2022 before testing positive for sleep apnea in March 2022. The Board notes that the Veteran depressive disorder was rating 30 percent in 2020 and then 70 percent in 2021, as the Veteran gained more weight. See April 2024 Codesheet. The private provider stated that the Veteran's obesity would not have occurred had the Veteran not had the depressive disorder. The Board finds that the evidence weighs in favor of granting the Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder caused the Veteran's obesity, which in turn was a substantial factor in causing the current obstructive sleep apnea and would not have occurred but for the obesity. As a result, the claim is granted.

 

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. A. Johnston, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.