Citation Nr: A25030678
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230914-376007
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral spine degenerative arthritis (back condition) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip degenerative arthritis (right hip condition) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 1985 to June 1989. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The August 2023 rating decision is a higher-level review decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a back condition and right hip condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back condition. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for back and right hip conditions. Specifically, the Veteran raised a secondary service connection theory of entitlement, that his back and right hip conditions were caused or aggravated by his service-connected left knee anterior tear, medial collateral ligament strain status post arthroscopy (left knee condition) and right knee degenerative arthritis with tendinitis (right knee condition). See February 2023 private medical opinions, March 2023 supplemental claim. 

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. In order to prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

After submitting the March 2023 supplemental claim, the Veteran was afforded the May 2023 VA examinations for his back and right hip conditions. The examiner stated that the Veteran had diagnoses for degenerative arthritis of the right hip and degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine. The AOJ requested that the examiner provide an opinion on whether those conditions were due to his service-connected left knee condition. See April 2023 exam scheduling request. In providing the requested opinion, the examiner explained that some common factors for osteoarthritis were age, repeated joint stress, excess weight, injury, overuse, structural or developmental abnormalities, autoimmune triggers, and genetics. The examiner further explained that knee conditions are not known to cause degenerative arthritis of the spine or hip. As such, the examiner opined that the Veteran's back and right hip conditions were less likely that not due to or the result of his service-connected left knee condition. However, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's back and/or right hip condition were aggravated by his service-connected left knee condition. 

The Board finds that the May 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate and this case must be remanded for an addendum opinion. First, the examiner's opinion was essentially a general statement about the well-known causes of osteoarthritis and that knee conditions are not known to cause degenerative osteoarthritis of the spine and hip. The examiner also did not address the Veteran's specific case in the opinion. Second, the examiner did not address the Veteran's contentions regarding secondary service connection as shown in the February 2023 private medical opinion that was submitted with the March 2023 supplemental claim, as well as the July 2022 statement in support of claim. The Veteran's contention is that his service-connected left and/or right knee condition altered his gait, which led to his right hip and lumbar pain. Third, a veteran may establish secondary service connection if the disability was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). Therefore, causation and aggravation must be addressed in any medical opinion concerning secondary service connection. Id.; El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). The May 2023 VA examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's service-connected left knee condition aggravated his back and/or right hip condition. These were pre-decisional duty to assist errors and a remand for addendum opinion is necessary. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Additionally, the May 2023 VA examiner was only asked to provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's back condition was caused by his service-connected left knee condition. However, the Veteran is also service connected for a right knee condition. See August 2023 rating decision codesheet. Furthermore, the February 2023 private examiner stated that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity conditions caused the Veteran to walk unevenly, which led to the back condition. The examiner also stated that the Veteran's altered gait, from his service-connected right lower extremity condition, caused and/or contributed to his back condition. Not providing an opinion on whether the Veteran's back condition was caused or aggravated by his service-connected right knee condition was a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remanding for an addendum opinion is necessary. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board acknowledges the December 2021 and February 2023 private medical opinions that were submitted in support of secondary service connection for the Veteran's back and right hip conditions. However, the Board finds that those private opinions are insufficient to support a nexus between the Veteran's back condition and/or right hip condition, and his service-connected right knee and/or left knee conditions. Both medical opinions have very similar rationales. Regarding the Veteran's back condition, the examiners explained that due to the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity conditions, he experienced pain and joint impairment that caused him to walk unevenly and develop a limp or antalgic gait. The examiners then explained that the altered gait caused and/or contributed to the Veteran's back condition. Likewise, concerning the Veteran's right hip condition, the examiners explained that his lower extremity conditions caused pain and joint impairment that caused him to walk unevenly and develop a limp or antalgic gait. As a result, the Veteran's altered gait caused and/or contributed to his current right hip condition. The December 2021 private opinion also included lay statements from the Veteran in which he explained how his left knee condition altered his gait, which led to back and right hip pain. A medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate for the Board to consider and weigh against other evidence of record. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007). The Board finds that the December 2021 and February 2023 private medical opinions are inadequate to support a nexus because the conclusions are not supported by sufficient evidence, thus making the analysis inadequate. Specifically, the examiners essentially made general statements that lower extremity conditions can alter a person's gait, which will then cause right hip and back conditions, as supported by medical literature. The examiners then cite to numerous studies to support their conclusion without explaining how those studies apply to the Veteran's specific case, and the examiners did not support their conclusions with medical records or other evidence specific to the Veteran. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's back condition is at least as likely as not due to or aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected left and/or right knee conditions. The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are two separate inquires, and both must be addressed in the opinion. 

In doing so, the examiner must address the December 2021 private medical opinion, February 2023 private medical opinion, and July 2022 statement in support of claim. The examiner should specifically address the contention that the Veteran's left and/or right knee conditions altered his gait which caused or aggravated his back condition. 

Provide a rationale to support the opinions. 

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's right hip condition is at least as likely as not due to or aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected left and/or right knee conditions. The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are two separate inquires, and both must be addressed in the opinion.

In doing so, the examiner must address the December 2021 private medical opinion, February 2023 private medical opinion, and July 2022 statement in support of claim. The examiner should specifically address the contention that the Veteran's left and/or right knee conditions altered his gait which caused or aggravated his right hip condition. 

Provide a rationale to support the opinions. 

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brodbeck, Douglas E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.