Citation Nr: A25030170
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-446022
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMAND

The issue of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea ("OSA") is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

This matter is remanded to schedule the Veteran for a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) examination and a SLEEP STUDY/MEDICAL OPINION to determine if the Veteran has OSA and if so, whether the condition was caused by toxic exposures during his Gulf War service. See 38 U.S.C. ยง 1168 (a), (b).

In 2022, the Veteran was asked to complete a home sleep study, but did not do so. He has since requested another sleep study. The Board finds that a sleep study is necessary to decide the claim, and the failure to make additional attempts to obtain one was a pre-decisional error that must be corrected on remand. 

THE VETERAN IS ADVISED that cooperation in VA's efforts to develop the claim, including reporting for scheduled VA examinations and completing a sleep study, is critical.

 

The case is remanded for the following:

Schedule VA examinations, to include a Gulf War/TERA examination and SLEEP STUDY, with appropriately qualified VA or contract clinicians.

The examiner must thoroughly answer EACH of the following:

QUESTION ONE: Does the Veteran have OSA or any other sleep-disordered breathing condition?

QUESTION TWO: If so, was the Veteran's OSA caused by toxic exposure during his Gulf War service? Why or why not?

QUESTION THREE: Was the Veteran's OSA caused by any other incident of service? Why or why not?

All clinical testing and evaluations needed to make this determination should be performed, and all findings must be reported in detail.

THE EXAMINER IS ADVISED that, although s/he must review the electronic claims folder, the following review of the record may be helpful in forming the opinion:

"	The Veteran had active service in Southwest Asia ("Gulf War Service") from April 2019 to July 2019, August 2019 to September 2019, October 2019 to April 2021, and May 2021 to August 2021.

"	The Veteran is considered a "Gulf War Veteran," and the law presumes he was exposed to burn pits and other toxins during his Gulf War service. "Other toxins" may include dust storms and other wind-borne suspension of organic and inorganic particles, diesel engine emissions, burn pit emissions, and industrial pollutants.

"	The Veteran's service treatment records show reports of disturbed sleep and breathing problems. 

"	In a September 2021 pre-separation report of medical history, the Veteran endorsed shortness of breath, a chronic cough "when laying down at night," "severe dryness in nose," "constantly waking up during sleep every hour or two," and "rarely feeling rested." The medical examiner opined that this was the first recorded instance where the Veteran reported these symptoms and that the symptoms did not require medical attention.

"	At a May 2022 VA sleep apnea examination, the Veteran reported that since 2019, he began waking up "gasping for air" during sleep, and that a fellow servicemember noticed his loud snoring. A VA clinician opined that the Veteran did not have, nor had ever had sleep apnea. However, the clinician opined that a sleep study was necessary to diagnose the condition, and the Veteran did not complete one.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A detailed rationale is requested for all opinions rendered.

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Hiaasen

The Board's action is only binding on this case. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.