Citation Nr: A25030787
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-440593
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from January 1988 to April 1992.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

The Veteran appealed that decision by submitting a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  The Veteran requested a Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the re-adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his sleep apnea is etiologically related to his period of active service.  The Veteran claims he has experienced sleep disorders on a direct basis and also secondary to his physical and mental service-connected disabilities.

In the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the claimed primary disability, cervical spine arthritis and spondylotic changes s/p C5-6 spine fusion with IVDS, is service-connected.  Also, evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service, as service treatment records reflect reports of trouble sleeping in service.  The Veteran was denied service connection in the September 2023 rating decision because the AOJ found there was no clinical diagnosis of sleep apnea.

An entrance examination dated November 1987 did not mention any problems with sleeping.  However, treatment notes dated April 1989 and October 1991 indicated the Veteran awakened to pain and was not sleeping well.  Also, a medical assessment dated November 1991 noted that the Veteran was having frequent trouble sleeping.  Additionally, the November 1991 assessment noted the Veteran experienced severe chronic neck and upper back pain and was taking medication to treat his pain.

Further, VA treatment records dated October 2022, April 2023 and February 2024 document issues with the Veteran's ability to sleep.  More specifically, an October 2022 mental health functional assessment indicated the Veteran was having problems sleeping and reported difficulties sleeping, and he was waking an estimated six to 10 times per night on average.  Further, the Veteran asserted on the October 2022 examination that he also has a ton of trouble staying asleep because of the pain...".  However, the Veteran's medical treatment records do not indicate a diagnosis of sleep apnea.  Thus, a Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) was not ordered by the AOJ.

Here, the Board finds the failure to afford the Veteran an examination in connection with his claim for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  The Veteran is competent to report trouble sleeping, and such symptoms are consistently documented in the record, to include during service.  Moreover, the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for the primary disability.  Thus, a remand is warranted to schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of any current sleep disorder.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed sleep apnea.  Following a review of the record and any necessary testing, the examiner should address the following inquiries:

(a.) Offer an opinion as to whether is it at least as likely as not that any sleep apnea had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's military service.  

(b.) Offer an opinion as to whether is it at least as likely as not that any sleep apnea was caused by a service-connected disability.

(c.) Offer an opinion as to whether is it at least as likely as not that any sleep apnea was aggravated by a service-connected disability.  For any aggravation found, the examiner should state, to the best of their ability, the baseline of symptomatology and the amount, quantified if possible, of aggravation beyond the baseline symptomatology.

In providing the aforementioned opinions, the examiner must address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his in-service and post-service symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Simmons, Shanita K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.