Citation Nr: A25030919
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230822-370875
DATE:  April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Air Force from July 1984 to March 1990.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review in the August 2023 decision that was appealed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the December 2022 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability is remanded.

Legal Principles

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id.

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) Disabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3)disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); see Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table).

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a Veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the Veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the Veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id.

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a Veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. Id. The remand must specify the action to be taken by the AOJ. Id.

Relevant Facts and Analysis

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a TDIU. See August 2023 VA Form 10182.

The Veteran is service connected for the following:

1)	Obstructive sleep apnea associated with chronic sinusitis

2)	Unspecified depressive disorder associated with chronic sinusitis

3)	Allergic rhinitis

4)	Chronic sinusitis

The Board has thoroughly reviewed the claims file as part of its duty to adjudicate this appeal. The individualized analysis required for claims of TDIU involves careful consideration of the symptoms of the service-connected disabilities only, and their impact on occupational functioning. During review of the claims file, it became apparent that there is insufficient evidence to adequately adjudicate the claim because the attribution of certain symptoms is unclear.

For example, in June 2018, the AOJ obtained a VA examination for headaches. See June 2018 C&P (Compensation and Pension) Examination. The examiner at that time diagnosed migraine, opined that migraine was less likely due to the service-connected sinusitis, and declined to diagnose the Veteran with an additional, separate headache condition. By contrast, in the Veteran's VAMC (VA Medical Center) record, headaches are mentioned in conjunction with treatment for the Veteran's sinusitis. See, e.g., CAPRI (Compensation and Pension Record Interchange) received October 2022, p. 39. In the September 2022 VA examination, headaches are recorded as one of the symptoms of sinusitis. See September 2022 C&P Examination, p. 3.

In addition, the Veteran's VAMC record indicated that he is diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease. See CAPRI received October 2022, p. 43. In the Veteran-submitted disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), the provider recorded that the Veteran's symptom of post-nasal drip associated with allergic rhinitis caused nausea. See April 2022 DBQ - Veteran Provided. The Board notes that nausea can be a symptom of gastrointestinal conditions.

Prior to adjudication, the AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion that considered the recorded symptoms and indicated whether certain symptoms, such as headaches and nausea, were attributable to a service-connected condition. The failure to obtain additional medical guidance constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The evidence in the claims file is insufficient to grant. Remand is therefore the appropriate action.

During readjudication, the Veteran and representative are invited to submit additional evidence related to employability.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete an updated VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

2. Schedule the Veteran for examinations by appropriate clinicians regarding the current severity of the service-connected disabilities. The examiner should elicit from the Veteran the complete educational, vocational, and employment history and should note any complaints regarding the impact of the service-connected disabilities on employment.  The examiner should identify all limitations or functional impairment caused solely by the service-connected disabilities.

The examiner should thoroughly review the claims file, identifying symptoms that may possibly be attributable to each service-connected disability, and indicate whether they are attributable to the service-connected disabilities, attributable to a non-service-connected disability, or whether this is not possible to determine without resorting to speculation. The examiner is asked to specifically consider and address whether the following symptoms are attributable to a service-connected disability: headaches, nausea.

?

The examiner must provide rationale for any conclusions and opinions offered. 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Williams, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.