Citation Nr: A25030154
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-417289
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

An increased 50 percent disability rating for tension headaches is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tension headaches have been manifested by very frequent prostrating and prolonged headache attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased 50 percent rating for tension headaches are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2002 to August 2006.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim in an October 2023 rating decision. The Veteran thereafter requested Higher-Level Review of the October 2023 rating decision.  In response, the AOJ issued a November 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision.

On February 20, 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review option.  Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of October 2023 rating decision which prompted the Veteran's selection of Higher Level Review.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.301, 3.2601(f).

Turning to the merits of the increase rating claim, disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's tension headaches are currently rated as noncompensable pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8199-8100.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen.  Unlisted disabilities requiring rating by analogy will be coded first with the numbers of the most closely related body part and "99".  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 8100.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 253 (2018).  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

In rating headache disabilities, ameliorative effects of medication may not be considered.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).

Following review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran's tension headaches have been manifested by very frequent prostrating and prolonged headache attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

In this regard, the evidence of record includes an August 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim in which the Veteran reported headaches occurring weekly.  He described headache pain that generally occurs around his temple region, on the right side of his head, on the left side of his head, and on the front of his head.  He reported that at least three to four times a month, the headaches knock him out of commission to the point that he is totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for two hours and that he has missed events and activities because they render him unable to function.  He further reported that during his headaches he has light sensitivity, noise sensitivity, visual spots, flashing or shimmering lights, weakness, vertigo, dizziness, throbbing pain, and pulsating pain; and that he uses over the counter aspirin, Excedrin Extra Strength, ibuprofen, or headache formula pain reliever to help treat these symptoms.  

The evidence of record also includes an August 2023 opinion from J.L. concluding that the Veteran's tension headaches manifest in symptomatology consistent with a 50 percent rating evaluation.  J.L. reasoned that the Veteran experiences very frequent, completely prostrating attacks of tension headache pain at least three to four times a month, causing absences from his place of employment, making his disability productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Per the Veteran's lay statements, his headaches occur weekly with pain around the temple region on the right side of the head, on the left side of the head, and on the front of the head; and these headaches knock him out of commission to the point that he is totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for two hours at least three to four times per month.  Additionally, per the Veteran's lay statements he has light sensitivity, noise sensitivity, visual spots, flashing or shimmering lights, weakness, vertigo, dizziness, throbbing pain, and pulsating pain; and he uses over the counter Aspirin, Excedrin Extra Strength, ibuprofen or Headache Formula Pain Reliver to help treat these symptoms.

In an August 2023 VA Headaches examination report an examiner documented pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head.  The examiner documented that the Veteran did not experience non-headache symptoms associated with headaches.  The examiner indicated typical head pain duration was less than one day, and location of typical head pain was both sides of the head.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain, completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain, or any other pertinent physical findings, complication, conditions, signs, or symptoms.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's headache condition did not impact his ability to work.

After reviewing the evidence and resolving doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's tension headaches, based on his reports of very frequent headache pain that interferes with his ability to participate in activities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Notably, the competent medical evidence reflects that the Veteran has prostrating attacks of headache pain 3 to 4 times per month and that he experiences light sensitivity, noise sensitivity, visual spots, flashing or shimmering lights, weakness, vertigo, dizziness, throbbing pain, and pulsating pain, requiring him to take medication alleviate the symptoms.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Board acknowledges that the October 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  However, as stated above, the competent lay evidence details the Veteran's headaches knock him out of commission to the point that he is totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for two hours and that he has missed events and activities because they render him unable to function.  The record also reflects that the Veteran has to take medication for his headaches.  The ameliorative effects of medication may not be considered in assigning the disability rating for the Veteran's headache disability.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012) (in assigning a disability rating, "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria.").  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's tension headaches have been manifest by the criteria for a 50 percent rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8100.  A 50 percent disability rating for tension headaches is granted.

 

 

S.C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Smith-Jennings, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.