Citation Nr: A25030461
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240327-427827
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 50 percent rating, but no higher, for service-connected migraine headaches (migraine disability) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, throughout the rating period on appeal, his migraine headaches were characteristic of very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial 50 percent rating, but no higher, for a migraine disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.6, 4.10, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 2001 to September 2005, with additional reserve service.

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an April 2023 supplemental claim decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

A January 2022 rating decision awarded service connection for a migraine disability and assigned a noncompensable (zero percent) initial rating effective February 20, 2021. In November 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the initial noncompensable rating for the migraine disability most recently addressed in the January 2022 rating decision. In April 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received and continued the initial noncompensable rating based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in March 2024. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations (ratings) are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. § Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual disorders in civil occupations. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

Where a claimant appeals the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an [initial] rating on appeal was erroneous." Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, "staged" ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found; this practice is known as staged ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Board notes that it is reviewing the AOJ's initial evaluation of the Veteran's migraine disability as noncompensably disabling and that the increased rating period on appeal ends with the issuance of the April 2023 supplemental claim decision, in this case on April 10, 2023, the date VA notified the Veteran of the April 2023 rating decision.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a migraine disability

The Veteran seeks an initial compensable evaluation for his migraine disability. Specifically, he contends, through his attorney, that a 50 percent rating is warranted due to completely prostrating and prolonged attacks that are productive of severe economic adaptability. See March 2024 Third Party Correspondence.

The Veteran's migraine disability is currently evaluated as noncompensably disabling under DC 8100. Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is assigned for migraines with less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. A 30 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A maximum 50 percent rating is assigned for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to the 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation. Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The 50 percent rating criteria under DC 8100 also contain several undefined phrases. The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency of at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 253 (2018). The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the Veteran entirely powerless. Id. The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Id. (internal citation omitted). 

Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria under DC 8100 require that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability." Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, regarding severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252-3 (2018). This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Id.

The rating of headaches or migraines under DC 8100 focuses on "attacks." It is the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact of these attacks that differentiate the levels of disability in DC 8100. Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 72 (2020).

In rating headaches or migraines under DC 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).

At the outset, the Board notes that the record indicates that the Veteran received private treatment for his migraine disability. See, e.g., January 2023 VA Headache Examination Report. However, the Board finds that there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding to the merits here because a 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating available under DC 8100 and the award of an initial 50 percent rating herein therefore represents a total grant of benefits sought on appeal for this disability.

The Veteran attended a VA headache examination in January 2022 in connection with which he reported worsening of his headaches in the prior six months and which he described as deep pain, dull and sharp, that now involved his whole head. He reported that his headaches occurred in the morning, at night, and intermittently throughout the day. His current treatment plan included taking medication noted as Topiramate. The examination report shows that he experienced headache pain that was constant on both sides of his head and non-headache symptoms of sensitivity to light and sound and changes in vision. The duration of typical head pain was less than one day and was located on both sides of his head. The examiner checked boxes to indicate that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain or have very long and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain productive of severe inadaptability, and found that his migraine disability had no functional impact. See January 2022 VA Headache Examination Report.

The Veteran attended another VA headache examination in January 2023 in connection with which he reported experiencing migraines three to four times per week that lasted about two hours during which he laid down in a dark room and avoided noises to alleviate his symptoms. His treatment plan included taking medication noted as Nortriptyline 10 mg and Topiramate 25 mg daily, that he reported taking for over a year without much effect. The examination report shows that he experienced pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of his head and non-headache symptoms of nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, and lightheadedness. The duration of typical head pain was less than one day and was located on both sides of his head. The examiner checked boxes to indicate that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain once a month and that he did not have very long and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain productive of severe inadaptability. The examiner noted functional impact as the Veteran's report that he was unable to work for about a week over the prior 12 months due to headaches. See January 2023 VA Headache Examination Report.

The January 2023 VA examiner issued an opinion in March 2023 confirming that the Veteran did not have severe economic inadaptability due to his migraine disability based on the Veteran's report that he was unable to work for about a week over the prior 12 months due to headaches and noting that the Veteran was employed full-time as a police officer. See March 2023 Addendum/Clarification.

The Veteran reported daily headaches around the temple region, on the right and left sides of his head, on the back of his head, and behind his eyes. He reported that at least five or six times a month, his migraine disability knocked him out of commission to the point where he was totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for six hours. He stated that during headaches, he was unable to function at all. See December 2021 VA Form 21-4138.

In January 2022, the Veteran submitted an undated statement from his wife. She reported that the Veteran's headaches were "getting really bad and much more intense," and that within the prior few months, he got excruciating headaches up to five days in a week. She stated that the Veteran was out of commission for hours when he got one of his headaches. See January 2022 Buddy/Lay Statement.

In November 2022, the Veteran reiterated that he had daily headaches with pain that occurred on the right and left side of his head, on the back of his head, and on the front of his head. He reported that at least nine to twelve times a month, his headaches knocked him out of commission to the point where he was totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for two hours. He stated that during headaches, he was unable to function at all. See November 2022 VA Form 21-4138.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a November 2022 independent evaluation prepared by C.M.B., a certified physician assistant (PA-C). C.M.B. found that the Veteran experienced very frequent, completely prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain at least nine times a month that caused at least one week of absences from his place of employment, making the disability productive of severe economic inadaptability, based on the Veteran's November 2022 statement. See November 2022 Independent VA Rating Evaluation Regarding Migraine Headaches. However, the Board places no probative value on C.M.B.'s report as it is unclear if C.M.B. reviewed the Veteran's claims file or medical records, or that he conducted any interview with or examination of the Veteran.

A March 2023 VA treatment record notes migraine headaches three to four times a week with photophobia and no dizziness or focal weakness. 

There are no other VA or private treatment records during the rating period on appeal that show treatment for the Veteran's migraine disability.

Based on the foregoing, after resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's December 2021 and November 2022 statements are representative of his migraine headache disability throughout the rating period on appeal and supports that the Veteran's migraine headache attacks were very frequent and prolonged. Additionally, the reported attacks were completely prostrating and prolonged as they lasted two to six hours several times per week and he was totally incapacitated during this time and were productive of severe economic inadaptability as they lasted long enough to prevent him from working as he needed to lay down in a dark room and avoid noises for two to six hours several times per week. As such, the Board concludes that throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran had migraine headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, corresponding to the criteria for a 50 percent rating under DC 8100, the maximum schedular rating available.

The Board acknowledges that the January 2022 and January 2023 VA examination reports do not show the severity of symptoms that the Veteran described in his December 2021 and November 2022 lay statements, and that the January 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine disability was not productive of severe economic inadaptability. However, the Board finds that the Veteran credibly reports that his headache symptoms waxed and waned but were productive of severe economic inadaptability and notes that neither examiner considered the Veteran's December 2021 or November 2022 lay statements. The examiners also did not discount the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication. Jones, supra. The Board therefore places higher probative value on the Veteran's lay statements. The Veteran is competent to report readily observable symptoms. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

In sum, in consideration of the evidence as discussed above and resolving reasonable doubt regarding degree of disability in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraine disability is shown to warrant an initial 50 percent rating under DC 8100.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Battaile

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.