Citation Nr: A25030959
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-437021
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1980 to July 1984.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a respiratory disability and a sleep disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In remanding these issues, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

1. The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

The Veteran filed a claim seeking service connection for sinusitis. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023. The examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of sinusitis because there was no pathology to render a diagnosis. 

Notwithstanding the above, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with allergic rhinitis; however, no medical nexus opinions were offered addressing whether the Veteran's allergic rhinitis was incurred in or caused by service. 

In that regard, the Board notes that when a claimant makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled. See Clemmons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (holding that VA must construe a service connection claim to include any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms the claimant describes, the information the claimant submits, or the Secretary obtains in support of the claim). Therefore, the Board will recharacterize the Veteran's sinusitis claim pursuant to Clemons as listed above.

Because the examiner failed to provide an opinion regarding the Veteran's allergic rhinitis, the opinion is inadequate. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand for a new opinion is warranted.

2. The issue of entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a sleep disorder. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA mental disorders examination to address his claimed sleep disorder. In the remarks section of the examination report, the examiner noted that for the Veteran's claimed sleep disorder "there is no diagnosis because Veteran reported having several days in a week during which he slept less well. He has OSA and uses a CPAP machine. Veteran's sleep difficulty associated with sleep apnea." The Board finds that the October 2023 VA examiner's statements that (1) the Veteran does not have a sleep disorder, but (2) has sleep apnea is internally inconsistent and inadequate. Additionally, the AOJ initially requested a sleep apnea examination; however, the Veteran was only provided a mental disorders examination. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate examination and opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand for a new opinion is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to whether any respiratory disability, to include sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service.

If the reviewing health care provider finds that a physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA sleep apnea examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of any sleep disorder, to include sleep apnea. The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner. The examiner should indicate whether any diagnosed sleep disorder had causal origins in service or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active duty service.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

3. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's appealed issues in light of the totality of evidence of record.  If any benefit sought is not granted to the fullest extent, the AOJ must provide the Veteran and his representative with a copy of the readjudication and afford them an appropriate period to respond.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Aston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.