Citation Nr: A25030213
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240328-428096
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

From March 28, 2023, entitlement to an increased rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left knee with chondromalacia of the patella status post ganglion cyst excision (left knee disability) is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

From March 28, 2023, entitlement to a separate, initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee instability is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From March 28, 2023, the Veteran's left knee disability more nearly approximated flexion limited to 30 degrees but did not more nearly approximate flexion limited to 15 degrees or any other symptoms warranting a higher rating.

2. From March 28, 2023, the Veteran's left knee instability more nearly approximated persistent instability requiring the use of assistive devices for ambulation, but did not more nearly approximate moderate recurrent subluxation or lateral instability as shown by a ligament sprain, a partial or complete ligament tear, or a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex requiring surgical repair.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. From March 28, 2023, the criteria for a 20 percent rating, but no higher, for left knee disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

2. From March 28, 2023, the criteria for a separate, initial 10 percent rating, but no higher, for left knee instability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1979 to January 1985.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in response to a March 28, 2023, claim for an increased rating for his left knee disability submitted on a VA Form 21-526EZ.  The RO denied the claim for increase in a May 2023 rating decision.  In November 2023, the Veteran requested higher-level review of this decision.  In the March 2024 decision on appeal, the RO continued the 10 percent rating for the Veteran's left knee disability.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Based on the above procedural history, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an increased rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left knee with chondromalacia of the patella status post ganglion cyst excision.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  To evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 510 (2007).  Here, as explained below, the uniform ratings are proper.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Court has emphasized that when assigning a disability rating it is necessary to consider limitation of a joint's functional ability due to flareups, fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, or when it is used repeatedly over a period of time, functional loss due to flareups, fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 28 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995); Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  In Mitchell, the Court explained that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the possible manifestations of functional loss include decreased or abnormal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance (38 C.F.R. § 4.40 ), as well as less or more movement than is normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, and pain on movement (as well as swelling, deformity, and atrophy) that affects stability, standing, and weight-bearing (38 C.F.R. § 4.45 ). 

Joints should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that a VA examiner must attempt to elicit information from the record and the Veteran regarding the severity, frequency, duration, or functional loss manifestations during flareups before determining that an estimate of motion loss in terms of degrees could not be given.  It also held that any inability to furnish such an estimate must be predicated on a lack of medical knowledge among the medical community at large, rather than insufficient knowledge by the individual examiner.

Disabilities of the knee and leg are generally rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5256 through 5263.  

During the appellate period, the AOJ has rated the Veteran's left knee disability at 10 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260, which is applicable to limitation of flexion of a leg.  Diagnostic Code 5260 provides a 10 percent rating if flexion is limited to 45 degrees, and a 20 percent rating if flexion is limited to 30 degrees.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for knee flexion that is limited to 15 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; Diagnostic Code 5260.

Separately, Diagnostic Code 5261 is applicable to the limitation of extension of a leg.  Diagnostic Code 5261 provides a noncompensable disability rating when extension is limited to 5 degrees, a 10 percent rating when it is limited to 10 degrees, a 20 percent rating when it is limited to 15 degrees, a 30 percent rating when limited to 20 degrees, a 40 percent rating when limited to 30 degrees, and a 50 percent rating when limited to 45 degrees.  Id.

VA's General Counsel has stated that separate ratings under Diagnostic Code 5260 and Diagnostic Code 5261 may be assigned for disability of the same joint without violating the rule against pyramiding.  VAOPGCPREC 9-04 (September 17, 2004), published at 69 Fed. Reg. 59,990 2004); see 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. 

Additionally, other Diagnostic Codes are for application to disabilities of the knees.  

The rating criteria pertaining to Diagnostic Code 5257 were revised effective February 7, 2021, prior to the appeal period.  Under the amended criteria, Diagnostic Code 5257 provides for recurrent subluxation or instability with a 30 percent rating that is unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for one of the following: (a) a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation, or (b) an unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  Diagnostic Code 5257 also provides for patellar instability with a 30 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker; a 20 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.  Note (1) of the rating provides that for patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon, and Note (2) states that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration).

Diagnostic Codes 5003 and 5010 pertain to arthritis.  An evaluation of traumatic arthritis, Diagnostic Code 5010, is rated under the criteria for Diagnostic Code 5003, which in turn evaluates disabilities based on the degree of limitation of motion under the appropriate Diagnostic Codes.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  If the disability is noncompensable under the appropriate Diagnostic Code for the joint involved, a 10 percent rating will be for application for such major joint or group of minor joints affected by limitation of motion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Under Diagnostic Code 5003, degenerative arthritis is evaluated based upon limitation of motion of the affected joint.  When limitation of motion is noncompensable, a 10 percent rating is warranted when there is x-ray evidence of involvement of a major joint.  In the absence of limitation of motion, a maximum schedular 20 percent rating is assigned for degenerative arthritis of two or more major joints or two or more minor joint groups, with occasional incapacitating episodes.

There are additional Diagnostic Codes that pertain to the knee.  However, as the evidence of record shows, the symptoms of the left knee disability in this case have neither manifested as or been attributed to ankylosis or its functional equivalent, see Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 23-24 (2021) (the ankylosis criterion in VA's General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare), symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage, impairment of the tibia or fibula, or genu recurvatum.  Therefore, separate, or higher disability ratings under these knee Diagnostic Codes do not require further discussion.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.14, 4.71a; Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5259, 5262, 5263.

As noted above, the Veteran filed his claim for a higher rating for his left knee disability on March 28, 2023.  The record from one year prior to this filing does not contain medical treatment records, examinations or lay statements concerning the Veteran's left knee disability.  As it is not ascertainable from the record that an increase in disability had occurred in the one-year period before his March 28, 2023, claim, the appeal period begins on March 28, 2023.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3).

The Veteran reported for a VA knee and lower leg examination in April 2023.  The examiner confirmed the diagnosis of status post excision ganglion cyst, left knee with chondromalacia of the patella.  The Veteran reported instability and constant pain in his left knee, and that his pain level increases when his left knee locks intermittently.  The Veteran rated his constant left knee pain as a six out of 10, and explained that his pain is aggravated by standing, walking, squatting, stairclimbing, inclines, and bike riding.  Regarding treatment, the Veteran has attended physical therapy, received knee injections, used ice or heat to treat the pain, and uses a prescribed knee brace.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not experience flareups and did not report or have a history of instability or recurrent subluxation of the left knee.  The examiner noted that the Veteran experiences functional loss based on his reports of constant pain and has a history of frequent, intermittent effusion of the knee.  The examiner did not test the Veteran's right knee range of motion because of reported pain with movement.  Regarding his left knee, the examiner recorded active and passive ranges of motion as follows:  flexion endpoint of 90 degrees (normally 140 degrees), with pain on flexion, and an extension endpoint of 0 degrees (normally 0 degrees).  The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions; the examiner did not record the extension and flexion measurements and marked that the Veteran had no additional functional loss or range of motion after three repetitions.  The examiner noted evidence of pain in the left knee when weight bearing and during active and passive motion, but that the pain did not result in or cause functional loss.  The examiner recorded evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue on both sides of his left knee.  No response was provided with respect to flareups, and the examiner recorded that the additional factors contributing to the disability included interference with sitting and standing, disturbance of locomotion, and less movement than normal.  The Veteran did not show objective evidence of crepitus, muscle atrophy, ankylosis, recurrent subluxation or persistent instability, ligament tear (sprain), or recurrent patellar instability.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran required a prescription (by a medical provider) of a cane for ambulation with patellar instability; the Veteran reported using his prescribed cane and brace constantly.  The only noted surgery was the removal of a ganglion cyst in 1984.  No imaging studies were performed in conjunction with the examination, and degenerative or post-traumatic arthritis was not otherwise documented in the report. 

A VA September 2021 x-ray showed degenerative arthrosis in both knees. However, as the Veteran's limitation of motion in his left knee is rated at a level higher than noncompensable under Diagnostic Code 5260, an additional 10 percent rating for degenerative arthritis is not permitted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 (VA is prohibited from pyramiding (rating the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes)). 

For the following reasons, the Board finds that entitlement to an increased 20 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's left knee disability for the entire appellate period.  Additionally, the Board finds that entitlement to a separate, initial 10 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the entire appellate period based on instability of the Veteran's left knee.  

The April 2023 VA examiner only provided an active range of motion for left knee flexion of 90 degrees; the examiner stated that the passive range of motion was the same as active, and that the Veteran did not lose range of motion after three repetitions.  This finding does not more nearly approximate limitation to 30 degrees, indicative of a 20 percent rating.  The Board must, however, also consider additional functional loss due to symptoms such as pain (and painful motion), weakness, premature or excess fatigability, and incoordination.  Functionally, the Veteran reported that his constant left knee pain significantly limits his ability to stand, walk, squat, or climb stairs or an incline.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's left knee disability created a disturbance of locomotion, that there was a history of frequent effusion, as well as tenderness and pain during the examination.  While the examiner checked the box indicating that the Veteran did not report flare-ups of the knee and/or lower leg, the Veteran reported that his constant pain was aggravated with basic movements such as walking or standing, and the examiner checked the box indicating that the Veteran reported functional loss or functional impairment of the joint with the description of the functional loss or functional impairment being constant pain.  The examiner also noted additional factors contributing to disability of interference with sitting, interference with standing, and less movement than normal.  Therefore, it is reasonable for the Board to assume that the Veteran's pain on movement, fatiguability, tenderness, and effusion surfaced in heightened ways with basic activities and strain. As factors to consider in determining functional impairment include "disturbance of locomotion, interference with sitting, standing and weight-bearing," 38 C.F.R. § 4.45(f), these factors may be the basis for a higher rating.

The symptoms of the Veteran's left knee disability more nearly approximated significant functional loss after repeated use over time and upon strain and certain activities.  Although range of motion testing conducted during the VA examinations do not reflect flexion limited to 30 degrees, the Veteran had consistently reported significant, frequent, and aggravated pain.  It is reasonable to conclude that the Veteran's range of motion was much more limited as the VA examination neither took place after walking or standing for more than 20 minutes.  Based on this evidence, a 20 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5260 for his left knee disability, based on estimated losses in range of motion considering factors such as pain and interference with standing and ambulation, is warranted.

Regardless of the competent and credible reports of pain and other functional impairments, and despite the fact that painful motion has been documented, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a rating in excess of 20 percent for this disability is warranted.  Rather, the evidence weighs persuasively against approximation of the symptoms required for a rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee disability.  The evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran's pain productive of functional loss, after repeated use and during flareups more nearly approximates left knee extension limited to 15 degrees, the basis for a higher, 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5260.  The evidence of record further fails to indicate that the Veteran had limitation in extension to warrant a compensable disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5261. Extension was normal, to 0 degrees, and painful motion under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is contemplated in the 20 percent rating being granted for left knee flexion.  See Frazier v. McDonough, 66 F.4th 1353, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (finding that VA's "interpretation of section 4.59" as allowing for only a single compensable rating for the joint based on pain "is not only reasonable but is consistent with the interpretation of section 4.59 applied by the DVA both prior to and since the Veterans Court's decision in Sowers").

For the above reasons, from March 28, 2023, entitlement to a 20 percent rating for the Veteran's left knee disability is warranted.  The probative evidence of record weighs persuasively against a rating in excess of 20 percent or any separate rating other than for instability as discussed below, for the Veteran's left knee disability.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application in this regard.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to a separate, initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee instability. 

Prior to the appeal period, the Veteran consistently reported instability in his left knee.  Specifically, in a February 2006 treatment record, the Veteran reported instability in his left knee, and that walking upstairs or uphill was problematic because there was no forewarning of a fall.  Similarly, in his March 2006 VA joint examination, the Veteran reported the sudden feeling of his knee giving away, and that even with a brace, he continued to experience instability in his left knee.  In a January 2014 VA treatment record, the Veteran was referred to prosthetics for a prescribed knee brace and walking cane to help alleviate the frequent falls he experienced because of his left knee instability.  In September 2021, VA referred the Veteran again to prosthetics for a new custom brace and walking cane. 

The Veteran has a diagnosis of left knee chondromalacia patella and this satisfies the criterion in DC 5257 of a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex.  His competent, credible, and consistent lay statements indicating recurrent instability without history of surgical repair that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker satisfy the remaining criteria and a 10 percent rating is therefore warranted under DC 5257.

However, the Veteran's symptoms did not more nearly approximate a sprain, partial or complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, or a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation.  To be clear, while the Veteran uses prescribe assistive devices for ambulation, the ligaments in his left knee have not been shown to be sprained or torn, and his diagnosed chondromalacia of the left patella has not required surgical repair, as delineated in the 20 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 5257.  Moreover, under note (2) of Diagnostic Code 5257, the surgery to remove the Veteran's ganglion cyst does not qualify as a surgical repair for patellar instability to warrant a higher rating.

Consequently, a rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee instability is warranted.  The evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so as to whether symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria for a 20 percent rating.  Rather, the evidence weighs persuasively against approximation of the symptoms required for a rating in excess of 10 percent.  Consequently, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application in this regard.  Lynch, 21 F. 4th 776.

The Board has considered the Veteran's claims?and decided entitlement based on the evidence.  Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with respect to his claims.  Doucette v. Shulkin,?28?Vet. App.?366, 369-70?(2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board notes that, in a separate rating decision, the Veteran was granted TDIU effective March 28, 2023, and there is no evidence or argument of a factually ascertainable increase within a year prior to the March 28, 2023 increased rating claim.  Thus, even if TDIU were part and parcel of the claim for an increased rating for left knee disability, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU prior to March 28, 2023 is therefore not before the Board.  Cf. Phillips v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 394, 401 (2024) ("if the RO grants or denies TDIU as part of one increased rating claim, VA may still need to consider TDIU in a separate appeal of a different rating").

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. T. Mowell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.