Citation Nr: A25030541
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432270
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, entitlement to an initial 50 percent rating, but no higher, for migraine headaches, effective May 11, 2022, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations government the payment of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to an initial 70 percent rating, but no higher, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, chronic, (hereafter adjustment disorder), is granted, effective April 20, 2023, subject to the laws and regulations government the payment of monetary benefits.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  During the appeal period, the Veteran's migraines have been very frequent, completely prostrating, and involving prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

2.  For the entire appeal period stemming from April 20, 2023, the date service connection was established, the Veteran's adjustment disorder was manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting in occupational and social impairment due to symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, irritability, panic attacks, impairment of short and long-term memory, and obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial 50 percent rating, but no higher, for migraine headaches have been met. U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100. 

2. The criteria for an initial 70 percent rating, but no higher, for adjustment disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9440.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1995 to November 1999, with additional service in the Reserve.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in February 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the underlying September (migraines) and November 2023 (adjustment disorder) rating decisions that was subject of the request for Higher Level Review (HLR) addressed in the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Considering the procedural history of this appeal, the Board finds that the review period is from the dates of service connection. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the September and November 2023 decisions, respectively, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for migraine headaches.

The Veteran is in receipt of a 30 percent rating for migraine headaches from May 11, 2022, the date of service connection.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history, and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id. 

The appeal period before the Board for migraine headaches begins on May 11, 2022, the date of service connection.  For the entire appeal period, such disability has been rated as 30 percent disability pursuant to DC 8100. 

Migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §4.124a, DC 8100, for migraine.  Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under DC 8100. 38 C.F.R. §4.124a.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraine attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 44546 (2004).

Turning to the evidence of record, in a May 2022 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran stated his headaches occur weekly and the pain is around his temple region, behind his eyes and ears and over his sinuses.  He contended that at least five to six times per month, the migraine headaches cause him to be "out of commission" to the point that he is "totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for" six hours.  He stated he takes over the counter Advil, Goody's, and Tylenol to treat the symptoms.  Furthermore, the Veteran asserted he missed events and activities due to his headaches because they render him unable to function at all during the time of the headaches.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in May 2022. The examiner noted that the Veteran had symptoms of pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain localized in the front of the head and temporal areas, nausea, and sensitivity to light and sound.  The examiner opined that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines productive of severe economic inadaptability, and that the Veteran's migraine headaches did not impact his ability to work.

In February 2023, the Veteran provided an independent evaluation for his migraine headaches.  Based primarily on the Veteran's May 2022 lay statements discussed above, the provider opined the Veteran experiences very frequent, completely prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain at least five to six times a month, and therefore meets and excess the criteria for a 30 percent disability rating.

In February 2023, the Veteran was provided another VA examination.  The examiner noted the Veteran had symptoms of pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, nausea, changes in vision, and sensitivity to light and sound.  The duration of typical head pain lasted one to two days.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks once in two months, and the Veteran had very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Furthermore, the examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine headaches impact his ability to work, due to the dizziness, nausea, aura, poor concentration, and difficulty with focusing at work.

The Board finds the Veteran's description and the February 2023 VA examiner's description of the Veteran's symptoms and functional impairment, fully support that the Veteran's headaches are prostrating and productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran reported having five to six migraines a month, and thus were more frequent than once a month as set forth in the 30 percent criteria under DC 8100.

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his readily observable symptoms.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran's reports regarding the frequency and severity of his migraines are generally consistent throughout the record, and are reflective of a history of uncontrolled, frequent prostrating migraines.  Accordingly, the Board finds his statements to be credible.

In sum, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and concludes the Veteran's migraines have been very frequent, completely prostrating, and involving prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Therefore, a 50 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's migraine headaches from May 11, 2022.  The Board notes that a 50 percent rating is the maximum rating available under DC 8100.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. The Board does not find a basis for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for adjustment disorder.

The appeal period before the Board begins on April 20, 2023, the date of service connection for adjustment disorder.  For the entire appeal period, such disability has been rated as 50 percent disabling pursuant to DC 9440, which provides that such disability is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Although the VA Form 10182 lists this disability under the separately diagnosed service-psychiatric disabilities, the Board finds that the service-connected disability is appropriately rated under one rating for the general schedule and that the issue on appeal is a request for a higher initial rating for all symptomatology attributable to the service-connected psychiatric disability without further reference to specific diagnoses.

The General Rating Formula provides a 10 percent rating when there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  

A 30 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating."  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023, where he was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, chronic.  The Veteran reported symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, hypervigilance, anhedonia, issues focusing, and excessive focus on neatness and organization.  The VA examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as having reduced reliability and productivity.

In July 2023, the Veteran provided VA an independent mental health evaluation.  The provider noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of memory, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationship, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, reduced participation in activities, irritability, hopelessness, fatigue, and social withdrawal.  The provider summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as having deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement in support of his claim and asserted he is no longer active in the hobbies he used to enjoy, he often feels sad and unmotivated, he withdraws from people because he wants to be alone, he feels anxious, has trouble sleeping, and has a hard time remembering tasks, events, or directions.  At times the Veteran has difficulty completing chores around the house and finds himself forgetting the names of close family members and what they do for a living.  He asserts that the symptoms associated with his adjustment disorder weigh on the relationships he was with his significant other.  The Veteran stated he gets angry easily and has difficulty being intimate with his partner.  The relationship problems extend to his family and friendships, and he avoids interacting with them.  Furthermore, the Veteran contends he experiences a pattern of repeated behaviors that interfere with his daily activities, which include nasal rinse.

With respect to social impairment, the evidence of record shows the Veteran has difficulty with his significant other, including intimacy, and he shuts down and withdraws from friends and family.  He no longer participates in social activities and hobbies that he once enjoyed.  

As for occupational impairment, the Veteran has worked as a low voltage cable puller and was a contractor in Kuwait and Afghanistan as an outside plant cable puller.  He is employed with a company that has a government contract installing information technology equipment for military bases.  His symptoms negatively impact his focus, so his tasks take longer.  He sometimes makes mistakes, and he has to accomplish the task over again. 

The Board must consider the totality of the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology, as well as both the occupational and social impairment resulting therefrom.  In this regard, the Board affords both the lay and medical evidence of record significant probative value as the examiner's opinions were based on evaluation of the Veteran and consideration of his own lay reports of his symptoms in light of the rating criteria.  

Upon review, the Board finds a rating of 70 percent is warranted during the appeal period.  With respect to the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology, the VA examination report and independent provider's report, document symptomatology that most nearly approximates the criteria for a 70 percent rating disability.   The Veteran experiences social and occupational impairment, with deficiencies at work, in family relations, thinking and mood, due to symptoms such as rituals which interfere with routine activities, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of memory, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships,  impaired impulse control, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, reduced participation in activities.  The Board has considered the lay and medical evidence regarding the Veteran's symptomatology, and the frequency, severity, and duration of these psychiatric symptoms, whether specifically listed in the rating schedule or not, and finds they do not indicate a greater level of impairment than reflected by the current 70 percent rating.

To warrant a higher rating for the period on appeal, the evidence must demonstrate the Veteran has total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  While the Veteran did report that he had experienced some memory loss toward family members, the Veteran does not report delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, or concern about hurting himself or others.  Furthermore, the VA examiner noted behavior observations including neat appearance, clear speech, focused attention cooperative behavior, normal insight and judgment, and logical and linear thought process.  Additionally, the record reflects current employment. Considering the frequency, duration, and severity of the symptoms of record, contained both in the lay and medical evidence, the Board finds that the record does not reflect total social and occupational impairment.

The Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  However, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities in light of the rating criteria to be probative and consistent with the Veteran's assertions.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected mental disorder during the appeal period; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  Furthermore, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

In sum, the Board concludes that the evidence of record persuasively weighs in favor of a 70 percent rating for the symptomatology of the Veteran's adjustment disorder.  In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine, however, the weight of the probative evidence is in favor of a 70 percent rating. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 70 percent. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard.  The Veteran's increased rating claim is granted, and a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Scherba, Heather L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.