Citation Nr: A25030394
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-455626
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent for other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder (claimed as mental health issues) effective July 25, 2023, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

During the period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

During the period on appeal, the criteria for a disability rating more than 70 percent for PTSD, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 1988 to February 2006. 

Procedural History

The Veteran filed a Fully Developed Claim in August 2017 seeking entitlement to service connection for PTSD. A rating decision was issued in September 2017 granting entitlement to PTSD with an effective date of August 4, 2017, with a disability rating of 50 percent. The Veteran took no action challenging the PTSD rating from September 2017, and the rating became final. 

Thereafter, the Veteran filed a Fully Developed Claim in January 2023. A March 2023 rating decision was issued which continued the 50 percent disability rating. The Veteran sought a Higher-Level Review (HLR) in August 2023, challenging the March 2023 rating decision. Following the HLR, a rating decision was issued in December 2023 which again continued the 50 percent disability rating. 

Following the December 2023 rating decision, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim in February 2023. A rating decision addressing the Supplemental Claim was issued in June 2024 which increased the rating percentage from 50 percent to 70 percent with an effective date of February 22, 2024. Thereafter, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182) seeking a Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge. The Veteran listed specific issues of: other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder (claimed as mental health issues) citing a decision date of April 1, 2023; chronic sprain with degenerative joint disease, right ankle (previously rated as right ankle sprain) citing a decision date of September 25, 2017; chronic strain with degenerative joint disease, left ankle (previously rated as left ankle sprain) citing a decision date of September 25, 2017; instability, left knee citing a decision date of September 25, 2017; chronic strain with degenerative joint disease, left ankle (previously rated as left ankle sprain) citing a decision date of July 15, 2014; and instability, left knee citing a decision date of July 15, 2014. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a) the Board is to liberally construe the VA Form 10182 submission to determine the issues being appealed.  Here, the Board notes the issues of entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for lumbar spine degenerative joint disease, status post, L5/S1 fusion prior to February19, 2024; entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 40 percent of lumbar spine degenerative joint disease, status post, L5/S1 fusion from February 19, 2024; entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle strain with degenerative joint disease; entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain with degenerative joint disease; entitlement to service connection for right foot neuropathy, to include a secondary to service-connected right and left ankle disabilities; and entitlement to service connection for left foot neuropathy, to include as secondary to service connected right and left ankle disabilities are being addressed in a separate appeal stream with a Supplemental Statement of Case issued in July 2024, an appeal to Board of Veteran's Appeals received in August 2024, and Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 21-0958) also filed in August 2024.  Thus, the issues concerning degenerative joint disease and ankles will be left to the separate appeal stream and not addressed herein. 

The issue of PTSD remains. In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 29, 2023, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Mental disorders are rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Under this general formula, ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of symptoms and the extent to which they cause occupational and social impairment. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 18 (2017); see also Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The rating criteria includes a non-exhaustive list of symptoms, meaning that VA is not required to find the presence of all, most, or even some of the enumerated symptoms to assign a particular evaluation. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 18 (quoting Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 116-17) (quotations omitted). Thus, a veteran may qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating that he or she suffers from the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that those symptoms caused the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a particular disability evaluation. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 18; Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 116-17 (quotations omitted). In sum, "VA must engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment." Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22 (internal citations omitted).

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the appeal period before the Board begins on January 25, 2023, the date VA received the Fully Developed Claim. Under VA's modernized appeals system, a claimant may "continuously pursue" a claim which has been denied such that the earliest possible effective date can be preserved. A claim is continuously pursued when the claimant continues to timely file review options after a decision by the AOJ, the Board, or the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). Those review options are laid out in 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(a). Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1), the effective date of a benefit granted to a claimant who has continuously pursued their claim by electing further review will be the date VA received a claimant's initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. The Veteran has continuously pursued the PTSD claim. Further, the relevant period for review also includes the one-year look-back period for increased rating claims. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

1. Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent effective January 25, 2023, for PTSD is granted. 

The Veteran contends his service-connected PTSD is worse than what it has been evaluated. Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the private medical evidence submitted supports his contentions.

The Board has determined the Veteran is entitled to a rating of 70 percent for his service-connected PTSD beginning January 25, 2023, (the date the Veteran's Fully Developed claim was received) and throughout the period on appeal, due to the reasons set forth below.

The service-connected PTSD is rated under Code 9411 under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty understanding common commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

After review of the evidence, the Board has determined the Veteran is entitled to a 70 percent rating beginning January 25, 2023, and throughout the period on appeal.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted an independent medical examination from a licensed clinical psychologist, K.H., Psy.D. The psychologist assessed the Veteran's service connected PTSD as occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, disorientation to time or place, reduced activity, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, memory and cognitive impairment, poor self- esteem, relationship problems, hopelessness, guilt, and impaired sleep. 

The Board finds the private opinion highly probative as it contains clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008). "The probative value of evidence is its tendency to establish the proposition that it is offered to prove. Evidence has probative value if it tends to prove the issue in dispute." McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 254 (2019) (quoting Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005); United States v. Welsh, 774 F.2d 670, 672 (4th Cir. 1985)).

VA examiners assessed the service-connected PTSD as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity in February 2023 with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of short- and long-term memory, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and suicidal ideation. 

VA examiners assessed the service-connected PTSD as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood again in March 2024 with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and suicidal ideation. 

The Board also finds the VA examiners opinions also probative as they contain clear conclusions with supporting data and reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

From March 2022 to January 2023, in CAPRI records, the Veteran denied suicidal ideations, homicidal ideations, and hallucinations.

The VA medical evidence, the Veteran's personal statement, and private opinion reflects symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating (flattened affect, impairment of short- and long-term memory, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships). Crucially, however, all three examinations also showed depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and suicidal ideation which are more closely associated with a 70 percent rating.

Further, the Veteran described his PTSD negatively impacting his peer and leadership relationships due to having difficulty with motivation. He further described having anxiety, a low frustration tolerance, taking frequent sick days, having low energy, and a desire to be alone. The Veteran also reported being charged with assault around 2019, with the charges ending in dismissal. 

The Veteran's symptoms are such that the private examiner in February 2023 and the VA examiner in March 2024 notated the Veteran's occupational and social impairment to be with deficiencies in most areas. Given the Veteran's suicidal ideation coupled with reported impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, the Board finds these functional deficits equate to symptoms of the 70 percent level, but no higher.

Thus, the Board finds the Veteran's service-connected PTSD more closely approximates a 70 percent rating under the criteria. However, a higher than 70 percent is not shown by the evidence to be warranted throughout the period on appeal. First, the Veteran's occupational and social impairment has been found to approximate a 70 percent rating more closely under the Code. The Veteran does not have total occupational impairment. Further, the medical and lay evidence does not show that the Veteran exhibits other symptoms of such severity, frequency, and duration as to be analogous to the criteria of the 100 percent rating. In addition, the medical evidence does not show at any time throughout the period on appeal that the Veteran was found to have persistent delusions or hallucinations. Thus, the Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms are shown by the medical and lay evidence to approximate a rating of no greater more closely than 70 percent rating throughout the period on appeal.

The medical and lay evidence also does not show at any time throughout the period on appeal that the Veteran's symptoms overall approximate the level of disability of total social impairment. Rather, the Veteran has been found to remain able to maintain work and social relationships, albeit with difficulty. The January 2023 private examination report shows he has a college education and works as a maintenance mechanic for a Veteran's hospital. The Veteran reported currently going through a divorce after being married for 31 years. He also has two sons and several grandchildren and reports to have a fair relationship with his youngest son. Lastly, he was in a motorcycle club but is no longer. He occasionally goes to restaurants. In summary, the medical and lay evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran's service-connected PTSD symptoms are productive of a 70 percent rating throughout the period on the appeal.

Accordingly, a 70 percent rating, and no greater, for service-connected PTSD from January 25, 2023, and throughout the period on appeal, is warranted. To that extent, the appeal is granted.

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	KMMH

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.