Citation Nr: A25030657
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230824-372239
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

The claim for service connection for a left ankle condition is dismissed.

The claim for service connection for a left hip condition is dismissed.

The claim for service connection for a right hip condition is dismissed.

The claim for service connection for a right arm condition is dismissed.

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for chest pain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran was granted service connection for a left ankle condition in a February 2025 rating decision. 

2. The Veteran was granted service connection for a left hip condition in a February 2025 rating decision. 

3. The Veteran was granted service connection for a right hip condition in a February 2025 rating decision. 

4. The Veteran was granted service connection for a right arm condition in a February 2025 rating decision. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the claim for service connection for a left ankle condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for dismissal of the claim for service connection for a left hip condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for dismissal of the claim for service connection for a right hip condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

4. The criteria for dismissal of the claim for service connection for a right arm condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from June 1988 to February 1992.

This matter stems from an August 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for chest pain, a left ankle condition, a bilateral hip condition, and a right arm condition.

By way of background, in October 2022, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for chest pain. In November 2022, the AOJ denied service connection for left ankle, bilateral hip, and right arm conditions. 

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a higher-level review request for the above conditions, in addition to other conditions not currently on appeal. The same day, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Board appeal for the same issues.

On January 19, 2023, the AOJ identified that a duty to assist error had been identified with respect to the claims of service connection for chest pain, a left ankle condition, a bilateral hip condition and a right arm condition, and in a June 2023 rating decision, deferred a final decision on these issues in order to complete further development. 

In August 2023, the AOJ denied service connection for chest pain, a left ankle condition, a bilateral hip condition and a right arm condition. The Veteran subsequently filed another VA Form 10182 wherein he selected the Direct Review Docket under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision. By operation of law, the Board is precluded from considering evidence submitted during a period after the AOJ issued the decisions on appeal. 38?C.F.R. §?20.303. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any additional evidence in conjunction with his appeal, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38?C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In December 2024, the Board issued a decision based upon the January 2023 VA Form 10182, remanding the issues of service connection for a right arm condition, left ankle condition, and bilateral hip condition for further development. The Board did not adjudicate the issue of service connection for chest pain or provide reasoning as to why that issue was not being adjudicated. 

In February 2025, the AOJ granted service connection for a left ankle condition, bilateral hip condition and right arm condition. 

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105. In this case, the Veteran has already been granted service connection for a left ankle condition, bilateral hip condition and right arm condition, and has not contended that he disagrees with the effective dates given, or the evaluations assigned. Therefore, there remains no further allegation of error of fact or law for appellate consideration. If the Veteran disagrees with the effective date for his claims, he is encouraged to work with his representative to file a Supplemental Claim, or a notice of disagreement within one year of the rating decision granting service connection.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran is also seeking service connection for chest pain. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that in June 1989, he was seen after a motor vehicle accident, and reported pain over the left chest and shoulder. Imaging at the time was negative. In July 1989, The Veteran reported that he injured/bruised his sternum and left shoulder after a motor vehicle accident and that he experienced a sharp pain that started in his shoulder and chest. He was diagnosed with a contusion and given Motrin. In October 1991, the Veteran reported a sharp chest pain and difficulty breathing after running and was diagnosed with possible asthma and difficulty breathing. The Veteran's chest x-ray was normal, and he stated that he had trouble breathing for 18 years.

The Veteran's post service treatment records are silent with respect to any complaints of or treatment for chest pain, and the Veteran specifically denied cardiovascular chest pain in February 2022.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2022, but no formal diagnosis was given. The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in August 2023 and was diagnosed with costochondritis, The VA examiner provided a negative opinion stating that the causes of costochondritis are coughing too hard, respiratory infection, physical exertion, or injury to the chest and that most cases do not last longer than a year. She stated that her reasoning considered that the Veteran did not submit medical progress notes within one year following separation that established a longitudinal trend of subjective complaints or objective findings. 

Here, the Veteran reported in service that he had trouble breathing for 18 years, in relation to sharp chest pain. The August 2023 VA examiner noted that his current diagnosis of costochondritis could have been caused by physical exertion, coughing too hard, respiratory infection or injury to the chest. While she stated that most cases do not last longer than a year, she did not address the Veteran's report that he had trouble breathing in relation to chest pain in the 18 years prior to 1991. Trouble breathing and/or chest pain was not noted upon entry into service, therefore, an opinion as to whether the Veteran's chest pain clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service and if so, whether it was clearly and unmistakably aggravated by his service, to include the 1989 motor vehicle accident, should have been obtained. The Board finds that not doing so earlier constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and therefore an opinion will be obtained on remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's chest pain. It is of note the Veteran's chest pain was found not to be cardiovascular in nature. If a physical examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Did the Veteran's chest pain clearly and unmistakably exist prior to service? Why or why not?

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's report in service that he had difficulty breathing for 18 years. See "STR - Medical" pg. 6, 57, date added 7/14/2004. 

(b.) If the answer to (a) is yes, was the Veteran's chest pain clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by his service (meaning that any permanent worsening of the condition was not beyond the natural progression of the disability)? Why or why not?

The examiner should discuss the 1989 motor vehicle accident where the Veteran injured his shoulder and chest. See "STR- Medical", pgs. 6-7, 36, date added 7/14/2007.

(c.) If the answer to (a) and/or (b) is no, the Veteran is presumed sound (meaning that the examiner cannot fall back on a finding that the Veteran had chest pain that pre-existed service.  If so, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's chest pain either began during or was otherwise caused by his active service and explain why or why not?

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elizabeth A. Gadson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.