Citation Nr: A25030393
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240130-423703
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for schizophrenia is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Navy from July 1990 to February 1992.

The rating decision on appeal was issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in December 2023.  In a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) received in January 2024, the Veteran elected the Direct Review option for this appeal; therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence in the record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

As an initial matter, the Board notes the AOJ recently issued a determination in March 2025, finding that the character of the Veteran's discharge from service does not constitute a bar to the receipt of VA benefits.  Therefore, the Board has restyled the issue on appeal as noted, instead of as a claim for service connection for treatment purposes only.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12, 3.360.

Entitlement to service connection for schizophrenia is remanded.

The Board finds a remand is necessary in this case to cure an error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist the claimant.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The AOJ denied the claim for service connection for schizophrenia based in part on a finding that the evidence did not show an event, disease, or injury in service.  

The Veteran submitted a disability benefits questionnaire completed in December 2022 by a private psychologist, which notes the Veteran started becoming delusional in 1991.  The Veteran also asserted in an April 2006 written statement that he was mentally ill during service.  Further, the Veteran's service treatment records contain a report from him that his alcohol intake increased significantly in July 1991, and that he had experienced suicidal ideation during service.  

The Board finds this evidence to indicate a possible relationship between the Veteran's current schizophrenia diagnosis and his service.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006) (VA is obliged to provide an examination where there is insufficient information to decide the claim and there is an indication the current disability may be associated with service).  However, the AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion, which the Board finds is an error in fulfilling the duty to assist.  The Board notes the AOJ did obtain a VA psychiatric examination in February 2025, which the Board is unable to consider at this time, as it was added to the record outside of any relevant evidence window.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Regardless, there is no medical opinion regarding a nexus between the Veteran's service and his current diagnosis of schizophrenia; therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an opinion in this matter.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine whether the current diagnosis of schizophrenia is related to the Veteran's military service.  If the examiner determines that an additional in-person examination is required, one should be scheduled.  Please note, if the examiner deems it reasonable, an alternate format such as telehealth interview is acceptable.

Following review of the claims file and, if indicated, examination of the Veteran, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence) that the schizophrenia began in or within the year after separation from service, see 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309, 3.384, or is otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service.

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.  The examiner may not dismiss the Veteran's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

(Continued on next page.)

?

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.  

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Josey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.