Citation Nr: A25030803
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240311-423769
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include anxiety and depression disorders, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbances is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 2012 to October 2012. The Veteran also had service in the Army National Guard.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024. Since this constitutes an initial decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), issued after the effective date of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the modernized review system applies. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1).

The Veteran appealed this decision by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) in March 2024. In doing so, the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the February 2024 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Service connection for anxiety is remanded.

2. Service connection for depression is remanded.

3. Service connection for sleep disturbances remanded.

The Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran's claim should have been expanded to include any psychiatric condition. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). The Veteran is not required to know the exact diagnosis of his disability, only to identify symptoms for which he seeks benefits. See Clemons, supra. Thus, the claim has been recharacterized accordingly.

In the decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found current diagnoses for anxiety and depression disorders. In October 2022, the Tucson VA Medical Center confirmed diagnoses of generalized anxiety and depression. However, the claim was denied because it determined that the Veteran's current psychiatric condition was not related to active service. In making this determination, the AOJ relied on the absence of complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis in service. The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's STRs do not show any event or injury related to a psychiatric condition; however, the absence of treatment or a diagnosis in service does not preclude service connection. Additionally, in October 2022, the Veteran reported nightmares related to the military and working as a combat medic.

In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report an in-service event, injury, or symptoms. Additionally, VA has a duty to assist a claimant in securing evidence necessary to substantiate their claim for VA benefits which includes providing an examination and medical opinion. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c). Under Mclendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006), a medical examination or medical opinion is necessary in a claim for service connection when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. Id.

Here, the Veteran has a current disability, and an in-service event which suggests that his psychiatric disorder may have been caused by service based on the Veteran's contentions. The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination regarding the claimed psychiatric disorders prior to adjudicating the claim. Similarly, the Veteran was not afforded an examination in regard to his sleep disturbances. As such, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders. The examiner must be provided with the entire claims folder, including a copy of this remand, for review.

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's psychiatric disorders, if any, are related to any injury, disease, or event incurred in service. Explain why or why not.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep disorder. The examiner must be provided with the entire claims folder, including a copy of this remand, for review.

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep disorder is related to any injury, disease, or event incurred in service or the aggravated condition in service. Explain why or why not.

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinions expressed. 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brown, B. D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.