Citation Nr: A25030099
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 241122-491972
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on a need for the aid and attendance of another under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate equipoise as to whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another due to the disabling effects of his service-connected diabetes and upper and lower extremities peripheral neuropathy disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an award of SMC based on the need for the aid and attendance of another have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from October 1966 to October 1968.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

The Board observes that although the rating decision on appeal denied the Veteran's SMC claim based on a need for the aid and attendance, and alternatively at the housebound rate, the Veteran only disagreed with the denial of SMC based on a need for aid and attendance on his VA Form 10182.  As such, the discussion below is limited to entitlement to SMC based on a need for aid and attendance under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l).  

Entitlement to SMC based on a need for the aid and attendance of another under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) is granted.

The Veteran has requested an SMC award based on a need for the aid and attendance of another.  He specifically contends that his service-connected diabetes and associated neuropathies of the upper and lower extremities are so severe that they prevent him from performing several activities of daily living without assistance.

SMC, in pertinent part, is payable if, as the result of service-connected disabilities, a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a), the following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether a veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person: (1) the inability of the veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; (3) inability of the veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; and (4) inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment. It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions which a veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. Id. 

After a review of the record, the Board finds that the criteria for SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another have been met.

Throughout the period under review, the Veteran has been in receipt of service-connection awards for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Type II diabetes mellitus, associated diabetic peripheral neuropathies of both upper and lower extremities, tinnitus and erectile dysfunction. 

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a December 6, 2022, VA Form 21-2680, Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance. Within the report, the examiner noted that the disabilities that limited the Veteran's listed activities or functions were, among others, his service-connected diabetes and neurological disabilities. The examiner indicated that the Veteran was unable to feed himself, as he needed assistance cutting foot due in part to his upper extremity neuropathy.  The examiner also highlighted a history of falls, and that the Veteran needs assistance with bathing and hygiene needs.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's wife assisted the Veteran with bathing, shaving, and toileting.  The examiner noted that the Veteran also needed medication management.  

In an April 2023 rating decision addressing the Veteran's claim, the AOJ listed as a favorable finding that the Veteran required the aid and attendance of another, as shown on the previously submitted VA Form 21-2680. This finding is binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). While the favorable finding does not specify that this need for aid and attendance was due specifically to service-connected disabilities, it points to evidence in the file (i.e., the December 2022 examiner's report) that identified the Veteran's service-connected diabetes and neurological disabilities as disabilities that play a role in preventing the Veteran from performing basic activities on his own, to include bathing and preparing meals. 

The Veteran has since supplemented the record with a statement from his wife, who noted in May 2024 that she gives the Veteran his showers and applies medication to his feet four times daily due to the seriousness of his neuropathy.  She indicated that the Veteran falls about once a week, and that she must help him up and give him his insulin each day.  In September 2024, VA approved the first steps of the Veteran's application for the Program of General Caregiver Support Services, highlighting his wife as his general caregiver.  VA treatment reports at that time noted the Veteran to be a fall risk due to his neuropathy in his feet.  See a September 25, 2024, VA CSP Assessment.  

In the October 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied the Veteran's SMC claim based largely on the findings of a more recently-obtained September 2024 aid and attendance examination. Within that report, the examiner concluded that the Veteran required no separate assistance in any category.  However, the September 2024 examiner provided little discussion as to how she drew this conclusion.  Indeed, the examiner only highlighted that she witnessed the Veteran move his scooter into the back of his truck without a walker or cane, and that he drove away from the facility, suggesting the Veteran maintained a level of ability allowing for ambulation without assistance.  While the Veteran may have been capable of performing such tasks on that day, the September 2024 examiner did not reconcile her overall conclusions with the other medical evidence of record referenced above, to specifically include the prior December 2022 aid and attendance examination report (upon which the AOJ based its favorable finding that the Veteran did, in fact, require aid and attendance), and the restrictions discussed in the Veteran's VA treatment reports.  Without more discussion addressing why her recent conclusions appear to contradict prior assessments, the Board affords the September 2024 aid and attendance examiner's report little probative weight.

After considering the above, the Board finds that the evidence is at the very least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are so severe as to require the aid and attendance of another.  Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, entitlement to SMC under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) is granted.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V. Chiappetta, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.