Citation Nr: A25030093
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240630-451812
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's plantar fasciitis either began in or was otherwise caused by his active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from July 2010 to November 2010, from January 2012 to June 2012, and from August 2014 to March 2015.

This matter stems from a September 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for plantar fasciitis. The Veteran timely appealed the September 2023 rating decision by filing a VA Form 10182, wherein he selected the direct review docket within the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act (AMA) review system.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision.  By operation of law, the Board is precluded from considering evidence submitted during a period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. §?20.303. 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38?U.S.C. §1110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during service (nexus). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that the Veteran fractured the top of his foot during a deployment and that in January 2015, he reported left foot pain for 2-3 days due to his boots. His military occupational specialty (MOS) was air transportation journeyman. In his initial claim for service connection in April 2023, the Veteran stated that he had to wear boots for periods of time and that he went through training for two battlefield schools which required rucking, and miles of running. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2023 and was diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis. He reported onset of his bilateral foot pain to be in 2017 after completing requirements for the reserves, which included a 12-mile ruck, and completing five miles in 40 minutes. The Veteran's symptoms were pain at the bottom of his feet. The VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis was due to his service. She stated that the Veteran had an ankle injury in service, that there was no report of foot pain upon separation from service, and that medical evidence does not show that an ankle injury would cause plantar fasciitis. She stated that anything that irritated or damaged plantar fasciitis could cause it including being on one's feet all day at work, playing sports, exercising, or working on a hard surface (like a warehouse floor), or wearing shoes that did do not support the feet well enough.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records show that in February 2023, he complained of pain in the right foot, and his physician noted an enthesopathy of the left foot.

In February 2023, the Veteran's Chief Master Sergeant submitted a lay statement in which he stated that all of the Veteran's injuries were reported to him, that the Veteran fractured his left ankle while engaging in approved physical activities, and that he was forced to have his ankle/foot in an Air Force issued medical boot and use crutches.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement in which he believed his plantar fasciitis was caused by his service, and that he was in a special operations unit whose slogan was "the strong will stand."

Despite the fact the VA examiner provided a negative etiological opinion, the Board finds that her reasoning, coupled with the additional evidence of record, puts the weight of the evidence regarding service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis in relative equipoise. 

The Veteran's MOS was air transportation journeyman, which the Board understands includes job duties such as managing and performing air transportation activities such as loading and unloading aircraft. The Board also understands that this is a physical job that likely requires many hours on the feet, working on hard surfaces.

The Veteran also stated in service that his feet hurt due to his boots, and repeatedly stated that he had to wearing boots, run, and ruck many miles. The September 2023 VA examiner provided a negative opinion but stated that things such as being on one's feet all day at work, playing sports, exercising, or working on a hard surface (like a warehouse), and wearing shoes that did not support the feet well enough could cause or irritate plantar fasciitis. 

Here, the Veteran has reported that his boots hurt his feet, and that he was required to ruck and run many miles. Additionally, his MOS suggests his job was very physical, requiring him work on his feet on a hard surface, exercise often, and wear shoes that did not support his feet. Despite the overall negative VA opinion, the reasoning given by the VA examiner as to what could cause or irritate plantar fasciitis aligns with the Veteran's situation. The Board finds that the above information puts the weight of the evidence in relative equipoise as to whether or not the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis was caused by his service. 

As such, service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is granted. 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elizabeth A. Gadson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.