Citation Nr: A25030192
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240807-461650
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2010 to May 2015.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a February 2020 rating decision. In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the initial rating decision. It was noted that VA granted the Veteran's time limit extension request due to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

In the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.  However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's service connection claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder strain is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for her right and left shoulder strain.

The AOJ made the following favorable findings. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral shoulder strain, and that the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service. The Veteran complained of chronic shoulder pain at her separation examination.

The Veteran reported that her shoulder pain started in 2014 while in service. The Veteran noted a history of multiple accidental falls (fell off ladder) and a history of carrying heavy weights on her shoulders during service. The Veteran noted that she did not receive treatment during service, but that she relied on pain medication. The Veteran expressed that her shoulder pain gradually got worse and that she was treated with massage therapy and pain medication. However, the Veteran noted that she still has constant, stabbing, and severe pain of the bilateral shoulder.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2020. The examiner stated that the Veteran's medical record and service treatment record does not show any evidence of a history, diagnosis or treatment of a bilateral shoulder condition. The examiner stated that other than the nonspecific shoulder pain mentioned in the Veteran's separation examination, the Veteran's medical records and service treatment record do not show any evidence of history, diagnosis or treatment of a bilateral shoulder condition during and after service period. The examiner noted that in a January 2019 medical record, no history of shoulder pain was reported. The examiner stated that the Veteran's history, signs, symptoms and physical examination today point to a diagnosis of right and left shoulder strain which in the examiner's opinion, is less likely the result from the right and left shoulder pain reported on the exit examination. 

The Board finds the VA opinion to be inadequate. The examiner relied upon the lack of documented medical evidence and did not consider the Veteran's competent reports of ongoing shoulder pain since service. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (explaining that a VA examination is inadequate if the examiner does not consider lay evidence). Because this duty to assist error occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal, a remand is warranted for an additional medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician who has reviewed the claims file to determine the nature, extent, and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disability. If the Veteran is unable to attend the examination due to her health, obtain a medical opinion. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available for the reviewing clinician. 

After eliciting a history from the Veteran and reviewing the record, the clinician is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not ("approximate balance" or "nearly equal," and does not require exact equipoise) that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disability had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, her military service.

Specifically, the examiner is asked to opine whether it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disability (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.

The examiner must address the Veteran's contentions that her bilateral shoulder pain/disability is attributed to a history of multiple accidental falls (fell off ladder) and a history of carrying heavy weights on her shoulders during service and has been continuous since service. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

A complete rationale is requested. 

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.