Citation Nr: A25030554
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240605-448080
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected mental and physical disabilities render him in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC based on the need for aid and attendance are met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1975 to January 1979.  This matter is before the Board following his appeal of a June 2023 rating decision.  The current claim stems from an appeal of the initial rating assigned following a grant of an April 2016 claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder.  Thus, the claim on appeal was filed in April 2016 and has been continuously pursued since the claim filing.

On a June 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the direct review docket.  As such, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the June 8, 2023, rating decision.  If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

SMC: Aid & Attendance

The Veteran contends that his service-connected psychiatric disorder, in addition to other service-connected disabilities, render him in need of regular assistance of another person such that special monthly compensation (SMC) is warranted.

SMC is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

The following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person: the inability of the Veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; inability of the Veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; and the inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all the disabling conditions listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the Veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the Veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

Here, the Board finds that SMC is warranted on a factual basis based on the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance as a result of service-connected disabilities.  Specifically, the Board finds that the Veteran was so helpless as a result of service-connected disabilities so as to be in need of regular aid and attendance based on factors including an inability to feed himself, dress, undress, attend to the wants of nature, bathe or keep ordinarily clean and presentable, and incapacity, physical and mental, which required care or assistance on a regular basis to protect from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(b), 3.352(a).

In support of its decision, the Board first observes that the Veteran and his wife have reported that the Veteran stays home most of the time, generally only leaving the house for medical appointments.  They also have indicated that the Veteran does not drive at all, as he cannot concentrate and could cause an accident, and also requires daily assistance, generally from his wife or son, with activities such as cooking, bathing, getting dressed, and taking medications.  Of note, the Veteran's wife reported that the Veteran is not interested in bathing, has to be "sent to take a bath," and is supervised when he does.  He also reportedly has all of his meals prepared for him and does not cook at all because he "forgets everything," does not remember how to prepare meals, and can burn things.  His medication is provided to him on a daily basis by his wife, and his "son is in charge" when it comes to understanding instructions and performing house/yardwork.  The Veteran and his wife also reported that the Veteran is unable to walk or move easily due to his low back and radicular disabilities, and he cannot go out alone.  He reportedly is also unable to handle money because "[h]e loses everything and is very forgetful."  In short, the Veteran's wife has indicated that "[i]t is necessary to help him in everything."  See generally SSA Records' 

A March 2023 VA examiner for aid and attendance noted the Veteran's service-connected mental and physical disabilities, symptoms, and limitations and found that the Veteran could not prepare his own meals because he was unable to stand long enough to cook, and required medication management by his wife due to forgetfulness.  The Veteran was also observed or noted to be fatigued, to move slowly with spine motion, to have spontaneous sadness, and to be forgetful and occasionally overwhelmed by simple things.  The examiner noted the Veteran only left the house once a week or less for either doctor appointments or stimulation or change of scenery, and always in the company of family or by family "as the [V]eteran cannot go out on his own."  Consistent with the March 2023 VA opinion is a private February 2023 opinion noting that, when the Veteran was in crises or having a panic attack, he was unable to dress, undress, keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable without assistance, unable to feed himself, unable to attend to the wants ot nature, and was impeded in his ability to protect himself from the hazards or dangers incident to daily environment.  The provider noted specific symptoms to include repeated flashbacks, nightmares, insomnia, panic attacks, erratic behavior, paranoid behavior, obsessive and repetitive patrolling of his house, and constantly assessing his surroundings. 

Also consistent with a finding that the Veteran is in need of the regular aid and attendance of another individual (such as his wife and son), are private March 2021 and January 2017 evaluations.  The March 2021 report noted that the Veteran experienced panic attacks 2 to 3 times a week, which were unpredictable but most often occurred when in public and during which he required the assistance of his wife.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran's ability to communicate effectively with the general public was compromised by his hearing loss; that his flashbacks rendered him unable to use public transportation (per a November 2018 psychiatric evaluation); that his daily headaches and bouts of impaired balance and dizziness rendered him incapacitated and unable to perform any activity or sustain concentration until they subsided; that unprovoked irritability contributed to difficulty interacting with others; and that his anxiety, panic attacks, and suspiciousness of his surroundings precluded his ability to focus or concentrate on tasks.  Of note, the examination report identifies the danger associated with the Veteran's memory and concentration issues through his report that he almost took a double dose of his medication but his wife intervened.  

The January 2017 private psychiatric report noted that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms interfered with his mood severely and to the point that he experienced a lack of impulse control, erratic and ill-tempered behavior and, importantly, the "inability to make adequate decisions."  In addition, the record generally shows objective findings supportive of the conclusions above, including observations that the Veteran was at times disheveled, unkept, or ungroomed, and to have poor hygiene or inappropriate clothing.  See generally Private Treatment Notes; January 2017 Private Evaluation Report.  He was also objectively observed at times to have impaired or decreased concentration, poor or decreased attention, poor eye contact, and/or to appear uncomfortable or uneasy.  Id.

The Board acknowledges that the evidence does not establish that the Veteran requires assistance in all of the activities indicated in the regulation.  However, in light of the VA and private examiners' findings that the Veteran did require, as a result of his service-connected disabilities, aid and attendance to accomplish at least some of the relevant activities - a finding that is supported by observations made by treating providers - the Board finds that the evidence relevant to this claim is in equipoise.  Accordingly, entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance of another person is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

S. C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Fagan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.