Citation Nr: A25030759
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458705
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include obesity as an intermediate step, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected mental health condition caused him to become obese, resulting in his diagnosis of sleep apnea.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Air Force from February 1971 to June 1991.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for an obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) disability, secondary to the service-connected adjustment disorder disability, is granted. 

The Veteran contends that his service-connected mental health condition caused him to become obese, which ultimately resulted in his obstructive sleep apnea.  See Statement in Support of Claim, June 2023. 

Generally, to prevail on a claim of service connection on the merits, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) medical evidence or other competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  See Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

To establish service connection on a secondary basis, the evidence must show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)(b) (2016), Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

Service connection can also be established through continuity of symptomatology. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (2013); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (b), 3.309. For chronic diseases shown as such in service or within the applicable presumptive period, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date are service connected unless attributable to an intercurrent cause. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b). For a chronic disease to be considered to have been "shown in service," there must be a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings. When the condition noted in service or within the presumptive period is not a chronic disease, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after discharge is required. Id.

The Board notes that obesity is not considered a disease or disability for VA purposes and is not subject to service connection. See Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 155, 156 (2018). However, obesity may be an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; see also Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020). But see Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating 3.310(b) for the use of the phrase "proximately due to" in the context of aggravation). 

The concept of obesity as an "intermediate step" in the service connection context was recently addressed by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Garner v. Tran, 33?Vet. App.?241 (2021). 

In Garner, the Court observed that in January 2017, VA's Office of General Counsel (OGC) issued a precedential opinion, finding that although obesity cannot be service connected on a direct basis, obesity may serve as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a condition claimed on a secondary basis.  VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  To decide such claims, OGC stated the analysis involves addressing the following questions: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese (or, aggravated the veteran's obesity); (2) if so, whether obesity/aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability, was a substantial factor in causing the claimed secondary disability; and (3) whether the claimed secondary disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused/obesity aggravated by the service connected disability.  Id.  The Court acknowledged that the soundness of OGC's guidance was endorsed in its decision in Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300, 305-07 (2020).  However, the Court noted that neither OGC's opinion nor Walsh provided guidance regarding what factual circumstances would give rise to claims for secondary service connection with this theory of entitlement. Therefore, if all of Walsh factors are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis, based on obesity.  

The Court provided the following non-exhaustive list of considerations that could give rise to a reasonably raised theory of secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step: (1) mobility limitations or reduced physical activity as a result of a service connected physical disability (in particular, orthopedic conditions or chronically painful conditions); (2) reduced physical activity or inability to follow a course of exercise or diet as a result of service-connected mental disability; (3) side effects of medication (e.g., weight gain), where the medication is prescribed for a service connected disability; (4) treatise evidence suggesting a connection between all or some combination of obesity, service connected disability, and the claimed condition; (5) lay statements by a Veteran attributing weight gain or obesity to the service connected disability; and (6) statements by treating physicians or medical examiners attributing weight gain or obesity to the service-connected disability.  Id. at 248.

Initially, the Board notes that the August 2023 rating decision conceded that the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The rating decision also conceded the Veteran is already service connected for a mental health condition. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a private examination.  The examiner noted the Veteran had a diagnosis of sleep apnea. Moreover, the examiner reported that the Veteran had gained 68 pounds since service and had a BMI of 34.9, which met the standard for obesity. The Veteran credibly relayed that his mental health condition contributed to his poor diet and exercise regime which ultimately resulted in drastic weight gain.  The examiner cited medical literature which discussed the relationship between depression, anxiety and excessive weight gain. The examiner further discussed the relationship of obesity being a high risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner concluded that "it is at least likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and obesity is due to/or related to his service-connected Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood; it is at least likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity."  The Board affords this opinion high probative value. 

In July 2023, a VA medical professional opined that the Veteran's current OSA was less likely than not the result of the service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.  The examiner stated that "obstructive sleep apnea and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood are not medically related."  The examiner further went on the state that obesity is a major risk factor for OSA, however, the examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's mental health condition served as an intermediate step for the Veteran's obesity.  As such, the Board affords this opinion low probative weight. 

As a result, the Board finds that the Veteran's mental health condition caused the Veteran to become obese, which resulted in the Veteran developing obstructive sleep apnea.  Therefore, the Board grants the Veteran's claim. 

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	RLBJ, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.