Citation Nr: A25030826
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 200916-109417
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased evaluation for limited abduction/adduction and internal/external rotation of the right hip, currently rated as 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased (compensable) evaluation for limited extension of the right hip is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased (compensable) evaluation for limited flexion of the right hip. is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April to July of 2003.  This case comes to the Board from a June 2020 decision of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Because the AOJ issued the decision after February 19, 2019, the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) applies to this case.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 20.4.

In August 2018, the AOJ granted service-connected compensation for residuals of an in-service stress fracture of the right hip, with a 10 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5253 (limited abduction, adduction or rotation of the thigh) and additional zero percent (noncompensable) ratings under DCs 5251 (limited extension) and 5252 (limited flexion).  In February 2019, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501, in which she requested higher ratings for her right hip disability.  The AOJ issued a decision in October 2019 which continued the previously assigned ratings under all three diagnostic codes.  The Veteran responded by filing a request for a higher-level review (HLR) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601.  The June 2020 decision - the decision the Veteran appealed to the Board - was the result of that HLR request.  In that decision, the AOJ continued the previously assigned ratings for the Veteran's right hip disability.  

In her VA Form 10182 ("Notice of Disagreement" or "NOD") the Veteran selected the option of direct review without the submission of additional evidence and without a hearing.  When an appellant selects this option, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.  Because the June 2020 decision was the result of an HLR of the October 2019 decision, the evidentiary record is limited to the information in the claims file at the time of the October 2019 decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f).

In March 2024, the Board issued a decision denying increased ratings for the right hip disability, and the Veteran timely appealed that ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In November 2024, the parties filed a joint motion for remand (JMR), in which they agreed that, in its March 2024 decision, the Board erred by relying on an inadequate examination report and by failing to give an adequate explanation for the refusal to grant a higher rating or ratings for additional functional loss pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59.  By granting the JMR, the Court vacated the March 2024 decision and returned this appeal to the Board.

After the Court issued its remand, the Board mailed the a letter to the Veteran inviting her to submit additional argument, but not evidence, in support of her appeal.  New evidence would not be considered, the letter explained, because the evidentiary limitations associated with her direct review appeal continued to apply.  Nevertheless, in March 2025, the Veteran  submitted copies of many previously unavailable medical records.  For the reasons described in the letter, the Board is unable to consider the newly submitted medical evidence at this time.  See Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 151, 157 (2021) (following a Court remand in an appeal governed by AMA procedures, the appellant may not submit additional evidence to the Board, and the Board is not required to independently develop the claim).  VA may waive AMA processing rules, but the November 2024 JMR did not waive evidence submission limits in this case.  See Bolds v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 359, 367 (2024).  However, the AOJ will likely be able to consider the newly submitted evidence on remand.  

In their JMR, the parties criticized the Board for relying on a report prepared by a physician assistant who examined the Veteran's hips in February 2018.  VA examination reports for musculoskeletal disabilities must comply with 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 by evaluating range of motion in the affected joint "for pain on both active and passive motion and in weight bearing and nonweight-bearing. . . ." Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 170 (2016).  VA examiners have the duty to elicit information from the Veteran describing the condition of the relevant joints after repeated use over time and during "flare-ups" or episodes when the relevant symptoms are at their worst.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).  

In the February 2018 report, the examiner provided the results of initial range of motion test results, in degrees of flexion, extension, abduction, and adduction.  Pursuant to Sharp, the examiner prepared an estimate of likely range of motion, in degrees, after repeated use over time.  However, the examiner failed to provide the requested estimate of range of motion during flare-ups, indicating it was impossible to do so without speculating because the Veteran was not experiencing a flare-up during the examination.  It is unclear from the report whether the February 2018 examiner attempted to elicit information from the Veteran about the extent of additional range of motion limits, if any, during flare-ups.  For these reasons, as the JMR explains, the February 2018 hips examination report was inadequate.

One confusing aspect of the JMR is that, in its vacated March 2024 decision, the Board relied on reports describing two separate examinations of the Veteran's hips which occurred during the review period.  In addition to the February 2018 report, the Board also relied on a hip and thigh disability benefits questionnaire prepared by a physician who examined the Veteran in October 2019.  When the VA arranges an inadequate examination, the appropriate remedy is to obtain a new, adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Unlike the first report, the October 2019 report seems to comply with Sharp because sections 3C and 3D of the questionnaire, respectively, include estimates of likely range of motion in the right hip - in degrees of flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation and internal rotation - after repetitive use over time and during flare-ups.  

As the Board will explain, there are potentially significant problems with the October 2019 report which do not concern Sharp.  But it was part of the record in the Veteran's appeal to the Court and, in their JMR, the parties presumably could have identified errors in the October 2019 report and explained the Board's duty to correct them, just as they did in their discussion of the February 2018 report.  There is a quotation from section XII ("Functional Impact") of the October 2019 report at the top of page four of the JMR.  But the parties only mention the report for the purpose of criticizing the incompleteness of the Board's explanation for denying a higher rating for functional loss under 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59.  They do not clearly say whether the October 2019 report is adequate or not.

For this reason, the Board has considered the possibility of deciding the increased rating claim today based on the findings of the October 2019 report while assigning no probative weight to the findings of the inadequate February 2018 report.  Such a decision, however, would neglect the following language on the bottom of the second page of the JMR: "On remand, the Board must return the claim to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error, to include obtaining an opinion that complies with Sharp."  (emphasis added).  

The Board will remand this case for a new examination and opinion because, to decide the increased rating claim based on the October 2019 report would clearly be inconsistent with the JMR's binding requirement to "return the claim to the AOJ" for a new opinion.  In addition to the need to provide the information on the standard hip and thigh examination report form, the post-remand examiner should also provide information to remedy two problems with the October 2019 report which, although not mentioned in the JMR, might potentially cause subsequent delays if left uncorrected.

First, the October 2019 examination report included initial range of motion test results for the right hip in active motion.  On section XIII of the report, the examiner indicated that range of motion in passive motion was the same.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran experienced pain when the right hip was used in non-weight bearing.  But the specific range of motion test results - in degrees of flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation, and internal rotation - when the right hip was in weight bearing and non-weight bearing are unclear.  Because the examiner failed to provide separate sets of results after all the testing methods required by 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, the October 2019 report is arguably inadequate.  See Correia, 28 Vet. App. at 170.  The post-remand examiner should prepare a report which corrects this problem.

The second problem concerns the very recent decision in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. LEXIS 327 (March 12, 2025), which the Court issued after granting the JMR in this case.  In Ingram, the Court rejected the Secretary's argument that, because regulations particular to musculoskeletal disabilities, including 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.59 as interpreted in Sharp, Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011), and DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995) already require range of motion estimates under the "worst-case scenario" of a flare-up, the Board need not discount the beneficial effects of medication when assessing the severity of a musculoskeletal disability for rating purposes.  See Id. at *28 ("the Court must reject the Secretary's alternative argument that Jones [v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012)] should not apply to the evaluation of musculoskeletal conditions.").  

Like the Veteran in this case, the appellant in Ingram used over-the-counter medication for treatment of a musculoskeletal disability.  Id. at *2.  Because the rating criteria applicable to the appellant's back disability in Ingram did not mention the beneficial effects of medication, the Court explained, "the Board was obliged to discount the beneficial effects of the medications taken for [the appellant's service-connected back and ankle disabilities]... and evaluate the baseline severity of those disabilities."  Id. at *15.  

According to the medical history summary of October 2019 report, the Veteran used 600 milligrams of Motrin each day to control the effects of her hip pain.  The earlier February 2018 report, which mentioned treatment with Tramodol, further indicates that the Veteran told the examiner, "[Tramodol] doesn't help."  It is likely that, although it failed to comply with Sharp, the February 2018 report is consistent with Ingram.  If the medication provides no beneficial effects, there is no need for a separate opinion discounting those effects.  However, the October 2019 report does not indicate whether motrin helps ameliorate the Veteran's left hip symptoms or not.  Because it fails to provide this information, the October 2019 report does not provide enough facts and medical information for the Board to make a fully informed decision.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).  For this reason, the post-remand examiner must indicate whether the Veteran experiences ameliorative effects from her use of medication.  If she does experience such effects, the examiner should provide an opinion pursuant to Ingram. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination with a qualified person to ascertain the current severity of the Veteran's current residuals of an in-service stress fracture of the right hip.  The electronic claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated testing should be accomplished and all symptomatology associated with the right hip disability should be identified.  The examiner should prepare a written report which includes the following information: 

(a) In addition to all findings identified on the appropriate examination form, the examiner should determine the effective range of motion in the Veteran's hips and present the results of range of motion tests in a written report which complies with 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 by recording separate sets of range of motion test results, in degrees of flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation and internal rotation, for both active and passive motion, AND IN WEIGHT BEARING AND NONWEIGHT-BEARING in both hips.  IN ADDITION TO THE ENDPOINT, IN DEGREES, OF RANGE OF MOTION, THE EXAMINER MUST IDENTIFY THE POINT, IN DEGREES, WHEN THE VETERAN BEGINS TO EXPERIENCE PAIN DURING EACH TEST.  It is not sufficient merely to indicate whether pain was present during each of the required tests.  If the examiner believes that testing using one or more of these methods is unsafe or impractical, he or she should clearly explain the medical reasons for that conclusion.

The examiner should indicate whether pain, weakness, fatigue and/or incoordination significantly limits functional ability of the right hip and thigh during flares or after repetitive use, and if so, the examiner must estimate range of motion in the right hip and thigh after repetitive use and/or during flare-ups.  If the examination does not take place during a flare or if repetitive testing cannot be performed, the examiner should ask the Veteran to describe and/or demonstrate the extent of motion loss during flares or after repetitive use and provide the extent of motion loss in terms of degrees.  If there is no pain and/or no limitation of function, such facts must be noted in the report.  The examiner should comment as to whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the description of reduced range of motion during flares or after repetitive use.

If the examiner indicates that pain does not cause functional loss with respect to the right hip and thigh, he or she should thoroughly explain the medical reasons for that opinion.

(b) After interviewing the Veteran about the effects of her medications (including Motrin and/or Tramodol) on the symptoms of her service-connected disability of the right hip and thigh the examiner should respond to these questions:

(i) Did the Veteran use medication on the day of the examination?  If she did, the examiner should ask the Veteran to describe and/or demonstrate the extent of range of motion loss during periods when she does not use her medication, and the examiner should estimate the extent of motion loss when the Veteran is not medicated in terms of degrees.  If the Veteran states that she does not perceive any beneficial effects when using her medication, the examiner should say so.  The examiner should comment as to whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the Veteran's description of reduced range of motion during periods when she has not used her medication.

(ii) The examiner should ask the Veteran to describe and/or demonstrate the extent of motion loss DURING FLARES WHICH OCCUR WHEN THE VETERAN IS NOT USING HER MEDICATION AND AFTER REPETITIVE USE OVER TIME DURING PERIODS WHEN SHE HAS NOT USED HER MEDICATION and provide an estimate of the extent of motion loss in terms of degrees.  If there is no pain and/or no limitation of function, such facts must be noted in the report.  The examiner should comment as to whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the Veteran's description of reduced range of motion during flares or after repetitive use when she is not medicated.

(iii) Does the Veteran's use of medication change the frequency, duration, or severity of the Veteran's flare-ups or increased functional loss after repeated use over time?  If so, how frequently does the Veteran experience flare-ups when she is not using her medication?  How long do flare-ups last when she is not using her medication?  

If the physician determines that it is impossible to prepare the requested estimate of right hip range of motion during flare-ups or to estimate range of motion when the Veteran is unmedicated without speculating, he or she should so state, and should indicate whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given the state of medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the records (i.e., additional facts are required) or because the examiner does not have the necessary knowledge or training.  The examiner is advised that he or she should not conclude that any of the requested opinions would be speculative without first seeking information from the Veteran in the examination interview about what she remembers about her symptoms during flare-ups, after repeated use over time, and when she is unmediated.  

2. The AOJ should review the requested examination report and opinions and ensure that they comply with 

?

these instructions.  If any report or opinion is deficient in any manner, the AOJ must implement corrective action.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Nye, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.