Citation Nr: A25030808
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-453847
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Air Force from October 1982 to November 2004. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine.

The Veteran contends that his sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine disability is more severe than reflected in his current rating. 

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). For the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Here, the record does not contain an adequate examination that satisfies the standards established by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017) (holding remand appropriate where examination not conducted during a flare-up and examiner declined, without sufficient explanation, to provide adequate flare-up opinion or estimate); Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016) (generally requiring range of motion measurements on both active and passive motion and with weight bearing and non-weight bearing).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2016.  The Veteran reported that his condition is worse with intermittent lumbar stiffness and pain with certain movement like rotation or with prolonged standing. However, the examiner noted the Veteran did not report flare ups and, therefore, did not provide any estimated ranges of motion during a flare up.

In an April 2016 clarification opinion, the VA examiner stated in relevant part "... Pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination could significantly limit functional ability during flare-ups, or when the joint or spine is used repeatedly over a period of time, and as such, additional limitation due to pain, weakness, fatigability or incoordination could occur.  However, to provide an opinion in terms of the degrees of additional ROM loss due to 'pain on use or during flare-ups' would not be possible, as an objective and unbiased examiner must be present to accurately determine any additional losses, if present during flares. Therefore, this is the explanation as to why the opinion cannot be rendered."  On remand, the examiner should provide a retrospective opinion that complies with Correia and Sharp.  See Chotta v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 80, 85 (2008) (when there is an absence of medical evidence during a certain period, a retrospective medical evaluation may be warranted).

Further, the Board notes that a review of the record reveals the Veteran takes medication for sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine. See March 2013, January 2014 VA treatment records. As the applicable diagnostic codes and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of such medication, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012). As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of his service-connected sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine. 

The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. As well as the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement in degrees without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

Pursuant to Correia, the VA examiner should provide a RETROSPECTIVE OPINION dating from October 2013, as best can be ascertained from the Veteran's self-reports as well as clinical records and other evidence regarding the Veteran's sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine. Specifically, based on the Veteran's statements and other evidence of record, the examiner must provide range of motion results for the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If it is not possible to provide the requested RETROSPECTIVE OPINION regarding additional loss in degrees of motion without speculation, the examiner must explain why.

Pursuant to Sharp, the VA examiner should provide a RETROSPECTIVE OPINION dating from October 2013, as best can be ascertained from the Veteran's self-reports as well as clinical records and other evidence regarding the Veteran's back. Specifically, based on the Veteran's statements and other evidence of record, the examiner must provide additional functional impairment in terms of degrees of range of motion loss during flareups and during increased activity. If it is not possible to provide the requested RETROSPECTIVE OPINION without speculation, the examiner must explain why.

The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service-connected sacroiliac joint degenerative arthritis, lumbar disc herniation L5-S1, and degenerative arthritis, thoracolumbar spine. 

If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motions would be without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.

In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record. 

2. Readjudicate the claim.

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Poston, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.