Citation Nr: A25030465
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241216-494427
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder strain disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1967 to October 1970.    

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an October 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with a VA decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

Following the October 2024 AMA rating decision, the RO received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in December 2024, and the Veteran requested Evidence Lane under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Accordingly, the Board may consider evidence of record as of the October 2024 rating decision and evidence submitted within 90 days after the VA Form 10182.

By way of history, the issues on appeal were remanded for medical opinions in a January 2024 Board remand.  Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268, 271 (1998).

A review of the record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with migraines including migraine variants, IBS, lumbosacral strain, left shoulder strain, wrist sprain of the right wrist, and lateral collateral ligament sprain of the right ankle.  See VA September 2021 VA examination reports.  

Of note, a March 2021 private medical record shows that a private examiner diagnosed the Veteran with of chronic headaches and IBS.  In addition, diagnoses of pain and dysfunction for his claimed lumbar spine, left shoulder, right wrist and right ankle disabilities.  The Board notes that the March 2021 private examiner opined for each disability that it was as likely as not that each condition was directly and causally related to the Veteran's military service.  

The Veteran was also afforded VA examinations for all claimed disabilities in September 2021.  Negative nexus opinions were provided.   

In its January 2024 Board remand, it was noted that the September 2021 etiology opinions did not consider the Veteran's statements regarding each claimed condition and relied heavily on the absence of evidence during service without explaining the significance.  Thus, VA medical addendums were to be obtained on remand.  See Dalton v. Nicholson,21Vet. App.23(2007). 

Regarding the Veteran's headaches disability, a new VA examination and opinion was afforded the Veteran in May 2024.  A diagnosis of tension headaches was provided.  The Veteran reported that the condition began 50 years ago and that he experienced daily headaches.  The VA examiner stated that the Veteran had never sought treatment for the condition, that a review of service treatment records (STRs) was silent for headaches and that the Veteran's medical records did not support that the condition was incurred during service.  The condition was first diagnosed in 2019.  Therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The VA examiner also stated later in the report that August 1969 STRs showed that the Veteran complained of dizziness, headache, and general malaise x 4 hours.  He was encouraged to drink fluids and bed rest for 24 hours.  The VA examiner stated that this acute and temporary situation was unlikely to be related to his currently diagnosed tension headaches.  In addition, a January 1968 STR showed that the Veteran complained of fever, backache, headache, and chills.  He was encouraged to drink fluids and bedrest.  Again, this acute and temporary situation was unlikely to be related to his currently diagnosed tension headaches.  It was noted that lack of adequate fluid intake could lead to dehydration, which could cause headaches and other symptoms like dizziness and malaise.  Tension headaches arose from muscle tension in the head and neck, often due to stress, poor posture, or eyestrain.   Jaw clenching, fatigue, emotional factors, excessive caffeine, and environmental triggers could also contribute.

Regarding the Veteran's IBS, a new VA examination and opinion was afforded the Veteran in May 2024.  A diagnosis of IBS was provided.  The Veteran reported experiencing constipation.  The Veteran reported that the condition began around 2016.  A review of STRs was silent for constipation, diarrhea, or abdominal pain and the Veteran's medical records did not support that the condition was incurred during service.  The VA examiner noted that the condition was first diagnosed 2024.  Therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

Regarding the Veteran's lumbar spine disability, a new VA examination and opinion was afforded the Veteran in May 2024.  Diagnoses of lumbosacral strain and intervertebral disc syndrome were provided.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had reported that his low back pain began in the early 1970's.  A review of STRs was silent for back pain and the Veteran's medical records did not support that the condition was incurred during service.  The condition was first diagnosed in 2021.  Therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

Regarding the Veteran's left shoulder disability, a new VA examination and opinion was afforded the Veteran in May 2024.  Diagnoses of shoulder strain, shoulder impingement syndrome, degenerative arthritis and old fracture fragment to greater tuberosity were provided.  The Veteran reported that he injured his left shoulder due to a forklift injury during service.  A review of STRs was silent for left shoulder pain and the Veteran's medical records did not support that the condition was incurred during service.  The condition was first diagnosed in 2021.  Therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

Regarding the Veteran's right wrist disability, a new VA examination and opinion was afforded the Veteran in May 2024.  A diagnosis of wrist pain with decreased range of motion, secondary to carpal tunnel, was provided.  The Veteran reported that he sprained his right wrist after slipping off the obstacle course.  The VA examiner stated that there was no objective evidence to render a diagnosis of chronic sprain.  The symptoms the Veteran reported were due to carpal tunnel syndrome, which was outside the scope of the wrist.

Regarding the Veteran's right ankle disability, a new VA examination and opinion was afforded the Veteran in May 2024.  A diagnosis of lateral collateral ligament sprain.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had reported that he initially sprained his ankle in 1967 while marching and had experienced pain ever since without any treatment.  A review of STR was silent for right ankle pain and the Veteran's medical records did not support that this condition was incurred during service.  The condition was first diagnosed in 2021.  Therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

In this case, first, the Board finds that the May 2024 opinions are not probative or responsive to the Board's prior remand directives.  Cumulatively, the rationales, again, are primarily based on the absence of evidence in the Veteran's medical records to provide a negative opinion for each claimed disability on appeal.  Dalton, supra.  In providing this conclusory analysis, the examiner did not substantially comply with the remand directive.  Stegall, supra.  The failure to obtain VA examination opinions that relied on absence of evidence is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Next, the Board finds that the factual history of the VA opinion for the claimed headaches condition is inconsistent.  The VA examiner provided a negative opinion in one area of the report noting that the Veteran's STRs were silent for a headache problem in service, however, then noted 2 STR entries which noted complaints of headaches.  The May 2024 VA examiner next noted that for the claimed IBS condition, that the Veteran's onset for the condition was in 2024, however, the March 2021 private medical note reflects a diagnosis of IBS.  The May 2024 VA examiner noted that for the Veteran's claimed lumbar spine disability, there were no problems noted in the STRs, however, as stated in the opinion for headaches, back pain complaints were found in the record.  Next, the May 2024 VA examiner did not provide a diagnosis or opinion for the claimed right wrist condition.  However, the Veteran has been diagnosed with a right wrist strain during the appeal period.  As such, an opinion regarding the diagnosis is required even if such disability subsequently resolved.  See McLain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).  

Based on the foregoing, a remand for addendum opinions for all claimed disabilities is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the May 2024 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed headache disability for an addendum opinion.  

Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed headache disability is etiologically related to service? 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.  In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements of record regarding his claimed headaches, to include statements found in the March 2021 private medical note.

2. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the May 2024 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed IBS disability for an addendum opinion.  

Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed IBS is etiologically related to service? 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.  In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements of record regarding his claimed IBS, to include statements found in the March 2021 private medical note.

3. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the May 2024 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed lumbar spine disability for an addendum opinion.  

Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed lumbar spine disability is etiologically related to service? 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.  In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements of record regarding his claimed lumbar spine disability, to include statements found in the March 2021 private medical note.

4. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the May 2024 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed left shoulder disability for an addendum opinion.  

Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed left shoulder disability is etiologically related to service? 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.  In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements of record regarding his claimed left shoulder disability, to include statements found in the March 2021 private medical note.

5. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the May 2024 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed right wrist disability for an addendum opinion.  

Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed right wrist disability (to include any foot condition that may have resolved during the appeals period) is etiologically related to service?

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.  In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements of record regarding his claimed right wrist disability, to include statements found in the March 2021 private medical note.

6. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the May 2024 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed right ankle disability for an addendum opinion.

Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed left shoulder disability is etiologically related to service? 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.  In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements of record regarding his claimed right ankle disability, to include statements found in the March 2021 private medical note.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.