Citation Nr: A25030103
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 230513-347567
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Whether the character of the Appellant's discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Appellant served on active duty with the United States Army from July 2018 to June 2020; the character of this service is the subject of this appeal.

The administrative decision on appeal was issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in April 2023.  In a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) received in May 2023, the Appellant elected the Direct Review option for this appeal.  Therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence in the record at the time of the April 2023 decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

As an initial matter, the Board notes the Appellant appealed the grant of four service connection claims for treatment purposes only, asserting that he disagreed with the finding that his benefits were limited to treatment for these disabilities.  As the issue the Appellant is contesting is his eligibility to receive VA disability compensation, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as contesting whether the character of the Appellant's discharge constitutes a bar to the receipt of VA compensation benefits.  

Whether the character of the Appellant's discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of VA compensation benefits is remanded.

When a person is seeking VA benefits, it first must be shown that the service member, upon whose service such benefits are predicated, has attained the status of a 'veteran' for VA purposes.  Holmes v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 38, 40 (1997).  "The term veteran means a person who served in the active military, naval or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  38 U.S.C. § 101(2).  VA benefits are not payable unless the period of service upon which the claim is based was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 5303; 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a).

In this case, the Appellant was separated from service administratively in June 2020.  In the proposed separation memorandum, his unit cited the following misconduct as the basis for his separation:  wrongful physical assault of his two children, possession of marijuana, making a false official statement, and conspiracy against another soldier.  The Appellant's service personnel records contain the civilian police report investigating the physical assault of the Appellant's two children.  However, there is no evidence in the personnel records or elsewhere in the claims file of the violations involving possession of marijuana, making a false report, or conspiracy against another soldier.  As these violations were part of the grounds for the Appellant's discharge from service, the Board finds it was an error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist to make the character of discharge determination without ensuring the service personnel records were complete.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 20.802(a).  

Further, the Appellant identified a public defender's office as having potentially relevant records.  The AOJ requested these using a medical record template, and did not pursue other methods to attempt to obtain these documents after no response was received.  The Board finds this was another error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist the Appellant.  See id.  

Lastly, the Board notes that, since the character of discharge determination was made in this case, amendments to the regulation governing character of discharge have gone into effect.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12.  After completing the described records development, a new character of discharge determination should be made using the amended regulation.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Attempt to obtain from the appropriate repositories any service personnel records that are not already of record, and associate those documents with the claims file.  

All such attempts should be documented in the claims file.  If additional personnel records are unavailable, the claims file must be documented clearly to that effect and the Appellant notified in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. Attempt to obtain from the appropriate repositories, including the identified public defender's office, any documents related to prosecution of the misconduct leading to discharge in this case.

3. Then, issue a new determination regarding the character of the Appellant's discharge from service.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Josey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.