Citation Nr: A25030960
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-432875
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for left shin pain is remanded.

Service connection for right shin pain is remanded.

Service connection for right foot pain is remanded.

Service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

Service connection for right knee pain is remanded.

Service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from July 1998 to July 2005.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) made on September 1, 2023 and September 27, 2023 as well as in October 2023 and December 2023.  This appeal is being adjudicated under the modern appellate framework.  In the April 2024 notice of disagreement which commenced this appeal, the Veteran opted into the Direct Review Docket.

As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Veteran has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

1. Service connection for left shin pain is remanded.

2. Service connection for right shin pain is remanded.

3. Service connection for right foot pain is remanded.

4. Service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for bilateral shin pain, right foot pain, and a left foot disability.  Unfortunately, these matters must be remanded.

The Veteran underwent a VA shin and knee examination in December 2023 in which the Veteran provided competent reports of bilateral shin pain.  The examiner opined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of a shin disability but conceded that the Veteran's reported pain limited the Veteran's ability to work; although there is some ambiguity regarding whether the examiner was referring to the Veteran's reported shin pain or knee pain.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's shin pain was unrelated to service, because the Veteran did not have a diagnosis to explain the shin pain.

The Veteran underwent a VA feet examination in August 2023.  The Veteran was diagnosed with a left foot disability.  The Veteran provided competent reports of right foot pain.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed bilateral feet conditions were not related to service because there was only report of foot pain and no diagnosis.  The examiner did state, however that the Veteran's reported pain limited the Veteran's ability to work; although there is some ambiguity regarding whether the examiner was referring to the Veteran's reported right foot pain or diagnosed left foot disability.  The examiner did not address the right foot injury the Veteran sustained in Iraq.

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide the Veteran with a VA examination, it must provide the Veteran with an adequate one, and adequate examinations have a sufficiently explained rationale to fully evaluate the Veteran's claim.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The rationale for the shin and feet examinations is inadequate, because undiagnosed pain is considered a disability for VA compensation purposes so long as it limits the Veteran's capacity to perform the activities of daily life including employment.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  As such, it is unclear from the rationales of the pertinent examinations whether or not the Veteran's undiagnosed pain impairs the Veteran's ability to work, and, to the extent that it does, whether a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's undiagnosed pain and a period of service.  This oversight constitutes a violation of VA's duty to assist, and, unfortunately, the Board cannot grant the Veteran's entire prayer of relief at this time.  As such, this matter must be remanded for a new VA examination in order to address these concerns.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

5. Service connection for right knee pain is remanded.

6. Service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran underwent a VA knee examination in December 2023.  He was diagnosed with left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome.  There was no diagnosis noted for the right knee, but the examiner noted that the right knee was "damaged" in the range of motion section.  The examiner noted that the functional impact of the Veteran's conditions included pain with prolonged standing or walking more than 20 minutes.  However, it was unclear which conditions caused the pain noted. 

The Board finds that the VA examinations regarding the Veteran's knee conditions are unclear, and therefore inadequate. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's undiagnosed shin pain impairs the activities of daily living to include employment?  Why or why not?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that a medical nexus exists between an in-service incurrence and a current bilateral shin disability to include undiagnosed shin pain?  Why or why not?

2. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's undiagnosed right knee pain impairs the activities of daily living to include employment?  Why or why not?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that a medical nexus exists between an in-service incurrence and a current left knee disability?

3. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's undiagnosed right foot pain impairs the activities of daily living to include employment?  Why or why not?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that a medical nexus exists between an in-service incurrence and a current right foot disability to include undiagnosed right foot pain?  Why or why not?

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed left foot disability is related to service?

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	David R. Seaton Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.