Citation Nr: A25030136
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 210204-128089
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder from December 14, 2012, to October 20, 2020, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

From December 14, 2012, to October 20, 2020, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder caused occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder from December 14, 2012, to October 20, 2020, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August 1989 to June 1991.

In June 2024, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) denied entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder from December 14, 2012.  

The Board also granted entitlement to a 70 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder from October 20, 2020.  

The Veteran appealed the June 2024 Board decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).

In a December 2024 order, which incorporated the parties Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR), the Court vacated and remanded the June 2024 Board decision to the extent that it denied a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder from December 14, 2012, to October 20, 2020. 

It is valuable to note that the Veteran has already been found to be 100 percent disabled by VA.  The Veteran has been in receipt of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) since August 25, 2021.  The Veteran has also been in receipt of special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (a) on account of loss of use of a creative organ from December 12, 2022.  In this case, the Board is only dealing with the limited outstanding issues that it must address under the law. 

In this regard, context in this case is important.  The Board is not dealing with the current problem, but the problem in the past for a limited period.  Such evaluations are multifaceted.  The Board has found though years of experience that obtaining a new medical opinion on such issue typically fail in providing the Board with evidence that either supports, or refutes, the claim.  A detailed review of the evidence of record during the limited period is the best way to fully address such claims as has been done in this case.  New retroactive medical opinion evidence provides almost no probative value, and only delays the full adjudication of the Veterans cases. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder from December 14, 2012, to October 20, 2020.

The Veteran contends there is evidence in the record of social and occupational impairment sufficient to warrant a 70 percent rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder prior to October 20, 2020.  See February 2025 Submission of Argument and Authorities. 

Alternatively, he contends that if it is unclear when the Veteran first met the criteria for a 70 percent rating for his psychiatric condition, then he requests to be provided with a retroactive medical opinion to determine when his increased symptoms first onset.  Id. 

Lastly, the Veteran argues that if the Board finds that his symptoms, such as suicidal thoughts and periods of aggressive behavior, are insufficient to warrant a 70 percent rating, then the Board should address whether those symptoms are consistent with and more nearly approximate the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a 50 percent rating.  Id.  

As for the concerns noted in the JMPR, the Court found the Board failed to address a June 2020 VA treatment record in which the Veteran described "rumination and inability to control excess worry" and reported "suicidal thoughts" 3 months prior.  Therefore, the Court found the Board must provide an adequate reasons or bases addressing the June 2020 VA treatment record.  

The Board will address the Veteran's contentions and the Court's concerns below. 

Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §?4.1.  

The rating criteria pertaining to the Veteran's appeal is subsumed into the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  Under the General Rating Formula, a 30 percent evaluation contemplates occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, and recent events).

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory for example, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech that is intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent disability evaluation is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time and place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation under the general rating formula, the primary consideration of the Board is a Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the Veteran's occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  A Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under the general rating formula by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Id. at 117-18.  The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating."  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). 

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran submitted a non-initial application for benefits for an acquired psychiatric condition, on December 14, 2012, which is the subject of his current appeal.

Initially, the Board notes that evaluation of a disability in light of its history is particularly important in the context of psychiatric disorders.  Because "psychiatric disorders abate and recur," VA is obligated to evaluate them "not by reference to isolated periods of activity or remission, but by assessing the effects of the disease or injury over the history of the condition."  Davis v. Principi, 276 F.3d 1341, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2002).

In this regard, the Board finds that the Veteran began reporting depressive symptoms in approximately 2004.  In fact, Social Security Administration (SSA) records indicate the Veteran endorsed feelings of depression "for about a year" in response to work difficulties on examination in 2004.

The Veteran submitted a private psychological examination, written by Forensic Psychologist K.J.M. from August 2005 that noted the Veteran had employment experience in the unskilled labor market with light-to-heavy physical demand.  See Private Opinion of Dr. K.J.M., received by VA, August 2005.

In January 2006, a VA examiner called in to VA to report that he examined the Veteran but found the symptoms presented on examination (by the Veteran) "seemed exaggerated and not clinically consistent."  See Report of Contact, January 2006.  

Such a finding by an examiner must be taken seriously by the Board.  Indications of exaggeration undermine the Veteran's claim, not only in terms of the limited issue before the Board at this time, but the current disability evaluation.  It must be considered by the Board. 

In October 2010, the Veteran was seen by a VA Psychology intern, K.J., Master of Arts (MA), under the direct supervision of a VA Psychologist, not present during the interview, who competently and credibly recorded the Veteran's statements on examination, providing probative evidence in this regard.

The Veteran endorsed intermittent anhedonia and fatigue in October 2010 "but denied other symptoms of depression."  He reported being more short-tempered and emotional than he used to be, but he denied feeling sad or depressed on a regular basis or for any length of time. 

The Veteran also denied symptoms of anxiety, panic, PTSD, or psychosis at the October 2010 psychological interview.  He denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation, plan, or intent.

He described feeling that he was coping "pretty well" given his current circumstances and limitations.  Finally, he denied that any of his psychiatric symptoms were causing him significant impairment.

Overall, beyond the qualifications of the examiner, the Board must find that it is the Veteran's own statements that are providing highly probative evidence against this claim. 

Overall, during this period of time, the Veteran's statements are providing highly probative factual evidence against this claim. 

The examiner opined that his symptoms "do not appear to be in excess of what may be expected given his physical limitation and related impairments."  

In December 2012, the Veteran reported symptoms of mental health problems such as anxiety, panic attacks, anger, irritability, feelings of hopelessness, loneliness and hypervigilance and trouble concentrating due to a period of separation with his wife.  Dr. P.T.D., M.D. wrote the plan as treatment for depression and anxiety which he labeled both symptoms as "mild at first Impression."  See VA Mental Health Consult Notes, CAPRI Record, December 2012.

Again, indications of a "mild" problem during the period on appeal must be considered carefully by the Board.  Not only does it not support the Veteran's claim, it undermines the 30% evaluation. 

In terms of probative weight, the Board finds Dr. P.T.D.'s initial impression on examination of the Veteran for mental health problems at the time of filing the claim, to be highly valuable.

In November 2013, he was diagnosed with mild depression due to pain in his back and knees after reporting moderate anxiety and mild depression.  In January 2014, the Veteran continued to report depression and anxiety due to physical pain.  Notably at this time, he reported having "low" depression, "moderate" anxiety, and his insomnia had become worse.  The statements of the Veteran's overall, during this examination are found to, overall, provide evidence against this claim. 

The remaining VA treatment records do not report complaints, treatment, or diagnoses worse than what is reported above.

In April 2019 the Veteran underwent a VA examination for PTSD.  Here, the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified personality disorder, mixed personality features, and unspecified mood disorder.  

The April 2019 examiner opined the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  

As to his social functioning the Veteran reported that he lived with his wife, who he stated, "has put up with me for almost 30 years."  He cited recurring issues with "anxiety, stress... [and] not being able to sleep some time."  

He stated his son (30) and his son's daughter (9) also live with him and described his relationships with them as "good."  The Veteran also endorsed having a 23-year-old son with whom he has a "good" relationship.  The Veteran endorsed having a supportive relationship with his mother but denied having any close friends.  He also endorsed being a member of the Free Masons and the Knights of Columbus and stated he enjoys "mechanical" activities, such as working on vehicles.  The Veteran reported that his mood on most days was "good" with periods of depression and anxiety approximately 2-3 days per week and occasional panic attacks.  

The evidence of the problem during, or around, this limited period is critically important in the understanding of the nature and extent of this disability.  Again, the Board has reviewed the Veteran's statements in some detail.  The problems the Veteran was having during this limited period are clear, but overall, undermine the contention that a higher disability is warranted during this period on appeal.  The Veteran, during this examination, at best, is providing evidence that supports the 30% disability evaluation.  At worst, his is providing evidence that indicates a mild problem that does not support the 30% evaluation.  

For example, despite having a remote history of suicide attempts in service, the Veteran often denied suicidal ideation, plan, and intent, as well as any suicide attempts since his attempt while on active duty, nearly 30 years prior.    

Moreover, the Veteran denied participating in any mental healthcare outside of the VA system since his discharge from the military.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's attorney's argument that he had suicide ideation since his time in service (which, based on a review of the Veteran's detailed statement over many years is simply not accurate - the Veteran's own statement over many years does not indicate he was hiding symptoms - he was reporting problems - in detail) that went unreported because he had a "fear" that it may lead to involuntary commitment to an institution, as told to him by a friend. 

The argument is, at best, unique:  The Board is being asked to not review what the Veteran told examiners, or stated, but what he was hiding from examiners during the limited period on appeal and ignore suggestions that the Veteran's was exaggerating his problems, rather than hiding problems from examiners. 

The Veteran and his attorney point to a December 2012 treatment note that recorded the lay testimony during treatment.

However, the entirety of the December 2012 medical note reads as follows: 

"[The Veteran] reports...SI in 1990 only...[but] when he was told his depression sounded mild, he added that maybe since 1990 he has had some SI, but none recent, no intent/plan/gesture/attempt since the OD in 1990, and states that a buddy told him you are not supposed to tell a psychiatrist you have SI, or risk getting admitted against your will."  

Contrary to the conjecture that the Veteran has had unreported suicidal plan or intent since 1990, the Board finds the Veteran's April 2019 VA examination lay testimony, along with his many statements made during the course of treatment at VA mental health clinics for many decades since he began treatment at VA in 2008, stating he does not have suicidal ideation or plan, far more probative than the December 2012 lay statement.

The Veteran credibly denied suicidal ideation, plan, and intent, as well as any suicide attempt, since his attempt while on active duty in 1990, on many occasions during treatment for mental health, spanning a time period of many years, from 2012 to 2020.  The Veteran's activities and relationships during this period fully support the finding that he was not hiding problems, but was instead providing highly accurate information to health care providers that undermine the 30% disability evaluation during this time period.  

The Board highlights that the June 2020 VA treatment record noted by the Court still supports that the Veteran has often denied suicidal ideation, plan, and intent.  Specifically, the June 2020 VA treatment record shows the Veteran's primary concern was anxiety.  He reported that his father passed away and he was going through a divorce.  He endorsed rumination and inability to control excess worry.  He reported having a breakdown 3 months ago and endorsed suicidal thoughts at that time, with no intent or plan.  He did not currently endorse suicidal ideation, intent, or plan at the time of the telephone appointment.  He also reported having tense muscles and chest pain once a week while driving, which he attributed to anxiety.  In the risk assessment section, the clinician noted the Veteran appears to be at intermediate chronic risk and low acute risk for suicide.  However, the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale was calculated as being negative based on the following key indicators: 

"	Over the past month, have you wished you were dead or wished you could go to sleep and not wake up?  The Veteran answered no. 

"	Over the past month, have you had any actual thoughts about killing yourself?  The Veteran answered no.

"	In your lifetime, have you ever done anything, started to do anything, or prepared to do anything to end your life?  The Veteran answered yes.

"	If yes, was this within the past 3 months?  The Veteran answered no. 

Overall, it determined there was no suicidal ideation endorsed in the past month; no method, no specific plan, and no intent in the past month; and past suicidal behavior, greater than 3 months.  Towards the bottom of the treatment record, it stated the information contained in the note was based on a self-report assessment and is not sufficient to use alone for diagnostic purposes. 

The Board finds that the June 2020 VA treatment record contradicts itself in that the Veteran reported suicidal ideation 3 months prior but had a negative result from the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale.  This contradiction limits the probative weight of the symptom of suicidal ideation (again, suggesting some exaggeration of the problem, as note above).  Here the Veteran's main concerns were anxiety, rumination, and the inability to control worry.  These symptoms are consistent with a 30 percent rating and comparable to the symptoms of anxiety, suspiciousness, and panic attacks (weekly or less often) that are listed in the rating criteria.  At worst, they suggest a 10% disability evaluation.   

Furthermore, from December 14, 2012, to October 20, 2020, despite reports of mild to moderate depression, anxiety and panic attacks, the Veteran more often than not reported negative on depression and PTSD screens during primary care appointments with VA on many occasions.   See CAPRI Records.

Overall, the Board has reviewed the treatment records and finding that they, overall, provide highly probative evidence against this claim, undermining the Veteran's representative contentions on all points.  The Board cannot ignore the Veteran's statements during this period. 

The Board is being asked to make a factual determination that the Veteran was hiding symptoms during the period on appeal.  Based on a review of those statements, the Board is making the following factual finding:  The Veteran was not hiding problems.  If anything, as noted above, during the period on appeal there was an indication of exaggeration of the problem. 

The Board has undertaken an in-depth review of the record in this case and with all the above in mind, the Veteran's mental health disability picture, prior to October 20, 2020, most closely resembles occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), thus warranting a 30 percent rating under the applicable criteria.

The Board has reached this conclusion because, despite arguably at times having one or two of the symptoms noted in the criteria for a higher rating, the Veteran's symptoms were chiefly reported as mild to moderate depression and anxiety, with suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, and recent events).  Suggestions of exaggeration, a limite points, only provide evidence against this claim. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's (and his Spouse's) lay reports of more severe symptoms such as hallucinations, panic attacks more than once a week and disturbances of memory, motivation, and mood during the period.  However, the Board finds his acquired psychiatric disability never manifested as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory for example, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, which is emblematic of the symptoms required for a higher, 50 percent rating.

Even with the divorce considered in 2020, the Board still finds the Veteran maintains highly functional social relationships with three generations of family member and maintains membership in social clubs such as Free Masons and the Knights of Columbus.  Occupationally, there is no competent, credible, and probative evidence showing difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work strictly due to his acquired psychiatric disability, which is the only issue on appeal in this claim.

Although lay persons such as the Veteran, his Spouse, and his attorney, are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, see Kahana v. Shinseki, 24?Vet. App.?428, 435 (2011), as to the specific issue in this case, determining the severity of his current acquired psychiatric disability falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person because it involves a medical and occupational subject concerning an internal and external physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.

The Board finds that the weight of the competent, credible, and probative evidence, which are the opinions of the VA treating physicians and the Veteran's statements during the course of treatment, does not show the severity of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability prior to October 20, 2020, rose to a level sufficient to warrant a higher rating under the applicable regulation.

In this case, it is not the absence of evidence, but the evidence itself, to include the Veteran's many statements during the course of VA mental health treatment throughout the appeal, that is against this claim.  The record in this case provides highly probative evidence against this claim.  It is highly detail, undermining any factually determination that the Veteran was hiding problems during this time.  If anything, the records at many points does not support the 30% finding.  It is clear that the Veteran was provided the benefit of any doubt in the award of the 30% rating during this limited period.

In this regard, nothing above should be interpreted as a finding that the Veteran was not having some problems during this period on appeal.  If he was not having problems, there would be no basis for the 30% finding.  The only question is the degree of the problem based on the best, most probative evidence. 

The Veteran did not report difficulty in occupational or social functioning sufficient to approximate a higher evaluation more closely, and at no time does the objective evidence of record find that due to his service connected acquired psychiatric disability, the Veteran suffered from flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory for example, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; or impaired abstract thinking.  Moreover, while the Veteran has reported a history of a suicide attempt in 1990, he repeatedly denied suicidal intent or plans throughout the course of treatment, from December 2012 to October 2020.

While the Veteran and his representative requests a retroactive medical opinion to determine when increased psychiatric symptoms first onset, the Board finds that retroactive medical opinions are extremely unsuccessful in nearly all cases that it has been attempted.  It is important for them to understand that retroactive medical opinions ultimately end in failure, particularly in this case in which there is so much evidence in this case that does not support the Veteran's claims.  Again, the current problem is not, at this time, at issue.  An examiner would be basing their report on the evidence that the Board has already reviewed and the factual findings that the Board has already addressed. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In this regard, based on the facts of this case, the Board must make the following factual finding:  The Veteran was not hiding problems he was having from VA examiners during this time frame.  No examiner in 2025, addressing the problems the Veteran faced many years ago, can overrule the findings of fact of the Board at this time. 

Lastly, the Veteran reports he has not worked since the early 2000's.  However, the Board highlights that his back and other physical disabilities along with his mental health disabilities are shown to cause unemployability.  There is no evidence the Veteran has difficulty working due to his acquired psychiatric disorder beyond the 30 percent disability rating already assigned.  As such, while the Veteran may have experienced some symptoms congruent with a higher evaluation, the Board finds the Veteran's symptomatology most closely approximates that contemplated by a 30 percent evaluation for the period prior October 20, 2020 (in fact, the evidence does not always support the 30% finding).  Therefore, the claim is denied.

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cochran, Laura

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.