Citation Nr: A25030475
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 250212-515546
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to housebound-in-fact and/or aid and attendance special monthly compensation (SMC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1968 to May 1970, to include service in the Republic of Vietnam for which he was awarded the Vietnam Service Medal with 4 Bronze Service Stars, the Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal, and the Combat Infantryman Badge. 

This claim comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 3, 2025, rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Therefore, the AMA applies. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1). The Veteran submitted VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) and elected the Direct Review Docket. See NOD, received February 12, 2025.

Under the AMA, the evidentiary record the Board may consider depends on the evidence considered by the AOJ in the decision on appeal and the Veteran's docket selection on the NOD. In this case, the February 2025 rating decision on appeal was ordered to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error discovered by the higher-level reviewer in the October 2, 2024, rating decision. When such is the case, the subsequent readjudication is not a HLR decision, but instead is a supplemental claim decision. As indicated above, the Veteran selected the Direct Review Docket when submitting the NOD in February 2025. Because the February 3, 2025, rating decision served to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 3, 2025, supplemental rating decision. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 3.2500, 3.2601. If evidence was submitted after the February 3, 2025, supplemental rating decision, the Board did not consider it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of the claim on remand. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to SMC for Aid and Attendance

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Additionally, under the AMA, the Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim, not just pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Id. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, received June 4, 2024. 

SMC is payable to a Veteran who, as a result of service-connected disabilities, is so helpless as to need or require the regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b)(3). SMC is granted if either a Veteran meets the statutory criteria or is housebound in fact. To be statutorily housebound, the Veteran must have at least one 100 percent rating and at least one separate and distinct disability independently ratable at 60 percent. 

Factual need for aid and attendance will be considered to have been met when the Veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities cause the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, one hand and one foot, blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less, or when the Veteran is substantially confined to their house (ward or clinical areas, if institutionalized) or immediate premises due to a service-connected disability or disabilities which, it is reasonably certain, will remain throughout such Veteran's lifetime. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.351(c), 3.352(a). 

The following criteria have also been enumerated in the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a): the inability of the Veteran to dress or undress themself, or to keep themself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which, by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); the inability of a Veteran to feed themselves through the loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; the inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect a Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to their daily environment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a). 

However, it is not required that all of the disabling conditions be found to exist to establish eligibility for aid and attendance and that such eligibility required at least one of the enumerated factors be present. The particular personal function which a Veteran was unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole and that it was only necessary that the evidence establish that a Veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need. Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996).

Bedridden status will also be a proper basis for the determination of the need for regular aid and attendance. Bedridden means that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the Veteran remain in bed. The fact that a Veteran has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

Here, the Veteran has been deemed statutorily housebound by way of his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with bipolar type schizoaffective disorder and his coronary artery disease, rated at 100 percent and 60 percent, respectively. See Rating Decision - Codesheet, dated February 3, 2025. 

The Board has reviewed the medical evidence of record but finds it insufficient to grant or deny the Veteran's factual need for aid and attendance. Although VA 21-2680 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance is of record, it has not been signed by an examiner and is only partially completed. Furthermore, the October 2024 higher-level reviewer specifically noted the need for a "VA examination regarding special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance," however, there is no indication that any such examination was requested. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the AOJ committed duty to assist errors in not providing the requested examination. Remand is therefore necessary. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

1.	Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the need for housebound-in-fact and aid and attendance special monthly compensation due to his service-connected disabilities. The claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed. ***Please note that the Veteran may not currently have available transportation therefore the most convenient scheduling scenario should be utilized. 

(a.)	Considering the nature and level of impairment resulting from service-connected disabilities only, the physician should render specific findings as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran is able to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; whether he is unable to attend to the wants of nature; and whether he suffers from mental or physical incapacity which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect him from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

The examiner must also state whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him permanently housebound, i.e., substantially confined to his dwelling or immediate premises. In providing the requested information, the examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical and lay evidence, to include the Veteran's statements regarding his need for aid and attendance.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to testify as to the nature and severity of his symptomatology, and the onset of his symptoms. If there is a medical reason to doubt the accuracy of the Veteran's statements this should be clearly expressed with a rationale as supported by the evidence.

A full rationale for any opinion offered should be provided. If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.

 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Offutt, Marty N. (she/her/hers)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.