Citation Nr: A25030834
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 221018-286707
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The credible evidence of record persuasively indicates that the Veteran's left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis was not shown as chronic in service and did not manifest to a compensable degree within the applicable presumptive period; continuity of symptomatology is not established; and the disability is not otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. 

§§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1976 to May 1977, with additional service in the Army Reserve.

The matter is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Thus, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for his left knee arthritis. See June 2019 VA 21-526EZ. Specifically, the Veteran contends that he "initial[ly] injured [his] left knee in basic training" but that seeking treatment "was frowned upon unless you[] were dying." October 2022 VA 21-4138. Therefore, the Veteran contends that although he injured his back during service, which he sought treatment for, he "did not want to bring up [his] knee because [he] knew they would try to remove [him] from active duty." Id. Thus, the Veteran contends "that the condition started on active duty and has continued on since the 70's." Id.

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection was previously appealed to the Board. See June 2020 VA Form 10182. In the resulting decision, the Board found that a pre-decisional duty to assist error had been made by the AOJ and remanded the claim with instructions to request the Veteran's private medical records from Carolinas Center for Surgery and Dr. Sean P. Scully at the Onslow Memorial Hospital. See January 2022 Board Decision. The Board notes that these records were requested and, upon receipt, associated with the claims file. 

Accordingly, the Board turns now to the underlying claim of entitlement to service connection. 

Service connection may be granted for disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may be granted for a disease initially diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current claimed disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury in service. Shedden v. Principi, 281 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Moreover, certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Here, the AOJ conceded that, as of January 2019, the Veteran has been diagnosed with left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis. See May 2022 Rating Decision. Moreover, the AOJ conceded that the Veteran's "disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to . . . military service," and that the Veteran's time in-service "meet[s] the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection." See id. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Thus, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's left knee disability began in, or is due to, an in-service injury or event. 

In evaluating the evidence, the Board has been charged with the duty to assess its credibility and weight. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F. 3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Indeed, the Court has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to do so. Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000).

The Veteran's service treatment records are absent any indication of a left knee condition or injury. Upon entrance, the Veteran reported "normal" lower extremities, inclusive of knees. See March 1976 Report of Medical Examination. Moreover, upon separation, the Veteran denied history of arthritis, rheumatism, or bursitis; lameness; "trick" or locked knee. See April 1977 Report of Medical History. The Veteran was further examined upon separation and noted to have clinically normal lower extremities, inclusive of any "other musculoskeletal" conditions or symptoms. See May 1977 Report if Medical Examination.

While the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination related to this claim, the record evidence provides that he has received ongoing treatment for a variety of left knee conditions since at least July 2008. See, e.g., July 2008 Nursing Outpatient Note. Specifically, the Veteran has undergone at least two surgeries to his left knee, including a scheduled total replacement that was disrupted due to an abscess requiring "irrigation, debridement, and synovectomy." See, e.g., August 2018 Community Care Consult Note; February 2021 Orthopedic Surgery Consult. The Board also notes that the Veteran has described his left knee pain as "chronic," and that he "ambulates with single point cane wearing custom long-leg hinged knee brace which extends into his shoe." See September 2021 Nursing Outpatient Note; September 2021 Orthopedic Surgery Clinic Note.

The Board again acknowledges the Veteran's contention that his left knee disability has "continued on since the 70's" after he "initial[ly] injured [his] left knee in basic training" but that seeking treatment "was frowned upon unless you[] were dying," and that although he injured his back during service, which he sought treatment for, he "did not want to bring up [his] knee because [he] knew they would try to remove [him] from active duty." October 2022 VA 21-4138. The Board notes that laypersons are competent to speak to symptomatology when those symptoms are readily observable. See, e.g., Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, the Board finds the Veteran not to be credible, and, thus, his lay statement lacks probative value.

Specifically, while the Veteran's service treatment records do indicate that he received treatment after he was "kicked in the back," his contention that he was incapable of reporting his purported knee injury at that time due to a fear of discharge is contradicted by contemporaneous records and the circumstances of his in-service back injury treatment. See April 1977 In-Service Medical Note. 

Upon seeking treatment for his in-service back injury, the Veteran reported pain "radiating across left hip," and the examiner indicated that the Veteran suffered potential kidney damage evidenced by urine in the blood, a back contusion, problem with movement, and tenderness in the left flank to groin. See April 1977 Chronological Record of Medical Care. However, two days after the examination, the Veteran was noted as seeking to be "screened . . . for elimination," from Active Duty "due to family problems and interpersonal difficulties." Id. The Veteran was further noted as "cleared for admin[istrative] discharge." Id. Moreover, the Board notes that the process to initiate the Veteran's discharge began the following month after the Veteran received an "Article 15" for three days of absent without official leave during basic training and "an altercation with a room mate" in which the Veteran "threatened him with a knife." See May 1977 Discharge Memorandum. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's lay statement relating to an in-service left knee injury to be inconsistent with his separation examination and his self-reported lack of knee or musculoskeletal symptoms upon separation. Moreover, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is internally inconsistent and facially implausible given the overlapping timeline and set of facts surrounding the Veteran's discharge during basic training, and, of particular importance, the fact that the Veteran was noted as seeking discharge at the time of his in-service treatment for a back injury and was therein cleared for administrative discharge. As such, the Board finds the Veteran to not be credible. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995); Curry v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 59, 68 (1994); White v. Illinois, 502 U.S. 346, 356 (1992). This is a finding of fact by the Board.

Consequently, as there is no evidence of a qualifying event, injury, or disease that had its onset during service, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to direct service connection is not warranted.

Nonetheless, the Board notes that the Veteran's left knee disability is a chronic condition that may be entitled to a presumption of service connection. Thus, the Board must determine whether the Veteran's left knee disability was shown as chronic in service, manifested to a compensable degree within one-year of separation from service, or has manifested with continuous symptomatology since service, so as to allow service connection to be presumed.

However, as detailed above, there is no credible, compelling evidence that the Veteran's left knee disability began in-service or within one-year of separation from service. Conversely, the credible, compelling evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's left knee disability began over thirty years post-separation from service. See, e.g., July 2008 Nursing Outpatient Note. Furthermore, there is no credible, compelling evidence that the Veteran's left knee disability has manifested in continuous symptoms since service. Instead, the Board notes, again, that the earliest evidence within the record indicates that the Veteran's left knee disability had its onset many years after the Veteran left active service. Moreover, there is no evidence associated with the record that shows a continuity of symptoms since service prior to July 2008. See id.

The Board acknowledges and sympathizes with the Veteran's more recent history of left knee conditions, as well as the pain, instability, and surgeries associated with those conditions. However, the record evidence fails to establish, presumptively or otherwise, that the Veteran's current disability is due to or the result of service.

The Board further acknowledges that the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination in this matter. However, the Board finds that a remand to obtain an examination is not warranted.

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

An examination is required when the evidence of record indicates that the claimed disability, or symptoms thereof, may be associated with the Veteran's active service. 38 U.S.C. §5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). Specifically, under McLendon, VA is obligated to provide an examination when the record contains (1) competent evidence of a current disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability), (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file to decide the claim. Id. 

Here, as noted above, there is competent evidence of a current left knee disability. However, as equally detailed above, there is no credible evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, and no indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service. Accordingly, the Board finds that a VA medical opinion is not necessary to decide the claim of service connection for the Veteran's left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis, as there is sufficient competent evidence on file to decide the claim. See McLendon at 81; 38 U.S.C. §5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. §3.159(c)(4)(i)(C).

Consequently, service connection for left knee arthroplasty status post pyogenic arthritis is denied. 

(CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE)?

In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt; however, as the persuasive evidence weighs against entitlement to service connection, the doctrine is not for application. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55 (1990).

 

 

A. Dean

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.W. Hall, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.