Citation Nr: A25030315
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 200904-107218
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to specially adapted housing (SAH) is denied.

Entitlement to a special home adaptation (SHA) grant is denied.

Entitlement to automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment or for adaptive equipment only is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran did not have a service-connected disability rated as permanent and total that causes loss or loss of use of both upper extremities or loss or loss of use of both of his lower extremities, one lower extremity together with the residuals of organic disease or injury, or one lower extremity together with one upper extremity, any of which preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; nor does he have service-connected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, full thickness or subdermal burns, or loss of use of one lower extremity with blindness in both eyes that results in only having light perception.

2. The Veteran did not have a service-connected disability rated as permanent and total that causes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, or that is due to burn injuries or residuals of an inhalational injury, nor does he have a service-connected disability due to blindness in both eyes, with corrected central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye.

3. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in loss or loss of use of a hand or foot, permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, severe burn injury, or ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a certificate of eligibility for financial assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5107, 2101 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.

2. The criteria for a certificate of eligibility for a special home adaptation grant were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5107, 2101(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a.

3. The criteria for financial assistance in the purchase of one automobile or other conveyance with necessary automotive adaptive equipment have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.808.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1988 to November 1997. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2019 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the September 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to specially adapted housing (SAH).

2. Entitlement to a special home adaptation (SHA) grant.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to SAH and/or SHA.

Specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who has a permanent and total (P&T) service-connected disability due to: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) rated as 100 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a , Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows. See 38 U.S.C. § 2101 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 (a), (b), (d).

Specially adapted housing is also available to a veteran with a permanent and total (P&T) disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to: (1) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (2) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or, (3) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion. See 38 U.S.C. § 2101 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 (a), (b), (d). The term preclude locomotion means the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or canes as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 (c).

"Loss of use" exists if a veteran has a deprivation of the ability to use a lower extremity so severe that it precludes perambulating without one of the required assistive devices. That definition indicates that locomotion is precluded even if a veteran is capable on occasion of moving about unaided. In addition, functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination. However, that does not mean that every time an individual is prescribed an assistive device in conjunction with a lower extremity disability that the individual would automatically be eligible to receive specially adapted housing.

To receive specially adapted housing based on loss of use, an individual must (1) has a permanent and total disability (2) due to a disorder that (3) involves both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices. Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66 (2017); 38 U.S.C. § 2101 (a)(2)(B).

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran may qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if he has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees (such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature); a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)). See 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a (b).

The Veteran "contends that he is entitled to the automobile adaption and SAH/SHA grants based on his visual impairment along with the impact that his additional conditions have on his ability to perform activities in and out of his home." See December 2020 IHP.

The Board does not dispute the Veteran's assertions and understands his concerns. However, the specially adapted housing and special home adaptation grant programs for which the Veteran has applied are only available to a veteran who is entitled to compensation for permanent and total disability due to certain specified conditions. 38 U.S.C. § 2101; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809, 3.809. In this case, during the period prior to the decision on review, the Veteran did not meet the eligibility criteria for these programs.

Here, service connection during the period on appeal was in effect for left seventh cranial nerve palsy, with left temporal visual field defect, migraine headaches, left shoulder tendonitis, right and left knee patellofemoral syndrome, and sinusitis. These service-connected disabilities combine for a total evaluation of 100 percent.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran has a permanent and total disability as required by 38 C.F.R. § 3.809, and now turns to the preclusion of locomotion.

The phrase "preclude locomotion" is defined as the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or canes as a normal mode of locomotion, although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 (c). The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has determined that the term "loss of use" in the context of specially adapted housing claims means "a deprivation of the ability to avail oneself of the anatomical region in question. It is a general term, one that can readily accept additional specificity in various circumstances. Adjacent modifiers and, in the case of [special monthly compensation], regulatory efforts create that specificity." Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66 (2017).

The Court in Jensen dismissed the concern that "every time an individual is prescribed an assistive device in conjunction with a lower extremity disability, he or she would then automatically be eligible to receive [specially adapted housing]." Jensen, supra, at 15. Rather, it lays out four elements that must be satisfied to establish entitlement to such benefit: "That individual must (1) have a permanent and total disability (2) due to a disorder that (3) involves both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices. There are plenty of limitations built into that standard." Jensen, supra, at 15-16.

As an initial matter, the medical record, including VA examinations, show that the Veteran does not have ALS, or amputation of an upper extremity.

Although the Veteran is service connected for anatomical loss of one eye and light perception only in the other eye, as the impairment of vision in one eye is due to a non-service-connected disease or injury, the Veteran's disability of seventh cranial nerve palsy associated with left temporal field deficit cannot qualify him for this benefit.  38 CFR 3.383; 3.809a; M21-1 IX.i.3.1.d.)

The record does not suggest, nor has the Veteran asserted, that he had any organic disease or injury that would preclude locomotion without the use of the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair if coupled with his lower extremity disorders.

Turning to the evidence, in a December 2018 VA Examination for Housebound Status, the examiner noted limitations based on the Veteran's blindness, but did not find any limitations of movement based on the upper or lower extremities.

VA treatment records for the period on appeal indicate that the Veteran has been ambulatory with a long cane to assist with his visual impairment. See September 2019 treatment record. Additionally, the Veteran's bilateral knee condition has been rated as 10 percent disabling which indicates a moderate level of impairment, but does not indicate a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices, under Jensen.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran has consistently been shown to remain mobile and that he can independently ambulate with a cane to assist with his visual impairment. The Veteran has not reported that he has lost the use of his lower extremities. 

In addition, related to the question of whether the Veteran's disabilities amount to the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity such as to preclude locomotion without the use of the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair, the Board finds that it does not.

Here, the medical evidence demonstrates that, although the Veteran did use a cane as a means of locomotion, the Veteran was able to independently stand and ambulate with proper balance and muscle strength appropriate for his age. See July 2019 VA treatment records. Thus, to the extent the Veteran may use an assistive device to better ambulate, the probative evidence does not illustrate that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in the loss or loss of use of both lower extremities, the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of organic disease or injury, or the loss or loss of use one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity such as to preclude locomotion without the use of the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair.

Notably, for the housing claims, the Veteran did not assert a loss of use of his bilateral lower extremities, but presented as ambulatory, albeit with the use of a cane. 

Based on the foregoing, eligibility for specially adapted housing must be denied. The Board, while not unsympathetic, is bound by the law and regulations when determining whether the Veteran is eligible for specially adapted housing.

However, if entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran may qualify for a grant for necessary home adaptations if he has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees (such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature); a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a (b).

Here, however, and for the reasons outlined in the Veteran's above claim for specially adapted housing, there is no probative evidence of record to show that he has paralysis of an upper extremity. Rather, the Veteran was noted to have loss of fine motor skills and dexterity, but not a total loss of use. Additionally, his service-connected disabilities do not include burn injuries, or an inhalation injury.

Furthermore, while he has loss of vision, as discussed above, the Veteran does not have a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees (such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature).

He is therefore also ineligible for a special home adaptation grant, and this claim must also be denied.

For these reasons, entitlement to specially adapted housing and special home adaptation is not warranted, and the claims are denied.

Although the Veteran does not qualify for specially adapted housing of for a special home adaptation grant, the Board advises that he may apply for a grant from the Home Improvements and Structural Alterations (HISA) program through the Veterans Health Administration, which provides for structural improvements and alterations to a veteran's residence such as those needed to allow entrance to or exit from the residence, use of essential lavatory and sanitary facilities, accessibility to kitchen or bathroom sinks or counters, and others specified under the regulation. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1710 (a), 1717(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 17.3100. The requirements for specially adapted housing/special home adaptation grant and the HISA grant differ greatly.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to specially adapted housing (SAH) or a special home adaptation (SHA) grant is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-81 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application), 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

3. Entitlement to automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment or for adaptive equipment only.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment or for adaptive equipment only.

Financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or automotive adaptive equipment only. 38 U.S.C. § 3902 (a), (b). Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted where one of the following exists as the result of injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active service: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, meaning central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury precluding effective operation of an automobile; (5) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; or, (5) for adaptive equipment only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. 38 U.S.C. § 3901; 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.

As noted above, service connection during the period on appeal was in effect for left seventh cranial nerve palsy, with left temporal visual field defect, migraine headaches, left shoulder tendonitis, right and left knee patellofemoral syndrome, and sinusitis. These service-connected disabilities combine for a total evaluation of 100 percent.

With respect to the first criteria, the applicable regulation does not further define the phrase "loss or permanent loss of use." Under the relevant eligibility criteria found in 38 U.S.C. § 3901 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.808, the Veteran must show that he or she had anatomical loss of a foot, or permanently lost the use of a foot due to service-connected disability. The Board notes that the term "loss of use" is used in several places in various statutes and regulations describing disability ratings by VA. In the context of special monthly compensation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (a)(2)(i), loss of use of a hand or a foot will be held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump at the site of election below elbow or knee with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. A less restrictive definition is written into 38 U.S.C. § 2101 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 regarding specially adapted housing. That regulation specifies that "loss of use" was defined by the adjacent modifier, "such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair." See Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).

As outlined above, the Veteran is not precluded from ambulation, but uses a long cane to assist in his ambulation. 

Even applying the relaxed standard for loss of use, the Board finds the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include left shoulder tendonitis and right and left knee patellofemoral syndrome, did not result in functional impairment equivalent to the loss of use of at least one foot, as discussed above. 

As such, the Board finds the Veteran's limitation does not rise to the severity contemplated by the relevant eligibility criteria. Moreover, there is no evidence the Veteran's disabilities produced functional impairment of an extremity such that no effective function remained other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis.

With respect to the remaining eligibility criteria, the Veteran does not claim and the competent, probative evidence does not reflect that the Veteran has a service-connected bilateral eye disability has resulted in permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 with a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye.

In reaching its conclusions, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions regarding the severity of and functional impairment resulting from the symptoms associated with his disabilities. The Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the statutes and regulations. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide evidence regarding his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of such in accordance with such criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). 

Consequently, the Board finds the probative, competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities resulted in the loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet or one or both hands, permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, a severe burn injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. Therefore, the Veteran does not meet the criteria for financial assistance in the purchase of one automobile or other conveyance with necessary automotive adaptive equipment. Thus, there is no doubt to be resolved, and such claim must be denied.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment or for adaptive equipment only is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-81 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application), 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. O'Connor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.