Citation Nr: A25030183
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240111-407577
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the claim of service connection for lumbar spine disability is granted.

Readjudication of the claim of service connection for thoracic spine disability is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for thoracic spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for keratoconjunctivitis sicca is remanded.

The claim of entitlement to total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New and relevant evidence has been received since the April 2017 denial that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine disability.

2. New and relevant evidence has been received since the April 2017 denial that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for thoracic spine disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for lumbar spine disability have been met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156.

2. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for thoracic spine disability have been met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1987 to June 1991.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal form a rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  After the issuance of February 2023, November 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions, the Veteran submitted a January 2024 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), wherein he selected the Direct Review docket.

The Veteran's original claim of entitlement to service connection for lumbar and thoracic spine disabilities claims were denied in an April 2017 rating decision.  Therein, the RO determined that the Veteran's service treatment records did not demonstrate an in-service injury, complaints, or treatment for either disability.  Further, the RO determined that neither disability manifested to a compensable degree within one year from his service separate, that neither disability was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, and that there was no nexus between his active duty and either disability.  Despite receiving notice of these denials and notice of his appellate rights, the Veteran did not perfect an appeal.  As such, the April 2017 rating decision is final.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted claims to readjudicate issues of entitlement to service connection for thoracic and lumbar spine disabilities.  The Veteran has continuously pursued these claims since then.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  He perfected appeals as to these claims by submitting the January 2024 VA Form 10182.

Since the April 2017 rating decision, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been associated with the claims file.  Specifically, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2023 to evaluate his thoracic and lumbar spine disabilities.

The Board finds that the newly submitted evidence tends to prove or disprove the Veteran's claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  The Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been presented and readjudication of the claims for service connection for thoracic and lumbar spine disabilities is warranted.

However, the Board finds that additional development of these claims is required, which will be addressed in the remand portion of the decision below.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Thoracic and Lumbar Spine

According to a September 2023 private medical record, the Veteran reported that served in the Navy Reserves from sometime in 1990 to sometime in 2000.  The RO has not attempted to verify this period of service and/or obtain associated service personnel/treatment records.  The Veteran asserted that he sustained an injury during his alleged Reserve service.  The Board finds that failure to attempt to obtain records associated with the Veteran's alleged Reserve service constitutes a pre-decisional error and, thus, a remand for additional development is required. 

Keratoconjunctivitis

Preliminarily, the Board observes that the Veteran submitted a claim of entitlement to service connection for keratoconjunctivitis December 2020, which was initially denied in a May 2021 rating decision.  Thereafter, the Veteran continuously pursued this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  Consequently, submitting new and relevant evidence is not required in order to adjudicate the merits of the Veteran's claim.

In February 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to ascertain the presence, nature, and etiological relationship to service with respect to his keratoconjunctivitis.  The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of bilateral keratoconjunctivitis.  With respect to etiology, the examiner rendered a negative etiological opinion.  However, in support of that opinion, the examiner limited the underlying rationale to visual disabilities, completely ignoring keratoconjunctivitis.  The Board finds that February 2021 VA examiner's opinion is not adequate.  Failure to obtain additional an adequate etiological opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and, thus, a remand is required for additional development.

TDIU

The Board finds that the issue of entitlement to TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the other claims being remanded herein.  As such, a remand of this issue is required for contemporaneous consideration.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Verify the dates of the Veteran's service in the Navy Reserves, claimed to have occurred from 1990 to 2000.  Associate with the record any Reserves personnel and/or treatment records with the claims file.  All efforts to verify this service and obtain associated records must be documented, and that documentation must be associated with the claims file.

2. Obtain an etiological opinion from a VA examiner regarding the Veteran's keratoconjunctivitis.  The Veteran's electronic claims file must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must specify in the report that it was contemporaneously reviewed.  If the examiner determines that an examination is required, one must be provided to the Veteran.

The examiner is asked to opine as to the following: whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's keratoconjunctivitis was incurred in or due to his active duty, to include, but not limited to, the documented episode of conjunctivitis during service.

In so doing, the examiner must consider and discuss the Veteran's report of symptom onset and course.

A complete rationale for any rendered opinion is required.

 

 

T. Berry

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sean G. Pflugner, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.