Citation Nr: A25030293
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240322-426342
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The service department found the Veteran's death was in the line of duty and not due to his own misconduct; this finding is not patently inconsistent with VA laws.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for establishing service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 105, 1310(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.5, 3.301, 3.303

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Navy from April 2016 until his death in June 2022.  The Appellant is his surviving spouse. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in February 2023.  The Appellant requested Higher-Level Review of that decision, which was completed in October 2023.  In a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) received in March 2024, the Appellant elected the Direct Review option for this appeal; therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence in the record at the time of the February 2023 AOJ decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death

Dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) is paid to a surviving spouse of a qualifying veteran whose death is service-connected or compensable.  38 U.S.C. § 1310(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.5(a)(1); see also Darby v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 243, 245 (1997).

Service connection for the cause of a veteran's death may be warranted where the evidence indicates that the cause of death is related to service.  In determining whether the disability that resulted in the death of a Veteran was the result of active service, the laws and regulations pertaining to basic service connection apply.  38 U.S.C. § 1310(a); see 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). 

In order for a veteran's death to be considered compensable, the death must have been incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service 'in line of duty.'  38U.S.C. §§ 105(a), 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(k)-(n), 3.301(a). 'In line of duty' means an injury or disease incurred or aggravated during a period of active military, naval, or air service unless such injury or disease was the result of the veteran's own willful misconduct or, for claims filed after October 31, 1990, was a result of his or her abuse of alcohol or drugs.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(m).

VA has defined willful misconduct as an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n).  It involves deliberate or intentional wrongdoing with the knowledge or reckless disregard of its probable consequences.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n)(1).  Mere technical violation of police regulations or ordinances will not per se constitute willful misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n)(2).  Willful misconduct will not be determinative unless it is the proximate cause of injury, disease, or death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1 (n)(3).

An injury or disease incurred during active military, naval, air, or space service shall not be deemed to have been incurred in line of duty if such injury or disease was a result of the abuse of alcohol or drugs by the person on whose service benefits are claimed.  38 C.F.R. § 3.301(d).  'Drug abuse' means the use of illegal drugs, including prescription drugs that are illegally or illicitly obtained, the intentional use of prescription or non-prescription drugs for a purpose other than the medically intended use, or the use of substances other than alcohol to enjoy their intoxicating effects.  Id.

The isolated and infrequent use of drugs by itself will not be considered willful misconduct; however, the progressive and frequent use of drugs to the point of addiction will be considered willful misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.301(c)(3).  Where drugs are used to enjoy or experience their effects and the effects result proximately and immediately in disability or death, such disability or death will be considered the result of the person's willful misconduct.  Id.  Organic diseases and disabilities which are a secondary result of the chronic use of drugs and infections coinciding with the injection of drugs will not be considered of willful misconduct origin; where drugs are used for therapeutic purposes, or where use of drugs or addiction thereto, results from a service-connected disability, it will not be considered of misconduct origin.  Id.

A service department finding that injury, disease, or death occurred in line of duty will be binding on VA unless it is patently inconsistent with the requirements of laws administered by VA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(m).  When the evidence of record includes service department findings, it is error for the Board to make its own findings of facts of line of duty and willful misconduct without addressing the service department findings before it.  Crediford v. Shulkin, 877 F.3d 1040, 1046 47 (Fed. Cir. 2017).  "The regulations recognize that the Service Department is in the best position to assess willful misconduct and line of duty actions of its Service."  Id. (citing United States v. Yellow Cab Co., 338 U.S. 338, 341 (1949)).  

Lastly, a disability will be presumed to be incurred in service and not caused by the veteran's misconduct, unless the government can establish, by the preponderance of the evidence, that the injury or disability was caused by the veteran's own willful misconduct.  Thomas v. Nicholson, 423 F.3d 1279, 1285 (Fed. Cir. 2005).

Here, the Veteran was serving on active duty in June 2022 when he was discovered deceased in his home.  The Appellant informed civilian police detectives that she had observed him "acting strange" and then he went to take a shower, where she found him unresponsive approximately 30-40 minutes later.  The Appellant further informed the police that the Veteran had a history of alcohol and narcotics abuse, and was recently working on staying sober.  She reported that he had been falling sleep frequently while completing daily activities in recent weeks and had not been sleeping well.  

A toxicology report indicated acute fentanyl, para/meta-fluorofentanyl, and hydroxyzine toxicity, and the medical examiner ruled the cause of death an accident by acute fentanyl toxicity.  The Veteran's death certificate indicated acute fentanyl, para/meta-fluorofentanyl, and hydroxyzine toxicity as the proximate cause of death; it indicated the manner of death was accidental, and described the injury relating to death as occurring due to recreational drug use.  

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect that he had an ongoing prescription for hydroxyzine to treat allergies, which manifested in upper respiratory symptoms as well as dermatological symptoms.  The dermatological symptoms occasionally resulted in severe pain requiring pain relief medications.  The service treatment records indicate that the Veteran was prescribed opioid medications on four different occasions during service, twice in August 2017 for a left ankle injury, once in February 2021 for the dermatological symptoms, and once in September 2021, for a persistent post-viral cough.  The service treatment records do not indicate any mental health complaints or treatment, chronic pain treated with opioids, including fentanyl, or substance abuse concerns.

In December 2022, the inquiry officer issued a line of duty report, recommending the determination that the Veteran's death was incurred in the line of duty and not due to member's misconduct.  The inquiry officer referenced the medical staff's screening of the Veteran's service treatment records, the Veteran's death certificate, and the Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) report which summarized the civilian police investigation, autopsy, and toxicology report.  The inquiry officer found there was sufficient data to support that the Veteran's death was an accident.

The line of duty report was endorsed by the Commanding Officer in January 2023, approving the findings and recommendations of the inquiry officer that the Veteran's death was incurred in the line of duty and not the result of his own misconduct.  

After careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is warranted in this case.

First, the Board must consider the service department finding that the death was in line of duty.  See Crediford, 877 F.3d at 1046-47.  This finding, favorable to the Appellant, is binding on VA unless it is patently inconsistent with VA laws.  

VA law defines drug use to enjoy or experience a drug's effects to be willful misconduct where the effects proximately result in injury or death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.301(c)(3).  The same regulation allows for drug use for therapeutic purposes or for the use of drugs for a service-connected disability, including an addiction to drugs based on use for a service-connected disability.  Id.  

The line of duty report concluded the death was accidental, based on the Veteran's death certificate and the toxicology report used in the civilian police investigation, and therefore not due to the Veteran's own misconduct.  While the presence of fentanyl and para/meta-fluorofentanyl in the Veteran's system suggests a possible use of illegal drugs or illicitly-obtained prescription drugs, the evidence also indicates the Veteran had used opioid pain medication for injuries and disabilities incurred during service and had been prescribed one of the medications identified in the toxicology report to treat his ongoing allergy symptoms.  

Given these facts, the Board finds the line of duty finding made by the service department is not patently inconsistent with VA's regulations as it is not clear that the Veteran's death arose from drug use that would be considered willful misconduct.  Therefore, VA is bound by the service department finding that the Veteran's death was in the line of duty.

As the Veteran's death was incurred in active duty service and was not due to his own willful misconduct, service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is granted.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Josey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.