Citation Nr: A25030761
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240709-455903
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for essential tremors and neurodegenerative disease, claimed as parkinsonism, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1970 to January 1972.  He died in December 2021, and the appellant is his surviving spouse.

This matter is before the Board on appeal from a July 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Higher Level Review rating decision.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was then subject to higher-level review in July 2023.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the August 2022 AOJ decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for essential tremors and neurodegenerative disease, claimed as parkinsonism, is remanded.

The appellant contends that the Veteran had a diagnosed disability of Parkinsonism that was incurred in or caused by his service, to include as due to Agent Orange exposure.  His DD Form 214 confirms that he served in Vietnam during the Vietnam Era; he is presumed to have been exposed to herbicides/Agent Orange in the course of such service.  His STRs are silent for complaints, findings, treatment, or diagnosis of Parkinsonism or related disability.

On September 2020 VA treatment, the Veteran reported having a tremor in his hands for 2 years, noted to be an action tremor; no rest tremor was observed.  He reported having had an intermittent twitch of the lower part of his face for years; it did not bother him, and he was not aware of it.  He reported having short term memory loss.  August 2020 brain imaging showed generalized cortical atrophy more pronounced in the biparietal lobes, with white matter changes due to small vessel disease.  He was noted to have been diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy several years earlier.  Following neurologic testing, the impressions included mild essential tremor; involuntary facial movement (facial tic/twitch) that was chronic, intermittent, bilateral, and not a hemifacial spasm; and neurodegenerative disease that included "likely, Alzheimer's dementia" and "probably very early vascular parkinsonism".

On October 2020 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran did not now have, nor had he ever been diagnosed with, Parkinson's disease.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had been seen by neurology in September 2020 and was diagnosed with Parkinsonian features but no definite diagnosis of Parkinson's.  The examiner noted that no medication had been started, and there were reported tremors but no specific rigidity.  The examiner opined that there was no diagnosis of Parkinson's because there were no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis.

November 2020 VA treatment noted the Veteran was started on the medication ropinirole for parkinsonism.

On February 2021 VA examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 2020.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition of Parkinson's disease was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner opined that a record review indicated Vietnam service and documented Agent Orange exposure for several other service-connected disabilities and noted that Parkinson's is included in the list of illnesses thought to be caused due to exposure.

In an April 2021 addendum, the VA examiner was asked to clarify whether the Veteran had a confirmed diagnosis of Parkinson's disease or a diagnosis of sub thresholds such as parkinsonism or tremors.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had obvious tremors on examination and stated, "I must defer to Neurology diagnosis of parkinsonism as stated."

On May 2021 VA neurology clinic treatment, the Veteran was noted to have better and worse days with his tremor, which was enhanced by anxiety; he had tried ropinirole, but it irritated his stomach.  He was noted to have mild cognitive impairment, and Namenda was helping with short term memory loss.  His pain in his legs and arms, and jerking legs while lying in bed, were being treated with gabapentin.  The impressions included mild essential tremor; involuntary facial movement (facial tic/twitch), resolved; and possible neurodegenerative disease including mild cognitive impairment and mood disorder/anxiety.  The provider noted that a 2020 neuropsychological evaluation showed mild cognitive impairment and mood disorder/PTSD.  The provider opined that a neuropsychological profile did not confirm Alzheimer's dementia or probably very early vascular parkinsonism as suspected.

In a December 2021 addendum, the February 2021 VA examiner was asked to supply a valid rationale to support the diagnosis of parkinsonism.  The examiner cited to a November 2020 VA neurology clinic treatment record stating that the impressions included neurodegenerative disease, likely Alzheimer's dementia, and probably very early vascular parkinsonism.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had obvious tremors and most likely vascular parkinsonism.

In a July 2022 VA record review and advisory medical opinion, the reviewing provider opined that the condition claimed was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The provider noted that the Veteran was not diagnosed with Parkinson's disease on October 2020 VA exam.  The reviewing provider agreed with the "no diagnosis" finding based on additional remarks included by the October 2020 VA examiner as well as objective medical record evidence found in a May 2021 VA neurology treatment note.  The reviewing provider noted that the Veteran was then diagnosed with Parkinson's disease on February 2021 VA examination.  The reviewing provider disagreed with that diagnosis, opining that no objective medical record evidence to include a neurology consult to confirm that the Veteran ever had or was treated for Parkinson's disease or parkinsonism, was found; the provider opined that the February 2021 VA examiner's opinion is therefore invalid.  The reviewing provider noted that, initially, "neurodegenerative disease/likely Alzheimer's dementia/probably very early vascular parkinsonism" were part of the differential diagnoses per a September 2020 VA treatment record; however, after further diagnostic work-up and treatment, "likely Alzheimer's dementia/probably very early vascular parkinsonism" were not included in the definitive diagnoses per a May 2021 VA treatment record, which states "Neuropsychological profile did not confirm Alzheimer's dementia or probably very early vascular parkinsonism as suspected".  The reviewing provider noted that "Essential tremor, mild" is listed under "Impressions" as part of the definitive diagnoses.

Certain diseases may be presumed to be service connected as due to exposure to herbicide agents (Agent Orange) if manifested in a Veteran who served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam Era.  38 U.S.C. § 1116.  Those diseases are listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e); parkinsonism is on the list.  

Post-service evaluation/treatment records do not support or suggest that the Veteran had a definitive diagnosis of Parkinson's disease or parkinsonism that may be related to his service, to include as due to exposure to Agent Orange.  Regarding the dispositive factor of a confirmed diagnosis of parkinsonism, the Board finds the VA examination reports and medical opinions (cumulatively) merit substantial probative weight.  They reflect review of the Veteran's claims file, familiarity with his medical history, and consideration of lay accounts, and include rationale that cites to historically accurate supporting factual data and medical principles.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). 

However, although the record does not show a definitive diagnosis of Parkinson's disease or parkinsonism, the record does show diagnoses of essential tremors and neurodegenerative disease. Although these diagnoses are not listed as specified conditions under the presumptive service connection with exposure to herbicide agents, that does not preclude proof of direct service connection. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  Once the presumption of exposure applies, the Veteran may establish direct service connection that his current disease processes are related to his exposure to Agent Orange. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed. Cir, 1994).  However, a nexus opinion was not provided. As such, remand is needed to obtain a nexus opinion addressing the Veteran's essential tremors and neurodegenerative disease and his conceded exposure to Agent Orange.

 The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's essential tremors and neurodegenerative disease.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  

The clinician must opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's essential tremors and neurodegenerative disease had its onset in or is otherwise related to active service, to include his conceded exposure to herbicide agents.

In rendering the opinion, the clinician is reminded that the fact that any diagnosed condition is not on the presumptive list of conditions related to herbicide agent exposure cannot by itself be the sole basis for a negative nexus opinion.  Rather, the clinician should consider the Veteran's specific military history, medical history, risk factors, and any other circumstances deemed relevant by the clinician in rendering an opinion.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion. 

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question have been exhausted. 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Schechner, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.