Citation Nr: A25030496
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210202-140494
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) benefits based on service connection for cause of death is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1968 to October 1969.  The Veteran died in February 2020.  The appellant is the surviving spouse.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2020 rating decision from the Regional Office (RO).  In the February 2, 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Appellant elected the Evidence Submission docket and submitted evidence within 90 days of the February 2, 2021, substantive appeal to the Board.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.303.  

Service connection for cause of death was previously before the Board in May 2024, at which time the Board denied service connection for cause of death.  See May 2024 Board Decision.  The Appellant appealed the matter to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In an October 2024 Joint Motion for Remand (JMR), the parties agreed that a remand was warranted in this matter.  Specifically, the parties agreed that the Board made an improper medical inference about the severity of the respiratory condition by indicating evidence of treatment for shrapnel wounds during service compared to the absence of medical treatment for respiratory symptoms during service as a basis for denying the claim.  

Additionally, the parties agreed that the Board relied on an inadequate medical opinion with no supporting rationale as a basis for denial of the claim.  Specifically, the VA examiner in March 2015 opined that the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was more likely than not caused by a history of chronic tobacco use rather than exposure to burning napalm or helicopter fuel during service in Vietnam.  The VA examiner provided no supporting rationale for this conclusion; therefore, the parties agreed that the Board should obtain an addendum VA medical opinion with supporting rationale regarding the cause of the Veteran's death. 

Service connection for cause of death is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA medical opinion to address the claimed cause of death.  The relevant documents in the record should be reviewed by the examiner and a history should be obtained from the record.  A rationale for all opinions and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved should be provided.

The examiner should offer opinion:

Is it at least as likely as not that the cause of death, endstage COPD, was caused by or etiologically related to exposure to burning napalm, helicopter fumes/jet fuels, or herbicide agent exposure during service in Vietnam?

The examiner should discuss any relevant risk factors for the development of COPD, to include the history of using smoking and smokeless (snuff/chewing) tobacco.  The examiner should discuss the lay and medical evidence, as well as any medical literature, and/or principles relied upon to support the cause of death opinions.

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.