Citation Nr: A25030296
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231103-390277
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1991 to December 1994.

The case is on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision.

In a November 2023 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran selected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board has considered the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision.

1. Service connection for tinnitus.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the Regional Office (RO) to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran if the error occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  VA has a duty to acquire relevant records in the custody of a federal department or agency.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  

The Veteran indicated in his February 2023 claim that he received treatment for his disabilities at Birmingham VA Medical Center (VAMC).  While treatment records from the Northern Indiana VAMC were added to the claim file, there are no treatment records from the Birmingham VAMC of record nor any indication that the RO attempted to obtain these records.  As this evidence may relate to the existence and etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus, the RO should have obtained these records prior to the October 2023 rating decision.  Accordingly, remand to obtain the Birmingham VAMC treatment records is warranted. 

2. Service connection for CFS.

Persian Gulf Veterans are eligible for compensation for an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness (MUCMI), such as CFS.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a), (e).  VA has a duty to obtain an examination pertaining to a potential undiagnosed illness or MUCMI when appropriate.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i).  Once an examination is ordered, VA has a duty to ensure its adequacy.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Veteran meets the definition of a "Persian Gulf Veteran" under 38 U.S.C. § 1117.  See January 2023 VA Memorandum.  The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2023 to evaluate his reported fatigue, weakness, and pain.  The examiner subsequently determined that the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the diagnostic criteria for CFS nor any other "Gulf War disability pattern."  The examiner stated that there was "no evidence of persistent/recurrent symptoms."

The examiner's opinion did not sufficiently address the Veteran's assertions in his June 2023 affidavit, particularly the Veteran's contention that he presently experiences symptoms of extreme muscle aches, muscle stiffness, lack of energy, nausea, extreme fatigue, and joint pain.  To this extent, the September 2023 medical opinion is not wholly adequate.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 254 (2020) (a medical opinion must discuss the pertinent facts of a claimant's case, including any relevant lay statements).  Accordingly, the RO should have obtained a new opinion prior to its decision.  Remand for a new medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's symptoms is therefore warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain complete VA treatment records from the Birmingham VAMC.

2. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's unexplained fatigue symptoms.  If an examination is deemed necessary, it shall be provided.  The examiner is asked to address each of the following:

(a) Provide a diagnosis for any fatigue-related condition

(b) If a current diagnosis is not present, state whether the Veteran's symptoms nonetheless cause functional impairment

Please also provide a medical statement explaining whether the Veteran's disability pattern is:

(a) an undiagnosed illness

(b) a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology

(c) a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or

(d) a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis

If the Veteran's symptoms do not fit the criteria described in (a) or (b) above, the examiner should state whether it at least as likely as not that any diagnosed disorder, or functional impairment associated with fatigue symptoms, had its onset during the Veteran's service or is otherwise causally related to any event or circumstance of his service, to include the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Hayes, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.