Citation Nr: A25030221
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240723-459220
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to the service-connected disabilities of lumbar spondylosis with mild to moderate multilevel degenerative disc disease, facet arthrosis and neuroforaminal stenosis, and left knee osteoarthritis with varus alignment is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from October 1980 to October 1986.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to the service-connected disabilities of lumbar spondylosis with mild to moderate multilevel degenerative disc disease, facet arthrosis and neuroforaminal stenosis, and left knee osteoarthritis with varus alignment, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection OSA as secondary to the service-connected disabilities of lumbar spondylosis with mild to moderate multilevel degenerative disc disease, facet arthrosis and neuroforaminal stenosis, and left knee osteoarthritis with varus alignment is remanded.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023.  However, this examination is inadequate because it does not address whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities of lumbar spondylosis with mild to moderate multilevel degenerative disc disease, facet arthrosis and neuroforaminal stenosis, and left knee osteoarthritis with varus alignment are the cause of the Veteran's obesity, which serves as an intermediary diagnosis to establish secondary service connection.

The Veteran asserts that because of the musculoskeletal conditions for which he is service connected he is unable to adequately exercise, which has caused his obesity.  This contention was contained in the Veteran's initial claim as well as a private medical opinion provided by the Veteran at the time of claim.

The VA examiner offered an opinion on whether the Veteran's musculoskeletal conditions were the direct cause of his current diagnosis of OSA.  The examiner did not provide an opinion on whether the available evidence supports that the Veteran's musculoskeletal conditions have caused a diagnosis of obesity, and that the Veteran's diagnosed obesity in turn is the cause the Veteran's OSA. 

The Veteran submitted a February 2023 private medical opinion concerning the intermediary diagnosis of obesity causing the Veteran's current diagnosis of OSA, but it is found to be inadequately supported.  The opinion cites several studies regarding musculoskeletal issues correlating to weight gain.  However, the opinion does not address any residual physical capacity retained by this particular Veteran and whether the Veteran could therefore participate in alternative forms of exercise.  The opinion also does not address the Veteran's dietary habits and whether they may be an intervening cause in the Veteran's obesity.  Without providing an analysis of these issues, the opinion is inadequately supported and cannot be relied upon to determine the issues of nexus.  If the Board could grant the Veteran's claim in reliance on the February 2023 private medical opinion, it would do so.  However, said opinion is inadequate to support a grant.  Thus, the best the Board can do for the Veteran is to remand the claim with directions for VA to assist the Veteran by giving him an adequate exam/opinion. 

Once the VA undertakes to provide an examination it has a duty to ensure that it is adequate.  The evidence of record which addresses the issue of nexus between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and diagnosis of obesity and OSA is found to be inadequate.  Therefore, the Board cannot reach a decision on the issue until an adequate opinion has been submitted.  The failure of the VA examiner to provide an evaluation of whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities of lumbar spondylosis with mild to moderate multilevel degenerative disc disease, facet arthrosis and neuroforaminal stenosis, and left knee osteoarthritis with varus alignment was the cause of the Veteran's obesity, and in turn the Veteran's obesity was the cause of the current diagnosis of OSA disability constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and a remand is required to correct that error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. An addendum opinion be obtained from the original examiner, or if necessary, a new examination scheduled, to provide an opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obesity and OSA as it relates to his disabilities of lumbar spondylosis with mild to moderate multilevel degenerative disc disease, facet arthrosis and neuroforaminal stenosis, and left knee osteoarthritis with varus alignment.  

If the examiner finds that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are the cause of the Veteran's diagnosis of obesity, then the examiner must also provide an opinion on whether the Veteran's obesity is the cause of the Veteran's OSA.

The examiner must review the April 2023 VA examination, February 2023 private opinion, and this Remand Decision to avoid the same errors that have already been made.  

A clear rationale for all opinions must be provided, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance.  If the examiner opines that any of the above questions cannot be resolved without resorting to speculation, then a detailed medical explanation as to why this is so must be provided.

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Arner, Jonathan T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.