Citation Nr: A25030275
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240125-411592
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a hypersomnia disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

Entitlement to restoration of a 20 percent rating for generalized anxiety disorder is granted.

A disability rating of 20 percent for generalized anxiety disorder throughout the entire period on appeal is granted.

Entitlement to a 50 percent disability rating for migraines is granted.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation for left knee strain with limitation of extension is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain with painful motion is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain with painful motion is denied.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation for right knee strain with limitation of extension is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a hypersomnia disorder.

2. The Veteran does not have a respiratory disorder.

3. The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately caused by his generalized anxiety disorder.

4. From October 31, 2021, the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder has manifested in symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting, an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation, all resulting in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas.

5. From April 27, 2021, the Veteran experienced migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

6. The Veteran's left knee's extension is limited to 0 degrees.

7. The Veteran's left knee strain with painful motion manifests with painful motion. Remaining functional flexion is equal or better than 45 degrees.

8. The Veteran's right knee strain with painful motion manifests with painful motion. Remaining functional flexion is equal or better than 45 degrees.

9. The Veteran's right knee's extension is limited to 0 degrees.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. A hypersomnia disorder was not incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. A respiratory disorder was not incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

3. Obstructive sleep apnea was proximately caused by service-connected generalized anxiety disorder. 8 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

4. The criteria for a rating of 20 percent rating for generalized anxiety disorder for the entire period on appeal have been met; restoration of the rating and an increased rating is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, Diagnostic Code 9400.

5. From April 27, 2021, the criteria for a rating of 50 percent for migraines have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

6. The criteria for a compensable evaluation for left knee strain with limitation of extension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

7. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain with painful motion have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

8. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain with painful motion have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

9. The criteria for a compensable evaluation for right knee strain with limitation of extension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2018 to October 2018. The Board thanks the Veteran for his service.

On August 23, 2017, the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Pub. L. No. 115-55, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017) went into effect. This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review on or after February 19, 2019. As this case is an appeal of June 2023, September 2023, October 2023, November 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions, this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

However, when, as here, there are pre-decisional, duty-to-assist, errors it is permissible for the Board to have them corrected before deciding the claim on appeal.

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) electing direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023, September 2023, October 2023, November 2023, and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a back disorder and total disability due to individual unemployability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a hypersomnia disorder

2. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder

Veterans are entitled to compensation if they develop a disability "resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty." 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 (wartime service), 1131 (peacetime service).

To establish entitlement to service-connected compensation benefits, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service -the so-called 'nexus' requirement." See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value. See Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1, 8 (1999).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F. 3d 1328 (1997).

"Congress specifically limits entitlement to service-connected disease or injury where such cases have resulted in a disability... in the absence of a proof of present disability there can be no claim." Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). The Court has held that the requirement for service connection that a current disability be present is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran maintains entitlement to service connection for hypersomnia which he avers is related to his military active duty service.  Alternatively, he argues that his hypersomnia is secondary to his service-connected bilateral shin splints. In the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran is service connected for the primary disability of bilateral shin splints.  

For the claimed respiratory condition, the Veteran maintains that this condition is also related to this military active duty service that includes his participation in a toxic risk activity.  In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ conceded the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity due to his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) of Heavy Equipment Operator.  Based on a note in the Veteran's Service Treatment Records referencing the occurrence of an unspecified viral infection on May 25, 2018, the AOJ favorably found that the evidence of record shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service.  

As the record is devoid of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

At issue in both claims is whether the Veteran has compensable disorders.

While the Veteran was not specific as to how the disorder specifically manifests, the Veteran's service treatment records do indicate that he had a viral infection that manifested as a cough and sore throat. As such, VA provided an examination for respiratory disorders for him.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his viral infection in November 2023, wherein the VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion and found that the Veteran did not have respiratory disorder of any kind.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his claimed hypersomnia disorder in December 2023, wherein the VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion. The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a sleep disorder of any kind (that was not a type of sleep apnea). In particular, the VA examiner wrote the following: "Veteran experiences daytime somnolence related to sleep difficulties in Generalized Anxiety Disorder and exacerbated by Obstructive Sleep Apnea... Symptoms of daytime somnolence are better accounted for by poor sleep related to service-connected Generalized Anxiety Disorder and exacerbated by his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea."

In evaluating a claim, the Board must determine the value of all evidence submitted, including lay and medical evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1335 (2006). The evaluation of evidence generally involves a three-step inquiry. First, the Board must determine whether the evidence comes from a "competent" source. Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience. Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007), Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis if (1) the medical issue is within the competence of a layperson, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 433 (2011); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

If the evidence is competent, the Board must then determine if the evidence is credible, or worthy of belief. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007). (observing that once evidence is determined to be competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible). After determining the competency and credibility of evidence, the Board must then weigh its probative value. In this regard, the Board may properly consider internal inconsistency, facial plausibility, and consistency with other evidence submitted on behalf of the claimant. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511-12 (1995).

The probative value of a medical opinion primarily comes from its reasoning; threshold considerations are whether a person opining is suitably qualified and sufficiently informed. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). In this case, the Board accepts the November 2023 and December 2023 VA medical opinions that the Veteran does not have compensable disorders as probative medical evidence on these points. The Board notes that the examiners rendered their opinions after thoroughly reviewing the claims file and relevant medical records. The examiners noted the Veteran's pertinent history and provided a reasoned analysis of the respective cases. See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 256 (2019).

Due to the absence of proof of an additional disability due to disease or injury, there is no valid claim for service connection for either claim. Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability at any point during the claim or appeal period. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). It follows that there must be a recognized disease or injury. The weight of the evidence is against the claims, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply, and the claims must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

3. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

After a thorough review of the record and relevant medical records, the Board finds that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.

In the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The AOJ also favorably found that the Veteran participated in a toxic risk activity. As the record is devoid of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). At issue in this case is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and his active duty service, to include his participation in a toxic risk activity. 

The Board notes that there have been multiple negative opinions within the claims file with regards to direct service connection and toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). 

In a September 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner provided a positive nexus opinion for the Veteran's sleep apnea, finding it to be secondary to his Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD). The examiner explained: "When the sleep is disrupted repeatedly throughout the night, the veteran will be tired, and his brain's neurochemical makeup can shift. He will have more cortisol in his brain, leading to increased stress and anxiety and shifts in mood and thought patterns. His body will be constantly anxious, and he won't get the sleep he needs. When someone is sleep-deprived, and the body isn't well rested, they're less able to cope with the stressors in their life effectively and far more likely to suffer from anxiety. This is a vicious cycle; the more anxious he feels, the less he can sleep. The Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of a generalized anxiety disorder..."

The Board notes that despite this positive nexus opinion, VA only requested further development, and did not engage further with the provided positive opinion.

Here, the Board finds that all elements of secondary service connection have been met; the Veteran has been diagnosed with the claimed disorder of obstructive sleep apnea; and there is a positive nexus opinion in the claims file. The Veteran's sleep apnea was proximately due to his GAD.  As such, service connection of obstructive sleep apnea is warranted. 

REDUCTION AND INCREASED RATINGS

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of a veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

1. Restoration of a 20 percent rating for generalized anxiety disorder

2. A disability rating of 20 percent for generalized anxiety disorder throughout the entire period on appeal 

After review of the appeal and relevant records, the Board concludes that the rating reduction was not warranted, as there was no improvement. Restoration of the 20 percent disability rating is granted. A 20 percent rating is warranted from October 31, 2021 onwards.

The Veteran maintains that he should have a higher rating, in addition to the requested restoration.

The central question when dealing with reduction claims is whether the disability has improved, such that there is an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 provide criteria and considerations to take into account when determining whether a reduction in a rating is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) notes that rating agencies will handle cases affected by change of medical findings or diagnosis, so as to produce the greatest degree of stability of disability evaluations consistent with the laws and Department of Veterans Affairs regulations governing disability compensation and pension. It is essential that the entire record of examination and the medical-industrial history be reviewed to ascertain whether the recent examination is full and complete, including all special examinations indicated as a result of general examination and the entire case history. Examinations less full and complete than those in which payments were authorized or continued will not be used as a basis of reduction.

Ratings on account of diseases subject to temporary or episodic improvement, e.g., manic depressive or other psychotic reaction, epilepsy, psychoneurotic reaction, arteriosclerotic heart disease, bronchial asthma, gastric or duodenal ulcer, many skin diseases, etc., will not be reduced on any one examination except in those instances where all the evidence of record clearly warrants the conclusion that sustained improvement has been demonstrated. Moreover, though material improvement in the physical or mental condition is clearly reflected, the rating agency will consider whether the evidence makes it reasonably certain that the improvement will be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a).

The provisions of paragraph (a) apply to ratings which have continued for long periods at the same level (5 years or more). 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

The Veteran's GAD is rated under Diagnostic Code 9400. The Veteran is considered to have a pre-existing rating of 50 percent. At the time of the increase in his rating in July 2023, he was considered to meet the criteria for a 70 percent rating; therefore, his GAD was rated at 20 percent.

Diagnostic Code 9400 pertains specifically to the primary diagnosed disability in the Veteran's case (GAD). In any event, with the exception of eating disorders, all mental disorders including PTSD are rated under the same criteria in the rating schedule. Therefore, rating under another diagnostic code would not produce a different result. Moreover, the Veteran has not requested that another diagnostic code be used. Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran is appropriately rated under Diagnostic Code 9400.

The criteria for a 50 percent rating are as follows:

Occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The criteria for a 70 percent rating are as follows:

Occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The criteria for a 100 percent rating are as follows:

Total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

The "such symptoms as" language of the diagnostic codes for mental disorders in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 means "for example" and does not represent an exhaustive list of symptoms that must be found before granting the rating of that category. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). However, as the Court also pointed out in that case, "[w]ithout those examples, differentiating a 30% evaluation from a 50% evaluation would be extremely ambiguous." Id. The Court went on to state that the list of examples "provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating." Id. Accordingly, while each of the examples needs not be proven in any one case, the particular symptoms must be analyzed in light of those given examples. Put another way, the severity represented by those examples may not be ignored.

The Veteran was first afforded a VA examination for his GAD in July 2022. The VA examiner found that the Veteran had "occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation." Symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.

An additional VA examination was provided in April 2023. The VA examiner found that the Veteran had "occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation." Symptoms included anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The examiner did not notice suicidal or homicidal ideation.

The next VA examination was provided in September 2023. The VA examiner found that the Veteran had "occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity." Symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation.

During this examination, the examiner notably wrote the following: "He reported a history of passive suicide thoughts, most recent was reported to be '1 year ago.'  His risk level was assessed during this exam and he is currently at low imminent risk, low acute risk, and high for lifetime risk.  He currently denied suicide ideation, plan, or intent."

The Veteran's final VA examination for his GAD occurred in December 2023. The VA examiner found that the Veteran had "occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood." Symptoms noted included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. The examiner did not follow up on whether the Veteran had passive thoughts of suicide.

The Board has reviewed other treatment records in the claims file. In particular, the Board notes that at least one CAPRI treatment note from May 2022 indicates that the Veteran has a history of suicide attempts, despite some denials during VA examinations. See CAPRI, received January 10, 2024.

After review, the Board finds that a reduction is not warranted. However, a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted.

The decision to reduce the rating during this rating period results an evaluation that does not show that the disability has improved to the point where the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Throughout this period, the Veteran still has significant mood difficulties. Further, the Veteran has expressed some sort of suicidal ideation during parts of the period on appeal. The Veteran's difficulty with interacting with others is consistently documented throughout the claims file.

The Board finds that reasonable doubt is in the Veteran's favor and that the rating should be restored. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. There has been no sustained improvement. Accordingly, in concert with 38 C.F.R. § 3.344, the Board restores the 20 percent evaluation.

After a review of the medical and lay evidence of record, an evaluation of 70 percent (prior to the 50 percent reduction to 20 percent) is both granted and remains warranted. The evidence suggests that the Veteran's symptomatology has more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment associated with a 70 percent disability rating for the entire period on appeal. Neither the lay nor the medical evidence of record more nearly approximates the frequency, severity, or duration of psychiatric symptoms required for a 100 percent disability evaluation, nor does it total social and occupational impairment. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Most notable during this period are the Veteran's symptoms of depression, memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and suicidal ideation. However, there is no indication that the Veteran's mood disturbances or depression resulted in such symptoms as violence or a persistent danger of hurting himself or others. While the treatment records indicate that the Veteran experienced a suicidal ideation during this time period, such an issue does not appear to result in a persistent danger of hurting himself or others.

Throughout the appeal period, there was no indication of symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger in hurting self or others, inability to perform activities of daily living, disorientation of time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives.

Thus, the Board finds that, during the entire period on appeal the Veteran had occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, but did not have total occupational and social impairment. He does have some deficiencies, but the greater weight of evidence demonstrates that it is to a degree that is contemplated by the 70 percent rating assigned herein. Furthermore, even resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that he does not meet the requirements for an evaluation greater than the now-assigned 70 percent schedular rating during this period. To the extent that the Veteran has any of the criteria for a 100 percent rating during this period, see Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442, the Board concludes that his overall level of disability does not exceed the criteria for a 70 percent rating.

3. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for migraines

The Veteran's migraines are rated under Diagnostic Code 8100. Migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100, for migraine. 

Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.

A 10 percent rating is warranted under this code for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.

A 30 percent rating is warranted under this code for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months.

A 50 percent rating is warranted under this code for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018).

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation. Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The Veteran was first afforded a VA examination for his migraines in July 2022. Headaches and described pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, and pain worsening on physical activity. Non-headache symptoms included nausea, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, and changes in vision. The Veteran was found to have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine / non-migraine headache pain at least once a month but did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The examiner wrote that the Veteran's migraines caused "impaired mental concentration and cognitive acuity during headache episodes which transiently undermines the ability to perform sedentary and physical activities of employment."

In a February 2023 VA examination for his migraines, the Veteran described his headaches as pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head. Non-headache symptoms included sensitivity to light and sensitivity to sound. The Veteran was found to have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine / non-migraine headache pain at least once a month and very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The examiner wrote the following regarding functional impact: "The veteran stated that he was let go from his most recent employment because he needed too much time off to deal with his [migraine] headaches."

In an April 2023 VA examination for his migraines, the Veteran again described as pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head. Non-headache symptoms included sensitivity to light and sensitivity to sound. The Veteran was found to have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine / non-migraine headache pain at least once a month but did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The examiner affirmed that the Veteran's migraines did have a functional impact and reiterated the February 2023 VA examiner's observation that the Veteran was let go from his work due to his migraines.

The Veteran's next VA examination for his migraines occurred in August 2023. Headaches were described as pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, and pain worsening with physical activity. Non-headache symptoms included nausea, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, and ringing in the ears. The Veteran was found to have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine / non-migraine headache pain more than once a month but did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain. The examiner affirmed that the Veteran's migraines did have a functional impact and reiterated the February 2023 VA examiner's observation that the Veteran was let go from his work due to his migraines, but also noted that the Veteran's headaches impact his ability to focus and required him to take breaks to rest.

The Veteran's next VA examination for his migraines occurred in December 2023. Headaches were described as pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head. The examiner also noted that the Veteran would have migraine headache pain one to two times a week when the headache starts. Non-headache symptoms included nausea, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound and sensory changes. The Veteran was found to not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine / non-migraine headache pain but did have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain more than once a month. The examiner affirmed that the Veteran's migraines did have a functional impact and reiterated the August 2023 VA examiner's observations.

After review, the Board finds that the Veteran warrants a 50 percent rating for the entire period on appeal.

The weight of the evidence indicates that not only did the Veteran experience prostrating headaches throughout the appeal period, the headaches produced severe economic inadaptability. The Board has considered observations from the July 2022 and April 2023 VA examinations that noted prostrating headaches, but indicated that the headaches were not so severe that they produced severe economic inadaptability for the Veteran.  However, after a thorough review of the Veteran's entire record and relevant treatment records, the Board finds that the Veteran did have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The Board notes the severity of the symptoms during this time period, as well as the Veteran's reported loss of his work due to his migraines.

Accordingly, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs in favor the claim of entitlement to an initial 50 percent rating for headaches. A 50 percent rating for headaches is warranted. The benefit of the doubt doctrine applies. 38 U.S.C. §5107 (b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

4. Entitlement to an increased evaluation for left knee strain with limitation of extension

5. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain with painful motion

6. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain with painful motion

7. Entitlement to an increased evaluation for right knee strain with limitation of extension

The Veteran's bilateral knee strains with painful motion are both rated under Diagnostic Code 5260. The Veteran's bilateral knee strains with limitation of extension are both rated under Diagnostic Code 5261.

Diagnostic Code 5260 is used to denote the rating criteria for the limitation of flexion of the leg. Limitation of flexion is rated as follows: flexion limited to 60 degrees warrants a noncompensable rating; flexion limited to 45 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating; flexion limited to 30 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating; and flexion limited to 15 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

Diagnostic Code 5261 evaluates limitation of extension as follows: extension limited to 5 degrees warrants a noncompensable rating; extension limited to 10 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating; extension limited to 15 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating; extension limited to 20 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating; extension limited to 30 degrees warrants a 40 percent rating; and extension limited to 45 degrees warrants a 50 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

The now assigned 10 percent evaluation for the left knee and right knee strains with painful motion contemplates pain on motion. It is also consistent with limitation of flexion to 45 degrees. Separate evaluations may be assigned for limitation of flexion and extension of the same joint. See VAOPGCPREC 09-04 (September 17, 2004). Specifically, when a Veteran has both a compensable level of limitation of flexion and a compensable level of limitation of extension of the same leg, the limitations must be rated separately to adequately compensate for functional loss associated with injury to the leg. Id.

In a November 2022 VA examination, the Veteran first examined for his knees and both knees showed irregular measurements. The Veteran's right knee had a flexion of 90 degrees and an extension of 10 degrees. Pain was demonstrated on both flexion and extension. Crepitus was not found. Repetitive use testing revealed no additional loss in range of motion. The Veteran denied flare ups in both knees. The examiner found that pain significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time in both knees. Muscle atrophy and ankylosis were not found. Joint instability was not found in either knee. No meniscal conditions were found.

The Veteran was examined for his knees in March 2023. Both knees showed irregular measurements; the VA examiner wrote that the right knee showed irregular measurements, but the left knee did not. Both of the Veteran's knees had a flexion of 120 degrees and an extension of 0 degrees. Pain was demonstrated on flexion. Crepitus was not found. Repetitive use testing revealed no additional loss in range of motion. The Veteran denied flare ups in both knees. The examiner found that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination did not significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time in either knee. Muscle atrophy and ankylosis were not found. Joint instability was not found in either knee. No meniscal conditions were found.

The Veteran was examined for his knees in July 2023. The VA examiner wrote that neither knee showed irregular measurements. Both of the Veteran's knees had a flexion of 130 degrees and an extension of 0 degrees. Passive range of motion showed no changes. Pain was not demonstrated in any of the tests. Repetitive use testing for both knees was estimated to have a flexion of 120 and extension of 0 degrees in both knees. Crepitus was not found. The Veteran denied flare ups in both knees. The examiner found that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time in both knees. Muscle atrophy and ankylosis were not found. Joint instability was not found in either knee. No meniscal conditions were found.

After review, the Board concludes that increased ratings are not warranted. In this case, the objective evidence shows, at worse and considering Mitchell, DeLuca, and all relevant factors, flexion in both knees was limited to 120 degrees with painful motion while extension in both knees was normal. As such, a rating higher than 10 percent for painful motion of both knees not warranted based on loss of flexion. Compensable ratings for extension are not warranted. The evidence does not show the Veteran's disability is manifested by symptoms as shown in the next higher ratings for limitation of motion. Additionally, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's right knee disability was manifested by dislocated semilunar cartilage or removal of semilunar cartilage. Notably, no meniscus abnormality was noted. Therefore, additional ratings under Diagnostic Codes 5258 and 5259 are not warranted.

The Board notes that one examination did show that the Veteran's extension was limited to 10 degrees in both knees. However, the weight of evidence indicates that the Veteran's extension was 0 degrees in both knees. The Board notes that the 2023 examinations which did not show impairment in extension.

Accordingly, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim of entitlement to higher ratings the knee disorders. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply and higher ratings for the knee disorders are not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

In the June 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran was diagnosed at VA examination in November 2021 with lumbosacral strain.  As the record is devoid of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). At issue in this case is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's lumbosacral strain and his active duty service.

After review, the Board finds that new medical opinions are required.

The Veteran received two VA medical opinions. The first opinion is from November 2021 while the second one is from February 2022. Both opinions rely solely on the lack of documentation in service treatment records in order to deny the claim. However, such rationale is in error. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (examiner cannot base opinion on absence of in-service corroborating medical records).

On remand a new medical opinion will be provided. 

2. Entitlement to total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

A request for a TDIU is not a separate claim for benefits. In Rice v. Shinseki, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that a claim for a TDIU is "part of the claim for benefits of the underlying disability" regardless of whether the claim is expressly raised or reasonably raised by the record. 22 Vet. App. at 453-54. As such, a Rice TDIU is not limited to claims reasonably raised by the record. Thus, the Board must adjudicate any explicitly raised claim for a TDIU pursuant to Rice when it has been explicitly raised during the initial adjudication of a claim or a claim for a higher rating for an underlying disability. Once entitlement to a TDIU is at issue as part of a claim for a higher rating, a claimant need not appeal a denial by the AOJ for the issue to be or remain in appellate status. Payne v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 373 (2019); Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356 (2018).

Here, the Veteran's migraine examinations indicate that he could not maintain employment due to his migraine disorders. The examinations raise a clear issue of TDIU. As such, the Board will remand in order to develop the TDIU claim. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Return the claims file to a new VA examiner of appropriate expertise in order to determine the etiology of the Veteran's back disorder. It is at the discretion of the VA examiner if a new in person examination is warranted.

The VA examiner must answer whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disorder is related to service.

The examiner is asked to consider and specifically address the Veteran's lay reporting and history. The examiner is reminded that a medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the record or that does not take into account the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history is inadequate.

A complete rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided in a report.

2. Send the Veteran a VA Form 21-8940 in order to obtain information about the Veteran's employability.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jonah Nelson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.