Citation Nr: A25030818
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-512801
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Air Force from April 1998 to November 2002. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board notes that, in the March 19, 2024, VA Form 10182, the Veteran appealed the rating decisions regarding service connection for a TBI, sleep apnea, migraines, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), as well as the rating decision regarding an initial compensable rating for residuals scars of left ankle repair.  However, the Veteran filed an earlier March 7, 2024, VA Form 10182 appealing all the above issues except the issue of service connection for a TBI, and a separate March 2025 Board decision addressed the issues of service connection for sleep apnea and migraines and a compensable rating for residual scars of the left ankle. 

Finally, as to the issue of service connection for GERD, the Board notes that, in an August 2024 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for GERD, effective December 21, 2022, the date of the Veteran's claim. 

Thus, the only remaining issue before the Board is service connection for a TBI. 

As the Board is remanding the claim of TBI, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claims so that he is afforded every possible consideration.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. 

Service connection for a TBI is remanded. 

The Veteran seeks service connection for a TBI.  The Veteran reports that he sustained multiple concussions while deployed and has suffered residuals of a TBI since service.

In a February 2023 VA Medical Center (VAMC) Neurology note, the Veteran reported that, in 1999, he experienced two mild TBIs, with loss of consciousness for less than one minute, and has experienced symptoms, to include severe headaches, phono and photophobia, and vomiting since service. 

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board determines that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when one is necessary to decide a claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4).  Such development is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but (1) contains competent evidence of a diagnosed disability or symptoms of a disability, (2) establishes that the Veteran suffered an event, injury, or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease during the pertinent presumptive period, and (3) indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006) (noting that the third element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and active service, including equivocal or non-specific medical evidence or credible lay evidence of continuity of symptomatology). 

First, during a March 2022 VAMC appointment, the Veteran underwent a TBI evaluation.  During the evaluation, the attending VA physician stated that there were no findings consistent with TBI on the current physical examination.  However, the physician specifically stated that, based on the history of the Veteran's injuries and the course of clinical symptoms, the Veteran sustained a TBI during a post-9/11 deployment.  Further, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current clinical symptoms consistently present as behavioral health conditions. 

Secondly, as noted above, the Veteran contends that his TBI is related to active service.  During the March 2022 VAMC appointment, the Veteran reported that he had two incidents during active service that he believes caused a TBI.  He reported that the more severe incident was in 2001 when he was in the Air Force Security Forces and a motor vehicle flipped over.  He stated that, after the vehicle flipped, he lost consciousness for about thirty seconds and suffered from confusion with a "brain fog" for a few days after the incident.  The Veteran additionally reported that, in 1999, he was in a separate motor vehicle accident after an IED blast and that he lost consciousness for about five to ten seconds.  

Significantly, the Veteran reported that he has continued to experience headaches and a sleep disorder since these events.  In addition, in its role as a finder of fact, in light of the lay and medical evidence, the Board finds the Veteran's account of experiencing a TBI in service and of having headaches and sleep problems credible.

The Board has determined that the "low threshold" necessary to establish entitlement to a VA medical examination in connection with the Veteran's claim of service connection for a TBI has been satisfied.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81. 

Accordingly, the claim is remanded to obtain a VA examination with a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's TBI and residuals to satisfy VA's statutory duty in light of McLendon and 38 U.S.C. § 1168. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to ascertain the nature, onset and etiology of the Veteran's TBI the residual manifestation of that TBI, to specifically include headaches and sleep disorders.

The examiner should review the entire claims file, conduct all necessary tests and studies, to include psychological and neurological examinations, and report all findings in detail. 

All manifestations of the Veteran's TBI must be identified.

Based on the results of the examination, the examiner is asked to address the following questions:

(a.) Whether the Veteran has a TBI or TBI residuals, i.e. a diagnosis of TBI must be ruled in or excluded.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that any diagnosed TBI or residuals had its onset in or are otherwise related to active service. 

In responding to these questions, the examiner must assume as true that the Veteran had a TBI in service and that he has had headaches and sleep problems since that time.

A fully articulated medical rationale for any opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report.

 

 

STEVEN D. REISS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Mountjoy, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.