Citation Nr: A25030249
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453398
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1986 to June 1988 and from September 2010 to October 2011.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 decision. In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2023 decision.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that the Board could not in consider in this decision, she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The veteran contends that he has sleep apnea secondary to his service-connected other specified trauma or stressor related disorder, and/or degenerative arthritis of the spine with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) and associated left lower extremity radiculopathy.

The record contains a private medical opinion by Z.M., M.D., dated in January 2023 that includes a diagnosis of sleep apnea based on results of a STOP-Bang questionnaire.  Dr. M opined that the sleep apnea is secondary to obesity resulting from the Veteran's service-connected other specified trauma or stressor related disorder, lumbar spine disability and associated left lower extremity radiculopathy.  There is no indication that the Veteran underwent a sleep study.

The AOJ requested a nexus opinion from a VA examiner in February 2023.  However, the medical opinion report is blank except for the examiner's notation of "awaiting sleep study results."  The claims file contains a Home Sleep Test (HST) Order with a signature and date of '2/15/20.'  This HST Order shows it was ordered by the February 2023 VA examiner.  The report contains a diagnosis of unspecified hypersomnia and includes a notation that "Patient does not have smart device to test with NightOwl, please send Apnea Link/Alice Night One."

Thus, it is not clear from the record whether the Veteran underwent the sleep study that was ordered by the February 2023 VA examiner to determine if he has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner did not provide a nexus opinion in the February 2023 VA examination report.

The issue is therefore remanded to correct the duty to assist error that occurred prior to the decision on appeal. Although the AOJ sought to obtain a nexus opinion in February 2023, prior to the February 2024 decision on appeal, the report of the medical opinion is incomplete.

The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires a remand in this case.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion to determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, and if so, the etiology of that disability. If the examiner determines that the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, the examiner is asked to provide responses to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea at least as likely as not related to service? 

(b.) Is the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) due to OR aggravated by his service-connected other specified trauma or stressor related disorder, and/or degenerative arthritis of the spine with IVDS and associated left lower extremity radiculopathy?

In answering this question, the examiner must make a determination on the facts of this particular Veteran's unique circumstances.

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected other specified trauma or stressor related disorder, and/or degenerative arthritis of the spine with IVDS and associated left lower extremity radiculopathy caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity?

(d.) If the Veteran's obesity was caused or aggravated by his service-connected other specified trauma or stressor related disorder, and/or degenerative arthritis of the spine with IVDS and associated left lower extremity radiculopathy, was his obesity a substantial factor in causing his obstructive sleep apnea?

(e.) If the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing obstructive sleep apnea, is it at least as likely as not that the obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for his obesity?

A fully-explained rationale is needed. 

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mazzucchelli, Michael G.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.