Citation Nr: A25030861
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230906-378798
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance or housebound status is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent disabling with additional disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, and her service-connected disabilities have not been manifested by the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or of one hand and one foot or blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less. 

2. She is also not permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person due to her service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC based on aid and attendance or housebound status have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. § 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1979 to March 1983.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a February 2023 decision. In June 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior February 2023 decision. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 decision. 

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance or housebound status.

The Veteran contends her service-connected disabilities cause her to need aid and attendance. In the September 2023 Appellate Brief, the Veteran, through her representative, stated that she has difficulty preparing meals due to an inability to stand for long periods. She has difficulty completing household tasks due to chronic back pain and her lower extremities conditions that make it difficult to ambulate without assistance from another person or a cane. She requires medication management due to memory issues and her mental health condition. She is only able to leave home for healthcare needs, such as medical appointments. She is able to travel only five to six blocks with assistance. 

SMC is available when, as the result of service-connected disability, a veteran suffers additional hardships above and beyond those contemplated by VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352; see also VAOPGCPREC 5-89 (Mar. 23, 1989) (explaining that SMC is a supplementary statutory benefit based on noneconomic factors such as personal inconvenience, social inadaptability, or the profound nature of a disability). SMC is payable in addition to the basic rate of compensation otherwise payable for the degree of disability.

A veteran may receive SMC either by reason of being housebound or based on the need for regular aid and attendance, but generally may not receive both simultaneously; regular aid and attendance is the greater monetary award. Compare 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) with 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).

SMC based on aid and attendance is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the veteran has an anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or of one hand and one foot; has blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less; is permanently bedridden; or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114 (l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350. Aid and attendance means helplessness or being so nearly helpless as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b)(3).

The following will be accorded consideration in determining the need for regular aid and attendance: inability of a claimant to dress or undress him or herself, or to keep him or herself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); inability of a claimant to feed him or herself through loss of coordination of the upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect a claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment. "Bedridden" will be a proper basis for the determination. For the purpose of this paragraph, bedridden will be that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the claimant remain in bed. The fact that a claimant has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice.

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in this paragraph be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions which the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need. Determinations that the veteran is so helpless, as to be in need of regular aid and attendance, will not be based solely upon an opinion that the claimant's condition is such as would require him or her to be in bed. They must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a); see also Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222, 224 (1996) (providing that eligibility for special monthly compensation by reason of regular need for aid and attendance requires that at least one of the factors set forth in VA regulation is met).

With regard to housebound status, SMC benefits may be payable if the veteran has a single service-connected disability rated 100 percent disabling, and in addition (1) has either additional disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of a service-connected disability or disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i). The disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more must be separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems. 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i)(1).

A veteran is "permanently housebound" when he is substantially confined to his house (ward or clinical areas, if institutionalized) or immediate premises due to permanent disability or disabilities, and it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout his or her lifetime. 38 U.S.C.A. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i)(2). Substantially confined means the inability to leave the house except in instances of seeking medical treatment. Howell v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 535, 540 (2006).

In considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance or by reason of being housebound.

In this case, the Veteran is service connected for chronic adjustment disorder with depressed mood (50 percent disabling), degenerative arthritis of the spine (40 percent disabling), and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy (20 percent disabling each). Her combined evaluation is 80 percent, and she was granted a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability from June 27, 2014. The issue of an effective date prior to June 27, 2014, for a total disability rating on an extraschedular basis was referred to the Director of Compensation by the Board in a November 2024 decision. 

While the Veteran has been granted a total disability rating based on her service-connected disabilities, there are no service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more.

Moreover, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have not been manifested by the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or of one hand and one foot or blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less. Indeed, she is not service connected for any foot, hand, or vision disorders.

The Board also finds that the Veteran is not permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person due to her service-connected disabilities.

The June 2014 VA back examination documents the Veteran has chronic pain from hip to her posterior right thigh, which is exacerbated by prolonged sitting, standing, and walking. She has functional limitations, loss in range of motion, and lack of endurance secondary to pain. 

During June 2017 VA treatment, the Veteran reported a trip to Oregon with friends where she walked a lot and felt well. 

During the May 2019 VA mental health examination, the Veteran reported she has no interest or motivation, and she does not want to leave her home. She does not eat much because it takes effort to get up and get food from the fridge. 

The Veteran underwent a November 2019 VA back examination. The examiner found the Veteran is unable to run, walk more than 300 feet, stand or sit for more than five to 10 minutes, lift more than five pounds, climb more than four steps, drive more than 10 to 15 miles, pick up an object from the floor, or reach/twist for objects. The back condition did not cause bowel or bladder problems. 

During October 2021 VA treatment, the Veteran reported she was traveling to Senegal for two months beginning on October 31, 2021. She requested a list of her active medications for the trip. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination for housebound status or permanent need for aid and attendance in February 2023. The Veteran was able to feed, bathe, and attend to other hygiene needs. However, she required assistance to prepare meals due to an inability to stand for long periods due to debility, chronic back pain, and plantar fascial fibromatosis. She was also unable to grip pots and pans. Her children assisted with medication management due to memory concerns, but she was able to manage her finances. She experienced difficulty completing household tasks due to chronic back pain, debility, and diabetic nephropathy, which made it difficult to ambulate without assistance or a cane and stand for long periods of time. The Veteran endorsed loss of bladder and bowel function. The examiner noted the Veteran only leaves home to attend to healthcare needs with limited time outside to complete other household tasks such as grocery shopping. 

The Board finds the evidence of record is persuasively against the Veteran's need for aid and attendance solely due to her service-connected disabilities. For example, the February 2023 examiner documented the Veteran is unable to stand for long periods in part due to plantar fascial fibromatosis, which is not service connected. Her diabetic nephropathy also affects her ability to stand and cook. Similarly, the Veteran is unable to grip pots and pans, but she is not service connected for any disabilities which affect the upper extremities. While the Veteran contends she only leave homes to attend appointments and household tasks, the record shows she has been able to travel. During the September 2020 mental health examination, the examiner documented the Veteran's mild memory loss equivocal which was described but not demonstrated during the examination. Even if the Veteran's has memory issues due solely to her service-connected mental health disorder, the need for medication management alone is not enough to require aid and attendance. In this case, the Veteran's need for aid and attendance is due to both service-connected and non-service-connected disabilities.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has physical limitations and has required assistance with some activities of daily living. However, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim is denied.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. McDaniels, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.