Citation Nr: A25030379
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-437544
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Reduction from a 40 percent evaluation to a 20 percent evaluation for lumbosacral strain was improper; restoration of the 40 percent evaluation for lumbosacral strain, effective June 1, 2024, is granted.

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracic back condition (claimed as chronic back pain) is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The reduction of the disability evaluation for the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain from 40 percent to 20 percent, effective June 1, 2024, was not proper as the evidence did not show that an improvement in a disability had actually occurred or that it was reasonably certain that improvement of this service-connected disability would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life.

2. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is not manifested by unfavorable ankylosis, or the functional equivalent thereof, of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction from a 40 percent evaluation to a 20 percent evaluation for lumbosacral strain, effective June 1, 2024, was improper; the criteria for restoration of the 40 percent evaluation for lumbosacral strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.105, 3.344, 4.1, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

2. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain have not been met for the period on appeal. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2012 to October 2015.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for a thoracic disorder and TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Law and Analysis

	Rating Reduction

There is no question that a disability rating may be reduced; however, the circumstances under which rating reductions can occur are specifically limited and carefully circumscribed by regulations promulgated by the Secretary. Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 280 (1992).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), a reduction in the evaluation of a service-connected disability is allowed when warranted by the evidence, but only after following certain procedural guidelines if the lower evaluation would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made. 

First, a rating action proposing the reduction must be prepared, setting forth all material facts and reasons. The veteran must be notified at his latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore. The veteran also must be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level, and to request a hearing in accordance with the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2). Whether or not a predetermination hearing was conducted, a written notice of the final action shall be issued to the veteran setting forth the reasons for the reduction and detailing the evidence upon which it is based. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2). The effective date of the reduction will be the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the veteran of the final action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2)(i).

In this case, the Board finds that these due process procedures were followed in accordance with 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105 and 3.501. The AOJ mailed a notification letter to the Veteran regarding the Proposal to Reduce Service Connected Compensation in November 2023. The record shows that the Veteran did not submit any additional documentation during the 60-day waiting period. Thereafter, the April 2024 rating decision effectuated a reduction from 40 percent to 20 percent for the lumbosacral strain, beginning June 1, 2024.

Since the procedural requirements are met, the substantive criteria governing rating reductions for certain service-connected disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R. § 3.344, must be considered. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) determined that this regulation applies to ratings that have been continued for long periods of time at the same level (five years or more). Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993). Here, the 40 percent rating was in effect from July 21, 2022, to June 1, 2024. As the rating was not in effect for more than five years, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 pertaining to stabilization of disability evaluations do not apply. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

However, the Court noted in Brown that there are several general VA regulations that apply to all rating reductions regardless of whether the rating has been in effect for five years or more. Id. at 420-421. Specifically, 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 requires that each disability be viewed in relation to its history. Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § 4.13 provides that the rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the condition, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in the use of descriptive terms. Additionally, in any rating reduction case, not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, but that such improvement reflects improvement in the ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-21; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10.

When evaluating the propriety of a reduction, the Board must focus on the evidence of record available to the AOJ at the time the reduction was effectuated, although post-reduction medical evidence may be considered for the limited purpose of determining whether the condition had demonstrated actual improvement. Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277 (1992).

The question of whether a disability has improved involves consideration of the applicable rating criteria.

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain has been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237. See April 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet. DC 5237 is part of the General Rating Formula for Disease and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula). Under the General Rating Formula, with or without symptoms such as pain, stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease, the following ratings will apply, in relevant part: a 20 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. And a 100 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237.

Note (1) of the General Rating Formula provides that VA should evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate diagnostic code. 

Note (2) provides that normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of the spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. Id.; see also Plate V.

Note (3) provides that in exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note (2). Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted.

Note (5) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

For procedural history, in an April 2022 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for lumbosacral strain and assigned a 20 percent rating, effective February 15, 2022. The Veteran filed for higher-level review and indicated that he disagreed with the effective date and disability evaluation for lumbosacral strain and service connection for "chronic back pain." Upon higher-level review, the AOJ confirmed and continued the 20 percent evaluation and effective date of February 15, 2022, for lumbosacral strain. See May 2022 Rating Decision. The Veteran then filed a VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim for service connection for compression fracture of the T5 vertebral body in July 2022. The AOJ adjudicated the issue as an increased rating claim and granted an evaluation of 40 percent, effective July 21, 2022, for "lumbosacral strain (now claimed as compression fracture T5 vertebral)." See December 2022 Rating Decision. The Veteran again filed for higher-level review, at which time the AOJ determined that a duty to assist error had occurred and transferred the claim to the supplemental claim decision review lane for additional development. See March 2023 Rating Decision. In November 2023, the AOJ issued a supplemental rating decision that proposed to decrease the Veteran's lumbosacral strain from 40 percent to 20 percent. Subsequently, the AOJ effectuated the rating reduction, effective June 1, 2024, in an April 2024 rating decision. 

The record includes several VA examinations regarding the Veteran's back condition claims. The March 2022 examination report documented the Veteran's diagnosis as lumbosacral strain. His active range of motion measurements were 70 degrees forward flexion, 20 degrees extension, 30 degrees right lateral flexion, 25 degrees left lateral flexion, and 30 degrees bilateral rotation. See March 2022 VA Examination. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in November 2022 for back (thoracolumbar spine) conditions. The Veteran had diagnoses of lumbosacral strain and compression fracture of the T5 vertebra and stated that the pain in his entire back had progressed/worsened since onset. He reported no flare-ups but had functional impairment of lifting. Upon physical examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's active range of motion measurements were 30 degrees forward flexion and bilateral rotation and 5 degrees extension and bilateral flexion; pain was exhibited on forward flexion, extension, and bilateral flexion. He was able to perform repetitive use testing with no additional loss of function. However, the estimated range of motion after repeated use over time, as reported by the Veteran, was 20 degrees for forward flexion and 0 degrees for extension and bilateral flexion and rotation. Passive range of motion testing was medically contraindicated and not performed. Also, the Veteran had localized tenderness; no objective evidence of crepitus, guarding, muscle spasm, or muscle atrophy; his bilateral lower extremity was normal for strength testing and sensory exam; and he had no radiculopathy, ankylosis, or intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS). The examiner documented that the Veteran asserted his thoracic and lumbar pain was different, and the compression fracture occurred on active duty, though it was only recently diagnosed. Further, the Veteran stated that he initially claimed thoracic and lumbar conditions, but he was only service connected for pain in his low back. See November 2022 VA Examination.

Based on this examination, the AOJ increased the Veteran's evaluation of his lumbosacral strain to 40 percent. See December 2022 Rating Decision.

In May 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained in relation to the AOJ's higher-level review return for additional development to determine if the diagnosed compression fracture of the T5 vertebra was due to the back condition noted in service. See March 2023 VA Form 0999 Higher-Level Review Return. After reviewing the claims file and medical records, the examiner offered an opinion regarding conflicting medical evidence, finding that the Veteran's new compression fracture at T5, which was identified after the March 2022 examination, was not related to service and accounted for the increased limitations of the Veteran's range of motion demonstrated during the November 2022 VA examination. See May 2023 VA Medical Opinion.

In considering whether a reduction is warranted, the applicable criteria are whether an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, and that such improvement reflects improvement in the ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-21; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10. Here, a review of the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's disability has improved, nor was there a finding of improvement in any of the medical examinations. See November 2022 VA Examination; May 2023 VA Medical Opinion. Yet, the AOJ continued with the proposed reduction and issued a final decision in the April 2024 rating decision that reduced the evaluation for lumbosacral strain from 40 percent to 20 percent. 

Nonetheless, after a review of the record, the Board finds that the November 2022 VA examination showed neither material improvement nor improvement in the Veteran's ability to function in the ordinary conditions of life and work. Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 350 (2000). In fact, it indicated a worsening of symptoms. The Veteran need not demonstrate that he is entitled to retain the higher rating; rather, it must be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the reduction was warranted. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993). Since VA failed to satisfy its burden to show sustained material improvement or improvement in the Veteran's ability to function in the ordinary conditions of life and work, the Board finds that the reduction was improper, and restoration of the 40 percent evaluation for lumbosacral strain is granted. 

	Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). While the regulations require review of the recorded history of a disability by the adjudicator to ensure a more accurate evaluation, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over the current medical findings.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established, and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). However, where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999). Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings, different or "staged" ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126-27.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in the parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. It is essential that the examination on which ratings are based adequately portrays the anatomical damage and the functional loss with respect to all of these elements. In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, it is necessary to consider, along with the schedular criteria, functional loss due to flare-ups of pain, fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, and weakness. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). The functional loss may be due to the absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints, and muscles, or associated innervation, or other pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. Pain on movement, swelling, deformity or atrophy of disuse, as well as instability of station, disturbance of locomotion, and interference with sitting, standing, and weight-bearing are relevant considerations for the determination of joint disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45. Painful, unstable, or malaligned joints due to healed injury are entitled to at least the minimal compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case, and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is currently rated as 40 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237. The applicable rating criteria for DC 5237 are discussed in detail above. In short, a 40 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

The Veteran generally contends that his low back symptoms are worse than the 40 percent evaluation currently assigned. See December 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review. 

The Board notes that the Veteran has continuously pursued an increased evaluation since the initial rating was assigned; thus, evaluation of the evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection is required, subject to any applicable evidentiary windows under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to an increased evaluation in excess of the currently assigned 40 percent for his lumbosacral strain for the period on appeal. 

Based on the discussion above, the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine was at most limited to 20 degrees based on an estimate of repeated use by the November 2022 examiner. The Board finds that the November 2022 VA examination is highly probative and consistent with a 40 percent rating for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain for the period on appeal.

Here, in considering whether a rating greater than 40 percent is warranted, the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe the severity of his back symptoms. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). The medical evidence, however, shows active range of motion in all planes, even after repetitive testing, and thus, there is no evidence of unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. See November 2022 VA Examination.

The Board has also considered whether the requirement of ankylosis can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis (i.e., functional immobility of the joint) during a flare-up in making this determination. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). While the Veteran reported flare-ups that contributed to additional limitation of motion, the disability picture at most showed 30 degrees forward flexion and bilateral rotation and 5 degrees extension and bilateral flexion with repeated use, which is consistent with the currently assigned rating. The evidence does not support a finding of the functional equivalent of unfavorable ankylosis. That is, there is no indication that he has findings consistent with this level of disability (thoracolumbar spine fixed in flexion or extension), such as difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision, breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration, gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen, or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. See General Rating Formula, Note (5). Therefore, the Board does not find that there is adequate pathology to support a higher rating based on functional impairment due to pain on motion or other factors.

The Board has also contemplated whether assigning a rating for IVDS is available. However, the evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes. See November 2022 VA Examination; VA Treatment Records.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he is entitled to a higher rating. Nonetheless, the Veteran is already in receipt of the highest rating available for a back disability in the absence of unfavorable ankylosis under the General Rating Formula. Since the probative medical evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's disability has been manifested by ankylosis or the functional equivalent thereof at any point during the pendency of the appeal, a higher rating under the General Rating Formula is not warranted, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82. Accordingly, the Veteran is not entitled to an increased evaluation in excess of 40 percent for his lumbosacral strain for the period on appeal.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran also seeks service connection for a thoracic (mid back) condition. He contends that he sustained injury to his mid back and low back while moving equipment on active duty. See March 2022 VA Examination. 

Upon review, the Board finds that additional development is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The record reflects that the Veteran has alleged his back pain as separate conditions involving the thoracic spine and the lumbosacral spine. See, e.g., November 2022 VA Examination. To this end, the Veteran submitted a new VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim in July 2022 for compression fracture of the T5 vertebra after he was granted service connection for lumbosacral strain in an April 2022 rating decision. He also requested higher-level review of the April 2022 rating decision for service connection of "chronic back pain," which he indicated as a different issue from the lumbosacral strain. See April VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review. 

However, the AOJ failed to properly adjudicate the issue of a thoracic condition and instead assessed the claim as one for increased evaluation of lumbosacral strain. See December 2022 Rating Decision.  While the AOJ did not list the Veteran's T5 spine disability as an issue in the most recent March 2024 rating decision, the narrative of the decision includes a decision of the issue and found that the compression fraction of the T5 vertebrae was not service connected in evaluation the back disability.  In essence, the AOJ made a determination on whether service connected was warranted for the T5 disability.  Since disabilities ratings for thoracic and lumbar spine disabilities are combined under the rating schedule, the Board will liberally construe the April 2024, notice of disagreement as encompassing both spinal segments.  Thus, the appeal of the denial of service connection for a thoracic spine disability is before the Board.    

Although the AOJ did obtain a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's diagnosed compression fracture T5 vertebral is due to his service, the opinion provided by the May 2023 VA examiner is inadequate. When VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). However, the May 2023 medical opinion did not address the Veteran's statements or contentions regarding the onset of his back conditions as they relate to his active duty service, and it was conclusory in nature with no rationale provided. 

Therefore, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain a new medical opinion based on a full reading of the medical record and consideration of the Veteran's statements of record. The rationale for the opinion must include a complete discussion of all potential factors so as to determine whether there is a relationship between the Veteran's current mid back disabilities and service.

Additionally, the Veteran explicitly raised the issue of entitlement to a TDIU when he filed the VA 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability form in November 2024. He listed the disabilities that prevented him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation as his service-connected lumbosacral strain and hypertension. The Board notes that although this TDIU claim has been adjudicated by the AOJ in March 2025 and the Veteran has failed to perfect an appeal on this issue, the TDIU claim remains on appeal as part and parcel of the Veteran's increased rating claim for his lumbosacral strain and service connection claim for his thoracic condition. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Moreover, because adjudication of the Veteran's service connection claim could impact his TDIU claim, the issue of TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the service connection claim on appeal. The appropriate remedy where a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with a claim currently on appeal is to remand the claim on appeal pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (claims "are inextricably linked together" where a favorable decision on one "could have a significant impact" on the other). Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an additional medical opinion from a suitably qualified VA examiner, addressing the likelihood of a relationship between the Veteran's mid back condition and his service. There is no need to schedule an additional examination of the Veteran unless the examiner concludes such is necessary.

The examiner is requested to review and address all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions. 

For each diagnosis identified or any functional impairment caused by mid back pain, the examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder manifested in service, was aggravated during active service, or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include any symptoms or events therein.

In providing this opinion, the examiner should address the Veteran's contention that he has separate conditions involving the lumbosacral spine and the thoracic spine that cause back pain as a result of his in-service injury. See, e.g., November 2022 VA Examination.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should discuss medically known or theoretical causes of any currently diagnosed disorder and describe how such a disorder generally presents or develops in most cases to determine the likelihood that the current disorder is related to in-service events as opposed to another cause.

A clear rationale for all opinions and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved should be provided.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Yang, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.