Citation Nr: A25030205
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-451349
DATE: April 2, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease (a lumbar spine disability).

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease (a lumbar spine disability) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from January 2004 to May 2009. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied entitlement to the benefits currently sought on appeal.

Following the June 2024 rating decision, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received after the June 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board has considered the recent holding by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (generally, the Board may not Decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later). In the Veteran's immediate case, a year has not yet passed from the time of the June 2024 rating decision on appeal. Having said that, neither the Veteran, nor his Attorney, have given any indication that they desire a docket switch. Furthermore, because the claim on appeal is being remanded for the reasons set forth below, the Board recognizes that a formal Decision is not being reached on the claim, and therefore the Veteran is not being denied any due process rights pursuant to Williams. To the contrary, by virtue of this remand, the Board is correcting a procedural error to assist in substantiating the claim. Thus, the Board will proceed accordingly.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease (a lumbar spine disability) is remanded.

The Veteran has claimed that his service-connected lumbar spine disability is worse than currently rated.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits.  38 U.S.C. § 1154 (a).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

By way of background, the Veteran submitted an Intent to File letter, which was received in November 2023. The Veteran subsequently submitted a claim for entitlement to service connection for a low back disability.

Following his claim, the Veteran was sent for a VA examination in January 2024. The Veteran was seen in person, and his claims file was reviewed. During the exam, the Veteran stated that he was stationed on several smaller ships while on active duty, which led to rocking of the ship in rough waters. The examiner noted that the current diagnosis of lumbar degeneration from his time in the Navy was "evidence of chronicity and a nexus has been established." They then opined that the Veteran's current diagnosis was at least as likely as not due to his active-duty service.

During this exam, the Veteran was also given a clinical evaluation to assess the current severity of his lumbar spine disability. The Veteran reported during the exam that he had "aching pain," that "becomes stabbing" if the Veteran did not stretch, or work out. The Veteran noted that he sees a chiropractor, and he is on a home exercise program. During the exam, the Veteran denied flare ups but reported that his "back will limit ambulation and movement." No further limitations on walking or movement were reported, despite the Veteran's lay statements. Upon clinical evaluation, the examiner denied that the Veteran had any loss of range of motion (ROM), insofar as he was "all normal." This was the case for active ROM, passive ROM, ROM after repetitive use, and after repeated use over time. Again, flare ups were denied, as were other symptoms such as guarding, muscle spasm, and additional factors (including disturbances of locomotion, less movement than normal, weakened movement, etc.) The only symptom that was noted by the examiner, despite the lay statements of the Veteran, was pain. In the final section of the examination report, the Veteran again noted "low back pain limits ambulation."

VAMC treatment notes from this period confirm that the Veteran regularly complains of low back pain and has at times complained of "numbness and tingling going down to both his legs and feet." The Veteran reported trying chiropractic services, massage therapy, stretching sessions, heating pads, cold packs, and low back epidural injections. See August 2023 VAMC treatment record.

In February 2024, the RO continued to deny the Veteran's service connection claim, despite the positive nexus opinion from January 2024.

The Veteran, through his Attorney, submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request - Higher Level Review in March 2024.

In June 2024, the RO then granted the Veteran entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability at 10 percent disabling, effective from November 2023, the date that VA received the Intent to File. The 10 percent disability rating was granted for the Veteran's reported pain, specifically.

The Veteran then submitted his NOD, appealing the current rating for the service-connected lumbar spine disability. The claim was placed on the Direct Review docket and is now before the Board.

As an initial matter, while the Veteran's only lay statements appear to stem from his VA examination in January 2024, those statements are still illustrative that his complaints may go beyond just pain. The Veteran complained of pain, but also difficulty with movement and ambulation. The Veteran's VAMC treatment records contain examples of the Veteran trying to seek relief in various ways, with everything from stretching and massage therapy, to epidural injections. He has also complained of potential neurological components, with numbness/tingling going down his legs. He is competent to report these symptoms, as well as what he experiences. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Despite this, the VA examiner from January 2024 found that the Veteran had no limited ROM whatsoever. The Veteran reported limited movement and that his lumbar spine disability impacted his ambulation, however even if any limited ROM were to be estimated, those estimated values were not provided. While a positive nexus opinion was provided, it is unclear to what extent the examiner considered the lay statements of the Veteran, especially those related to limited movement and ambulation. The Veteran also complained of numbness and tingling down his legs, however the portions of the examination report regarding an impact to his nerves were not addressed.

Regardless, the Veteran has essentially argued, through his lay statements and through his appeal seeking a higher disability rating itself, that the severity of his service-connected spine disability is worse than currently rated.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately remanding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

A new examination is appropriate when there is an assertion (and indication) of an increase in severity since the last examination. Palczewski v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 174, 181 (2007). Also, where the Veteran claims that a disability is worse than when originally rated, VA must provide a new examination. See Olsen v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 480, 482 (1992).

Here, the Board finds that because there is evidence that the Veteran's spine disability is worse than currently rated, and that the VA examination used to assign the current disability rating may have not fully considered the Veteran's competent lay statements, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred.

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected lumbar spine disability. See, Weggenmann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 281 (1993); see also, Snuffer v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 400 (1997) (a Veteran is entitled to a new examination where there is evidence that the condition may have worsened since the last examination).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination with an appropriate physician to assess the current severity of his service-connected lumbar spine disability. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this remand, should be made available for the clinician to review, and the reports should reflect that such review was accomplished. The clinician should consider the lay statements of the Veteran. The examiner is asked to:

(a.) determine the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability. The claims folder and this remand must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examination report must reflect that such a review was undertaken.

The examiner is reminded that the Veteran has provided lay statements regarding the pain associated with his low back disability, which at times includes a limitation of movement and ambulation, as well as possible numbness/tingling down his legs.

The examiner is to specifically test the range of motion in active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing, for the joint(s) in question and any paired joint(s). See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 170 (2016). The examiner should detail range of motion measurements, to include the degree at which he experiences pain, any additional impact caused by motion such as weakness and fatigability, incoordination, or swelling.

The examiner is to note a full and complete history of the Veteran's symptoms, to include symptoms associated with any flare-ups. Provide an opinion as to additional functional loss during flare-ups of the musculoskeletal disability, pursuant to DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). Should the examiner state that he or she is unable to offer such an opinion without resorting to speculation based on the fact that the examination was not performed during a flare, the examiner is directed to ascertain information as to the frequency, duration, characteristics, severity, or functional loss. Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

(Continue on next page.)

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the issue on appeal as noted above.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.