Citation Nr: A25030143
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-465375
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral flatfoot (pes planus) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from January 1983 to May 1998. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2024 rating decision by a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In an August 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran timely appealed the August 2024 rating decision and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for bilateral flatfoot (pes planus), any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board also recognizes the Court's decision in Williams v. McDonough, requiring the Board to afford the Veteran the opportunity to modify his docket election in the absence of a waiver of this right. 37 Vet. App. 305, 310 (2024). However, because the Board is remanding the claim, the Veteran is not prejudiced by the Board's expedient disposition prior to expiration of the time to request a docket switch.

Service connection for bilateral flatfoot (pes planus) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he developed bilateral pes planus with chronic foot pain due to participation in demanding road marches required as a drill sergeant, which included running on various surfaces and uneven terrain.

Service treatment records (STR) reflect a complaint of bilateral foot pain in the big toe area during service, and noted the pain was likely due to irritation from footwear. The Veteran reported this was the second occurrence of such foot pain and the prior incident improved with decreased activity. See 05/14/2015 STR-Medical, p. 24 (12/15/1983 STR). The Veteran's entry, re-enlistment, and discharge examinations reflect no foot troubles. See id., pp. 51, 55 (03/09/1998), p. 96 (02/22/1993), p. 98 (08/14/1980), pp. 101-102 (10/06/1982). Treatment records post-service do not reflect any complaints of foot pain or problems.

A May 2024 VA examination reflected a diagnosis of bilateral flatfoot (pes planus). The Veteran reported onset of pain in his arches and heels in service due to marching in boots, for which he sought treatment a few times during service. He denied any treatment after service. Symptoms endorsed were tingling in the balls of both feet and tenderness at the heels, which he self-treated with Tylenol. The Veteran reported inability to play sports and trouble walking, as well as pain in both feet at his job when walking on hard floors. Severe flareups were reported weekly lasting three to five hours, precipitated by unknown factors. The examiner noted pain accentuated on use and manipulation of both feet and no swelling on use. Functional losses of pain and interference with standing were noted.

A May 2024 Gulf War examination identified foot conditions, including flatfoot (pes planus).

In May 2024, the VA examiner provided a Gulf War opinion and medical opinion for toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) with respect to the Veteran's right foot pes planus. The examiner noted a claim for service connection for right pes planus based upon claimed exposure to Gulf War oil well fire smoke. The examiner was requested to provide a medical statement with supporting rationale explaining whether the Veteran's claimed disability of right pes planus was: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology (MUCMI); (3) a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology; or (4) a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis. The examiner found that the Veteran's right pes planus constituted a disease with a clear and specific etiology, providing a rationale, etiology and pathophysiology that pes planus can either be congenital or acquired, with a general explanation of both scenarios. The examiner opined that the claimed right pes planus was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's indicated TERA's. The examiner reasoned there was no evidence connecting the toxic exposures and the Veteran's right pes planus condition. No TERA opinion was given with respect to left pes planus. No opinion was provided with respect to direct service connection for pes planus of either foot.

The Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error exists. The Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on the issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral flatfoot (pes planus) because no VA examiner has opined whether the claimed condition is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including participation in road marches during service on various surfaces and uneven terrain. As such, a remand is warranted for a medical opinion addressing direct service connection.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an opinion from a VA examiner regarding whether the Veteran's bilateral flatfoot (pes planus) is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including participation in road marches during service.

Provide a rationale to support the opinion. 

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brown, Janet A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.