Citation Nr: A25030814
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230921-378692
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating above 70 percent of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is DENIED.

Entitlement to an increased rating above 40 percent of traumatic brain injury (TBI) is DENIED.

Entitlement to a compensable rating prior to April 13, 2021, of migraine headaches is DENIED.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 50 percent since April 13, 2021, of migraine headaches is GRANTED.

Entitlement to an increased rating above 30 percent of asthma is DENIED.

Entitlement to an increased rating above 10 percent of lumbosacral strain is DENIED.

Entitlement to an increased rating above 10 percent of right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and lateral collateral ligament (LCL) sprain is DENIED.

Entitlement to an increased rating above 10 percent of dyshidrotic eczema is DENIED.

Entitlement to a compensable rating of allergic rhinitis is DENIED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 10 percent rating of lumbosacral strain is DISMISSED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 10 percent rating of right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain is DISMISSED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 10 percent rating of dyshidrotic eczema is DISMISSED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 6, 2020, but no earlier, for the 

70 percent rating of PTSD is GRANTED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of April 13, 2021, but no earlier, for the grant of service connection for TBI is GRANTED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of April 13, 2021, but no earlier, for the 

50 percent rating of migraine headaches is GRANTED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 20, 2022, but no earlier, for the 

30 percent rating of asthma is GRANTED.

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating of right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy is REMANDED.

Entitlement to an increased rating of left foot toe fracture is REMANDED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy is REMANDED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date left foot toe fracture is REMANDED.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance based on permanent and total disability status is REMANDED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran's TBI is manifest by a complaint of mild loss of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing; occasionally inappropriate social interaction; occasional disorientation to person, time, place, or situation; moderately impaired visual spatial orientation; three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work, instrumental activities of daily living, or work, family, or other close relationships; one or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace or social interaction, or both, but do not preclude them; and an inability to communicate either by spoken or written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time, or to comprehend spoken or written language, or both more than occasionally but less than half of the time, but she can generally communicate complex ideas.

3. Prior to July 7, 2020, the Veteran experienced migraines with less frequent attacks.  The migraines did not manifest in characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months.

4. Since July 7, 2020, the Veteran experienced migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

5. The Veteran's asthma did not more closely match a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV-1) of 40 to 55 percent of predicted value; or a forced expiratory volume in one second to forced vital capacity (FEV-1/FVC) of 40 to 55 percent; or at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations; or, intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

6. The Veteran's lumbosacral strain manifested in a limitation of flexion to at least 

70 degrees.

7. The Veteran's right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain manifested by a limitation of flexion to 120 degrees without nonunion or malunion of the tibia and fibula or loose motion that required brace.

8. The Veteran's dyshidrotic eczema manifested in characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected.

9. The Veteran's allergic rhinitis manifested in nasal congestion, but there was less than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides and less than complete obstruction of either side with no polyps.

10. In June 2019, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), among other decisions, granted service connection for PTSD with TBI (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances) with a 50 percent rating, asthma with a 10 percent rating, lumbosacral strain with a 10 percent rating, psoriasis (claimed as eczema) with a 10 percent rating, and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain with a 10 percent rating, and migraine headaches with a 10 percent rating, all effective December 7, 2018.  

11. No appeal or additional evidence was received from the Veteran or an authorized representative within one year of the notice of the June 2019 AOJ decision, and the decision became final.

12. On April 5, 2021, a new claim was received for increased ratings, including for lumbosacral strain, migraine headaches, asthma, and allergic rhinitis.  These claims have been continuously pursued ever since.

13. On April 13, 2021, a new claim was received for increased ratings, including for psoriasis (claimed as eczema), right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, and PTSD with TBI (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances).  These claims have been continuously pursued ever since.

14. In July 2021, the AOJ denied an increased ratings of asthma, lumbosacral strain, allergic rhinitis, and migraine headaches.

15. In August 2021, the AOJ denied increased ratings of PTSD with TBI (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances), psoriasis (claimed as eczema), and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.

16. In July 2022, a supplemental claim was received, including for increased ratings for PTSD with TBI, psoriasis, right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, asthma, allergic rhinitis, migraine headaches, and lumbosacral strain.

17. In September 2022, the AOJ granted increased ratings from 50 to 70 percent for PTSD, 10 to 30 percent for asthma, 0 to 30 percent for migraine headaches, all effective July 7, 2022; granted a separate 40 percent rating for TBI, effective July 7, 2022; and denied increased ratings for dyshidrotic eczema (previously rated as psoriasis), lumbosacral strain, and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, and allergic rhinitis.

18. In September 2023, the Veteran's Board Appeal was received, including for increased ratings of PTSD, asthma, migraine headaches, TBI, dyshidrotic eczema (previously rated as psoriasis), lumbosacral strain, and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, and allergic rhinitis and earlier effective date for the grant of service connection of TBI.  With this appeal, the Veteran's authorized representative also submitted arguments, including in favor of earlier effective dates for PTSD, asthma, migraine headaches, dyshidrotic eczema, lumbosacral strain, right leg stress fracture, and allergic rhinitis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are not met for a rating more than 70 percent for PTSD.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 

(DC) 9411.

2. The criteria are not met for a rating more than 40 percent for TBI.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, 4.130, DC 8045.

3. Prior to April 13, 2021, the criteria are not met for a compensable rating for migraines.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8100.

4. Since April 13, 2021, the criteria are met for a 50 percent rating for migraines.  

38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8100.

5. The criteria are not met for a rating more than 30 percent for asthma.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.31, 4.97, DC 6602.

6. The criteria are not met for a rating more than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5237.

7. The criteria are not met for a rating more than 10 percent for right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5299-5262.

8. The criteria are not met for a rating more than 10 percent for dyshidrotic eczema.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, DC 7806.

9. The criteria are not met for a compensable rating of allergic rhinitis. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.321, 4.97, DC 6502.

10. The Board dismisses the Veteran's appeal for an earlier effective date for an increased rating of lumbosacral strain because it failed to identify the specific issue with which the Veteran disagrees.  There was no increase during the period on appeal and therefore no effective date of any such increase to appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.

11. The Board dismisses the Veteran's appeal for an earlier effective date for an increased rating of right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain because it failed to identify the specific issue with which the Veteran disagrees.  There was no increase during the period on appeal and therefore no effective date of any such increase to appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.

12. The Board dismisses the Veteran's appeal for an earlier effective date for an increased rating of dyshidrotic eczema because it failed to identify the specific issue with which the Veteran disagrees.  There was no increase during the period on appeal and therefore no effective date of any such increase to appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.

13. The criteria are met for an effective date of May 6, 2020, but no earlier, for the 70 percent rating of PTSD.? 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400, 3.2500.

14. The criteria are met for an effective date of April 13, 2021, but no earlier, for the grant of service connection for TBI.? 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400, 3.2500.

15. The criteria are met for an effective date of April 13, 2021, but no earlier, for the 50 percent rating of migraine headaches.? 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400, 3.2500.

16. The criteria are met for an effective date of May 20, 2022, but no earlier, for the 30 percent rating of asthma.? 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400, 3.2500.

PROCEDURAL AND FACTUAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 2013 to December 2018.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system governs procedure.  

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  

38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of increased ratings and earlier effective dates of right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and left foot toe fracture, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Earlier Effective for the 70 Percent Rating of PTSD

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the September 2022 decision on entitlement to an increased rating of PTSD.  In October 2022, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior September 2022 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 decision.

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

I

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged" rating is required.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).  Adjudicators must consider whether to assign different ratings at different times during the rating period to compensate the Veteran for times when the disability may have been more severe than at others.  The Court since has extended this practice even to established ratings, not just initial ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; however, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative of the symptomatology of the other condition.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

A.	Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder

Legal Criteria

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Material Facts

In April 2024, a VA primary care physician adjusted the Veteran's depression medication.

On May 6, 2020, the Veteran called the Veterans Crisis Line.  She endorsed suicidal ideation with undetermined plan or intent.  She described herself as hopeless and not wanting to be here.

In October 2020, the Veteran was hospitalized at a VA medical center for a week after a suicide attempt.  On admission, her speech had limited spontaneity and was slurred and soft, anxiety "all the time," "poor" impulse control, difficulty adjusting to a new location after moving, and relationship problems.  After discharge, she rated her depression zero out of ten and anxiety three out of ten but struggled to communicate just how much she was suffering prior to her suicide attempt.  She reported that she wanted to improve her communication and learn how to handle stress and social interactions.  Her hygiene was reported to be "good."

November 2020 VA screening showed minimal anxiety and depression.  She presented alert and oriented for person, time, and place.  Her manner was calm and cooperative.  Her speech was somewhat slowed, but goal-directed and appropriate.  There was no evidence of pressured speech.  There was no evidence of thought disorder.  She reported her mood as depressed.  Her affect was restricted but appropriate.  She denied any hallucinations.  No delusions or paranoia were noted.  Her insight was fair and judgment and impulse control were good.  Cognition and memory appeared grossly intact.  She denied current suicidal thoughts.  She reported experiencing restlessness at times, feeling depressed, appetite issues, feeling tired, and worrying at times.  She reported that medication was helping reduce her symptoms of depression.

Between January and March 2021, her appearance was appropriate, grooming good, attitude or behavior cooperative, and her mood content.  She was alert and oriented.  Her thought processes were logical, and her judgment and insight were good.  Her speech was regular and attention grossly intact.  Her memory was also intact, but not formally tested.  

The Veteran's increased rating claim was received on April 13, 2021.  In July 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed PTSD and TBI and was unable to differentiate symptoms between the two.  The VA examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran reported depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  The Veteran presented casually dressed, grooming fair, mood appropriate to situation, affect commensurate with mood.  Her thought process was linear and content appropriate.  Her attention or concentration was intact.  She had no suicidal or homicidal thoughts.

A December 2021 mental status examination showed that her appearance was appropriate, grooming good, attitude or behavior cooperative, and her mood content.  She was alert and oriented.  Her thought processes were logical, and her judgment and insight were good.  Her suicide risk was assessed to be low, and she was removed from a high-risk list.

A May 2022 screen was positive for depression.  A June 2022 mental status examination showed no psychomotor slowing or activation.  Her appearance was appropriately groomed, dressed, and nourished.  She had adequate personal hygiene.  There was no acute distress.  She was oriented to person, place, time, and circumstance.  Her speech was clear with normal rate, rhythm, and tone and not pressured. Her mood was "okay."  Her affect was dysthymic.  Her thought process was coherent, relevant, logical, and goal-directed with no loose associations.  There were no thought disorders.  She denied suicidal and homicidal thoughts, hallucinations, and delusions.  She had fair insight and judgment.  

In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed PTSD.  The Veteran found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  The Veteran's PTSD symptoms included depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  The Veteran was alert and cooperative.  She was approximately oriented, thinking it was the first instead of the second of September.  Her affect was constricted.  Her mood was somber or anxious.

Analysis

The Veteran contends entitlement to a rating higher than 50 percent prior to July 7, 2022.  The Board agrees; the Veteran is entitled to a 70 percent rating during this period (see Analysis section of the Decision below on the separate issue of the effective date of the current 70 percent rating of this disability).

The issue in this appeal then is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.  The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating since May 6, 2020.

VA and private treatment records, the July 2021 and September 2022 VA examination reports, and the Veteran's lay statements show that the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating (suicidal ideation; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene).

The Veteran expressed suicidal ideation, which is like persistent danger of self-harm, which is contemplated by the 100 percent criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017).  However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not risen to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating.  The Veteran regularly denied thoughts, intent, or a plan involving self-harm in existing treatment records, and during the July 2021 VA examination.  In December 2021, a VA psychologist had assessed that the suicide risk was low and removed her from a high-risk list.

The Board also finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms more closely matches the level associated with a 70 percent rating.  The Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity with deficiencies in most areas.  

Further, the Veteran was not totally occupational or socially impaired.  While October 2020 VA treatment records show the Veteran reported perceived isolation and relational distress, subsequent treatment records contain reports that the Veteran was maintaining relations with her spouse and father-in-law.  Furthermore, she appeared to be actively working as a wastewater operator for a local government office.

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 100 percent rating.  The criteria for a 100 percent or higher rating are not met.  The appeal is denied.

B.	Traumatic Brain Injury

Legal Criteria

Traumatic brain injuries are evaluated under DC 8045.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  There are three main areas of dysfunction listed that may result from TBI and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after TBI), emotional or behavioral, and physical.  Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation. 

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive.  Not all these brain functions may be affected in everyone with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others.  Symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day.  Cognitive impairment is evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of TBI or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  They are evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" whether they are part of cognitive impairment.  However, a rater is to separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another DC, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table. 

Emotional/behavioral dysfunction is evaluated under § 4.130 (Schedule of ratings--mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, evaluate emotional/behavioral symptoms under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 

Physical (including neurological) dysfunction is evaluated based on the following list, under an appropriate DC: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  

The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of TBI.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  Residuals not listed above that are reported on an examination are evaluated under the most appropriate DC.  Each condition is to be evaluated separately if the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation and combined under § 4.25 for each separately rated condition.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  The evaluation assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations. 

The need for special monthly compensation is considered for such problems as loss of use of an extremity, certain sensory impairments, erectile dysfunction, the need for aid and attendance (including for protection from hazards or dangers incident to the daily environment due to cognitive impairment), being housebound, etc.  

38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  

The table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" contains 10 important facets of TBI related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total."  However, not every facet has every level of severity.  The Consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.  Assign a 100-percent evaluation if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets.  If no facet is evaluated as "total," assign the overall percentage evaluation based on the level of the highest facet as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent.  For example, assign a 70 percent evaluation if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet. 

Note (1) to DC 8045 states: There may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another DC. In such cases, do not assign more than one evaluation based on the same manifestations. If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated, assign a single evaluation under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions. However, if the manifestations are clearly separable, assign a separate evaluation for each condition. 

Note (2) to DC 8045 states: Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present to assign a particular evaluation. 

Note (3) to DC 8045 states: "Instrumental activities of daily living" refers to activities other than self-care that are needed for independent living, such as meal preparation, doing housework and other chores, shopping, traveling, doing laundry, being responsible for one's own medications, and using a telephone.  These activities are distinguished from "Activities of daily living," which refers to basic self-care and includes bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out of bed or a chair, and using the toilet. 

Note (4) to DC 8045 states: The terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" TBI, which may appear in medical records, refer to a classification of TBI made at, or close to, the time of injury rather than to the current level of functioning.  This classification does not affect the rating assigned under DC 8045.

Material Facts

In August 2020, after a fall at work, the Veteran denied hitting her head or any loss of consciousness.  During her October 2020 mental health hospitalization, the Veteran's memory and cognition appeared "intact."  The Veteran had psychomotor retardation on admission, but her behavior remained cooperative.  Her judgement and concentration or attention improved from poor to good but was not formally tested.  She interacted with staff and was "pleasant" in her interactions in group therapy.  The Veteran reported feeling like the source of much of her relationship trouble was her inability to communicate effectively with her spouse and that it was her fault. "It's my fault, I'm a poor communicator . . . .  I got to overthinking it and drank more . . . and took the pill . . . ."  After discharge, she listed "improved communication and learning how to handle stress and social interactions" as some of her treatment goals.  She reported that she was struggling to communicate just how much she was suffering prior to her suicide attempt.  She reported that, "I just want to do my work and be left alone . . . . I don't want to interact with others; it makes me nervous but I try to hide it and just smile." 

 In November 2020, the Veteran's cognition, memory, and attention appeared "grossly intact."  She had no psychomotor agitation or retardation, tremor, or tics.  In January 2021, her memory was "intact per eval but not formally tested."  Her attention was "grossly intact." Between January and December 2021, her judgement was "good."  She reported that she and her spouse had discussed how they met people, socialized, and played a game.  She was oriented to person, place, time, and situation during the period on appeal.  In March 2021, the Veteran and her spouse were developing insights around how the couple managed frustrations and how they could work from not sweeping things under the rug to communicating about them.

The Veteran's increased rating claim was received on April 13, 2021.  In August 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed TBI.  The Veteran reported that his condition had progressed or worsened since 2016.  Assessment of facets of TBI-related cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms of TBI are addressed below.  The VA examiner found no functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work.  The VA examiner remarked that it was "not possible to determine the contributor whether TBI or PTSD although the memory and cognitive concerns are more likely related to TBI."

In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed TBI.  Assessment of facets of TBI-related cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms of TBI are addressed below.  The VA examiner expected that the Veteran's TBI caused "mild occupational impairment depending upon the demands of the job."  The VA examiner remarked that some of the facet abnormalities previously associated with the traumatic brain injury were less likely than not associated with the traumatic brain injury and more likely than not associated with her PTSD only.  The VA examiner remarked that that the Veteran's migraine headaches were not posttraumatic type but began before she experienced the traumatic brain injury, although while on active duty.

Analysis

The Veteran seeks a higher rating of her TBI disability, currently rated at 40 percent.  

When evaluating possibly comorbid symptoms, or symptoms that may overlap between both the veteran's TBI and other service-connected disabilities, the Board follows a five-step process.  Step one is to rate any distinct comorbid conditions under their appropriate DC.  Step two is to identify which comorbid conditions overlap with TBI residuals.  Step three is to determine the rating under DC 8045 for all TBI residuals not rated under step one.  Step four is to determine the rating for the overlapping comorbid condition under appropriate DC and the rating for the remaining TBI residuals under DC 8045.  Step five is to "assign a single evaluation on whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired function due to both conditions."  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045, Note (1).

At step one, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD is a distinct comorbid condition and has already rated it separately (see above).  The VA examiner also remarked that her headaches were also distinct and were already rated separately (see below) prior to the period on appeal.

The Board moves to step two.  The Board finds that the manifestations of her TBI can be clearly separated from her PTSD.  The September 2022 VA examiner made this medical finding.  As noted above, the September 2022 VA examiner remarked that some of the facet abnormalities (specifically Facets 1, 3, and 8 below) previously associated with the traumatic brain injury were less likely than not associated with the traumatic brain injury and more likely than not associated with her PTSD only.  Since the manifestations are clearly separable, the Board has assigned a separate evaluation for each distinct condition (PTSD above, TBI here, and for migraine headaches below).

The Board rates the Veteran's TBI as a distinct condition.  The August 2021 VA examiner assigned a "2" rating in the categories of Subjective symptoms; Communication; "1" rating in the categories of Memory, attention, concentration, executive functions; Social interactions; Visual spatial orientation; Neurobehavioral effects with no "total" ratings.  

The September 2022 VA examiner assigned a "2" rating in the categories of Visual spatial orientation; Subjective symptoms; Communication; "1" rating in the categories of Memory, attention, concentration, executive functions; and Orientation with no "total" ratings.  The Board finds that the September 2022 examination, although a snapshot in time of the Veteran's level of functioning, represents the best evidence of the severity of the Veteran's TBI symptoms during the period on appeal because the VA examiner, a psychiatrist, was able to differentiate the Veteran's TBI symptoms from her PTSD symptoms.  Therefore, for this period, "2" being the highest of all facet ratings, the appropriate rating is 40 percent.  A review of the medical record is consistent with the criteria for this rating.

Facet 1 for rating TBI residuals is "Memory, attention, concentration, and executive functions."  A severity level of "1" is assigned.  Both the August 2021 and September 2022 VA examiners found that the Veteran had a "complaint of mild memory loss (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing."  With the notable exception of his week-long mental health hospitalization, the Veteran's memory, attention, concentration, and cognition were noted to be "good" or "intact" in his VA treatment records.  

The September 2022 VA examiner remarked that this facet abnormalities were more likely than not associated with her PTSD only.  The Board cannot, in making its decisions, assert its own medical opinion.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991).  As there no evidence of objective evidence on testing of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment, a level of impairment greater than "1" is not warranted.

For Facet 2, a severity level of "1" is assigned for the "Judgment."  Both the August 2021 and September 2022 VA examiners found that the Veteran had a "Normal" judgment.  With the notable exception of his week-long mental health hospitalization, his judgment was noted to be "good" in his VA treatment records during the period at issue.  The Board is persuaded by the evidence that the Veteran's judgment has not been shown to be more than mildly impaired judgment or, for complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally inability to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, a level of impairment greater than "1" is not warranted.

For Facet 3, a severity level of "0" is assigned for the "Social interaction."  The August 2021 VA examiner found that the Veteran had "occasionally inappropriate" social interactions.  The September 2022 VA examiner, however, remarked that this facet's abnormalities were more likely than not associated with her PTSD only.  The Board cannot, in making its decisions, assert its own medical opinion.  Colvin, 1 Vet. App. at 175.  A higher level of severity than "0" for social interaction is not warranted.

For Facet 4, a severity level of "1" is assigned for the "Orientation."  The September 2022 VA examiners found that the Veteran was "Occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation."  A review of the record consistently showed that the Veteran was oriented.  As the Veteran has not been more than occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects of orientation during this period, a higher level of severity than "1" for the orientation facet is not warranted.

For Facet 5, a severity level of "1" is assigned for the "Motor activity."  Both the August 2021 and September 2022 VA examiners found that the Veteran had a "Normal" motor activity.  A review of the evidence showed one instance of psychomotor activity retardation upon admission for mental health hospitalization for a week.  As the Veteran's motor activity has been shown to be normal most of the time, but mildly slowed once, a level of impairment greater than "1" is not warranted.

For Facet 6, a severity level of "2" is assigned for the "Visual spatial orientation."  The August 2021 VA examiner found that the Veteran's visual spatial orientation "Mildly impaired."  The September 2022 VA examiner found the Veteran's visual spatial orientation "Moderately impaired."  As the Veteran's visual spatial orientation has not been shown to be more than moderately impaired during this period, a level of impairment greater than "2" is not warranted.

For Facet 7, a severity level of "2" is assigned for the "Subjective symptoms."  Both the August 2021 and September 2022 VA examiners found that the Veteran had "Three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family or other close relationships" (insomnia, hypersensitive to sound and light, anxiety).  As there was no indication that the Veteran's subjective symptoms more than mildly interfered with work during this period, a level of impairment greater than "2" is not warranted.

For Facet 8, a severity level of "0" is assigned for the "Neurobehavioral effects."  The August 2021 VA examiner found that the Veteran had "One or more neurobehavioral effects that do not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction."  The September 2022 VA examiner, however, remarked that this facet's abnormalities were more likely than not associated with her PTSD only.  The Board cannot, in making its decisions, assert its own medical opinion.  Colvin, 1 Vet. App. at 175.  A higher level of severity than "0" for neurobehavioral effects is not warranted.

For Facet 9, a severity level of "2" is assigned for the "Communication."  The September 2022 VA examiner found the Veteran's had an "Inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time.  Can generally communicate complex ideas.  The September 2022 VA examiner explained that "Since the traumatic brain injury she has noticed she has difficulty        formulating her thoughts clearly, understanding complex concepts be        expressed by others, naming objects, etc."  A review of the record did not show any other deficits in this area.  Therefore, a level of impairment greater than "2" is not warranted.

For Facet 10, during this period, the evidence did not indicate that the Veteran experienced a persistently altered state of consciousness, such as a vegetative state, minimally responsive state, or coma.  There was no evidence of this on mental status examinations throughout the period on appeal.  Therefore, she does not meet the criteria for a total disability rating due to her state of consciousness.

During this period, the highest assessed score of "2" of all the TBI facets would warrant no higher than a 40 percent rating of the Veteran's TBI under DC 8045.  The Board is persuaded by the evidence of record that the Veteran's TBI symptoms most closely matches the criteria of this rating.  The appeal is denied.

C.	Migraine Headaches

Legal Criteria

Migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, DC 8100, for migraine.  Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under DC 8100.

The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30?Vet. App.?245, 252 (2018).  This renders 38?C.F.R. §§?4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  

The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  

Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, regarding severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46 (2004).

Material Facts

In April 2020, the Veteran reported that, since starting Topamax, her migraines had "improved drastically."  Her doctor noted that, previously, the Veteran had reported medical history of having migraines every day that lasted a few hours for which she he took two Advil.  She used to drink coffee heavily, but she has not had coffee for two weeks.  She slept seven hours unless she had low back pain.  She had endorsed phonophobia, but not photophobia.  She denied any visual disturbances.  Her migraines were located behind her eyes, and on the left side, it was sensitive to the touch.  She usually had a pulsation behind her eye and tearing of her eyes before it starts.  In August 2020, she reported that she had discontinued the Topamax as her migraines had "resolved."  She denied headaches at VA treatment visits in August 2020 and while hospitalized in October 2020.  She took acetaminophen for pain if needed, but still was not on any prescribed medications.

The Veteran's increased rating claim was received on April 13, 2021.  In June 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed migraine including migraine variants.  The Veteran reported that his condition had progressed or worsened since its onset in 2016.  She reported current symptoms of daily frontal headaches and bilateral eye pain with no treatment, medication, or surgery.  She reported pain localized to one side of the head (frontal over brow and both eyes hurt), nausea, sensitivity to light, and lasted less than one day.  

The VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain or very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines or non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Regarding the impact on her ability to work, the VA examiner found that, with occasional severe headaches, the Veteran would call out for work or leave early from work to go home and rest.

In May 2022, she reported frontal headaches and described them as "better."

The Veteran's supplemental claim was received on July 7, 2022.  In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed migraine including migraine variants.  The Veteran reported that she had been having more frequent episodes of severe pain.  She had a daily mild to moderate headache.  Several times per month she had difficulty with incapacitating headache lasting at least a few hours.  She had been prescribed medication in the past, but it had not been effective.  Her headaches were predominantly either frontal or on the right side.  Her symptoms included constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain localized to one side of the head, and pain that worsened with physical activity.  She also had nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light and sound, and changes in vision.  

The VA examiner found that the Veteran did have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain. The VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines or non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Regarding the impact on her ability to work, however, the VA examiner found that the Veteran had an incapacitating headache anywhere from one to four times per month.  She needed "to be out of work or, at best, is showing major impairment of occupational efficiency, at least a few days per month."

Analysis

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating.  Her representative contended that the Veteran's headaches were very frequent, completely prostrating, prolonged, and produced severe economic inadaptability.

The Veteran is competent to report readily observable symptoms.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  And the Board find's her account credible. 

Prior to April 13, 2021

Prior to April 13, 2021, the Board concludes that the Veteran's migraine headaches had occurred with less frequent attacks during the appeal period, corresponding to the criteria for a noncompensable rating under DC 8100.  

A compensable rating under DC 8100 is not warranted unless there are migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months.  Considering all relevant evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraine headaches, while occurring as frequently as daily prior to August 2020, did not show that she had characteristic prostrating attacks prior to April 13, 2021.  In fact, the Veteran reported that in August 2020 she stopped medication because her migraines had "resolved."  Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran's migraine headaches most closely match the criteria for a noncompensable rating under DC 8100.  

Thus, the Board concludes that the Veteran's migraines did not occur with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months at any time prior to April 13, 2021.  The evidence tends to show that the Veteran's headaches had resolved.  A compensable rating under DC 8100 is not warranted for this period.  The appeal is denied.

Since April 13, 2021

The Board concludes that the Veteran has had migraine headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, corresponding to the criteria for a 50 percent rating under DC 8100.  

Considering all relevant evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraine headaches produced severe economic inadaptability.  

In June 2021, the Veteran reported daily headaches, indicating as increase in frequency since August 2020 when she had reported that her headaches had "resolved" and she stopped taking medication for her headaches.  The June 2021 VA examiner found that "With occasional severe headaches, veteran will call out for work or leave early from work to go home and rest."  This evidence is relevant to evaluating whether the Veteran's migraine headache attacks might have produced severe economic inadaptability because she was missing work.  Unfortunately, the VA examiner did not quantify how often "occasional" meant.  The Board turns to the most recent VA examination of record for this information.

The September 2022 VA examiner found that that the Veteran had an incapacitating headache anywhere from one to four times per month.  The VA examiner explained that she would miss work during these times or, at best, would show "major impairment of occupational efficiency, at least a few days per month."  Accordingly, the Board concludes that, as of September 2022, the Veteran had migraine headache attacks were frequent, prostrating, and prolonged enough to produce severe economic inadaptability, corresponding to the criteria for a 50 percent rating under DC 8100.  The Board gives the Veteran the benefit of the doubt that the Veteran's attacks were similarly as frequent on April 13, 2021, when her claim was received, because the June 2021 VA examiner did not otherwise quantify how often the Veteran might call out for work or leave early from work.

A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under DC 8100.  The appeal is granted.

D.	Allergic Rhinitis

Legal Criteria

Under DC 6522, a 10 percent disability rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for rhinitis with polyps.

In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent rating for a diagnostic code, a zero percent rating will be assigned when the requirements for a compensable rating are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Material Facts

In August 2020, the Veteran denied nasal congestion or drainage at a VA emergency care visit after falling at work.  In October 2020, she reported nasal congestion one time during her week-long mental health hospitalization (see above).

In June 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran reported symptoms of intermittent runny nose and itching eyes that have stayed the same since 2019 and treatment with over-the-counter allergy medication.  Physical examination showed that there was no greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis, complete obstruction on either side, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, nasal polyps, or any granulomatous conditions.  The VA examiner found that there was no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran reported that she used fluticasone nasal spray but not every day.  She reported that even with using this medication her right nostril always felt closed.  "I always feel like my nostrils are dirty."  Her eyes feel itchy, and nose was "very irritated from rubbing it all day."  She also had a "drip that I constantly have to clear up."  She also used saline washes about every four days or at least once a week.  She also took Zyrtec every day that she went to work.  Physical examination showed that there was no greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis, complete obstruction on either side, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, nasal polyps, or any granulomatous conditions.  Regarding impact on the Veteran's ability to work, the VA examiner wrote that the Veteran had "just started work six months ago at [a local government] as a wastewater operator.  Her job required outside work.  Most of the time she was inside monitoring a computer screen.  She said her nose gets stuffy because there was lots of dust and ash outside.  She used her nasal spray.

Analysis

The Veteran is service connected for rhinitis with an initial rating of 0 percent, effective April 1, 2021.  The Veteran contends her service-connected rhinitis warrants an initial higher rating than is currently assigned under DC 6522.

After careful review of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for a compensable evaluation under DC 6522 have not been met.  The Veteran's symptoms have included running nose, itchy eyes, headaches, and nasal congestion.  According to the March 2021 and 2022 VA examination, she does not have nasal passage obstruction greater than 50 percent on both sides, complete obstruction of either side, permanent hypertrophy, polyps, or granulomatous conditions.

The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all diagnostic codes that are potentially applicable when evaluating the Veteran's rhinitis.  Scharfrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 593 (1991).  However, the Veteran has been diagnosed with, and is in receipt of service connection for, rhinitis, a condition that is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule.  Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015 ("When a condition is specifically listed in the Schedule, it may not be rated by analogy").  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's rhinitis is appropriately rated as noncompensable.  The appeal is denied.

E.	Asthma

Legal Criteria

Under DC 6602, a 10 percent rating for bronchial asthma is warranted for FEV-1 of 71 to 80-percent predicted; or FEV-1/FVC of 71 to 80 percent; or intermittent inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of 56 to 70 percent predicted, or FEV- 1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, or daily inhalation or oral bronchodilator therapy, or inhalation anti-inflammatory medication.

A 60 percent rating is provided where there is FEV-1 of 40 to 55-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of less than 40 percent predicted; or FEV-1/FVC of less than 40 percent; or more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure; or the requirement of daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immunosuppressive medications.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6602.

When entitlement or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination, or reexamination, action shall be taken in accordance with paragraph (b) or (c) of this section as appropriate.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).  When the examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a supplemental claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  Id. at 3.655(b).

Material Facts

In October 2020, the Veteran denied have a cough, shortness of breath, wheezing, or hemoptysis.  She reportedly quit smoking because of her asthma.

In June 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed asthma.  The Veteran reported her current symptoms as chest tightness with shortness of breath that she treated with an inhaler as needed.  Pre-bronchodilator testing showed that FVC was 88 percent predicted, FEV-1 was 90 percent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC was 81 percent.  Post-bronchodilator testing showed that FVC was 88 percent predicted, FEV-1 was 96 percent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC was 86 percent.  The VA examiner found no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

In May 2022, she reported that she had a history of asthma.  In July 2022, a VA physician assessed that the Veteran's asthma was stable on maintenance inhaler with albuterol use as needed and should continue with this treatment plan.

In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed asthma.  The Veteran reported a daily inhaler (Advair).  She also had albuterol inhaler for use as needed.  She was diagnosed with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID) in January 2022.  She reportedly had more severe breathing problems then.  She went to an emergency room but was not hospitalized overnight.  She had an asthma attack as well as having COVID.  That was the only time she had to see a medical provider for her asthma in the previous 12 months.  

The VA examiner determined that pulmonary function testing must be performed, but her laboratory testing was cancelled because the Veteran failed to respond to mandated scheduling effort.  A review of the record showed that the neither the Veteran nor her authorized representative offered any cause for failing to respond to the effort to schedule an appointment for necessary pulmonary function testing.  

Regarding the impact on the Veteran's ability to work, the VA examiner wrote that. from time to time, she had to climb a lot of stairs at work (current job), and she had to take out her inhaler and use it.  She also must go into the "sludge area" and always had tightness in her chest.  After this she went to her office and used her inhaler.  The sludge area duty is on a three-week cycle.  Three weeks of sludge area and three weeks off sludge duty.  So, she had respite from the inhaler use when not in the sludge area for the next three weeks.

Analysis

The Veteran has continuously pursued her increased rating since April 5, 2021.  The September 2022 VA examiner determined that pulmonary function testing was necessary.  The Veteran's laboratory appointment was cancelled because she failed to respond to a mandated scheduling effort.  A review of the record did not show that either the Veteran or her authorized representative offered any good cause for failing to respond to the effort to schedule an appointment for the necessary pulmonary function testing.  The claim is denied because the Veteran failed to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with her claim for increase.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

F.	Lumbosacral Strain

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237.  Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 

10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. 

 A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 

60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  

A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code.  Id.  at Note 1.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flareups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  

Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

Material Facts

In April 2020, the Veteran reported constant or chronic eight out of ten low stabbing to aching back pain into right leg.  She reported that she was overly sedated with duloxetine, and it did not improve her low back pain.  She used to receive lidocaine patches which improved her symptoms but has not been able to have them approved.  She was currently using nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and duloxetine.  She had pain down the right lower extremity every day.  She worked at a warehouse and the end of the day was painful.  She used Lidocaine cream without relief.  She denied fecal and urinary incontinence.  Her primary care physician at VA prescribed nortriptyline and topical lidocaine cream.  If pain persists and nonresponsive, her doctor planned to prescribe lidocaine patches.  Her doctor affirmed that the Veteran did have lumbar radiculopathy.  

In August 2020, the Veteran was reportedly working for Amazon and had pain where she could not sleep.  She was tossing and turning.  She felt that the pain in the lower part above the buttocks on the right side and radiated to her ankle.  She stated that palpation exacerbated her pain.  Her doctor had prescribed nortriptyline, but the Veteran was unable to tolerate due to vomiting and diarrhea.  The Veteran preferred the lidocaine patches.  Veteran reported pain in lower back "like a pinch" and going down to her right leg to her ankle.  She reported that the pain worsened a "few weeks ago."  Her pain level was ten out of ten.  She reported trying lidocaine patches and Aleve last night, both are ineffective in treating pain.  She reported that she "used 3 [lidocaine patches] last night."  She stated that in the past she used a higher "percentage" lidocaine patch that was effective in treating pain.  She and her doctor discussed coming to an emergency room, but she stated that she would prefer to try a higher dose lidocaine patch.

Later in August 2020, the Veteran sought emergency care for right ankle, right leg, and lumbar pain onset after falling in a hole while at work.  She reported that her leg fell through a concrete hole in flooring at work.  Her back pain was worse with sitting.  She had joint pain, swelling, and stiffness.  She was assessed with low back pain.  In September 2020, she stated that she was still having back pain from the fall.  In October 2020, she also reported chronic lower back pain during her week-long mental health hospitalization.  

The Veteran's increased rating claim has been continuously pursued since April 2021.

In June 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) and lumbosacral strain.  The Veteran reported a dull low back pain that had progressed or worsened.  She took Tylenol as needed.  She reported mild monthly flareups lasting one to two days made worse with excessive standing, bending, or sitting and helped by rest and frequent movement.  During a flareup, she was unable to stand or sit for more than one to two hours without pain and pain with climbing stairs.  Regarding functional loss or impairment, she reported that, "My back continues to get worse the older I get.  I am now having pain more often and it lasts longer with standing or sitting for long periods of time.  It is difficult to ride in a car or stand at work for extended times without rest."  Initial range of motion (ROM) testing showed 80 out of a normal 90 degrees of forward flexion with pain.  The VA examiner was unable to test passive ROM.  

The Veteran had pain with active motion that caused functional loss: exacerbation of pain and tightness with normal movements.  She had mild tenderness to lumbosacral area.  There was no additional loss of function or ROM after three repetitions.  With repeated use over time and during flareups, the VA examiner estimated that forward flexion would be limited to 70 degrees due to pain.  

Additional factors contributing to disability included interference with sitting and standing, disturbance of locomotion, inability to stand or sit for more than one to two hours without pain, and pain with climbing stairs or walking more than 30 minutes.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensation testing were normal.  There was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or IVDS.  Straight leg raising testing was negative.  There was no radiculopathy or other neurological abnormality noted on physical examination.  

The VA examiner noted that August 2016 and May 2019 lumbar x-rays showed "Early degenerative dis disease at L5-S1."  Regarding the impact on the Veteran's ability to work, the VA examiner wrote that the Veteran was "unable to stand or sit for more than 1-2 hours without pain, pain with climbing stairs."

In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed lumbosacral strain and right lower extremity radiculopathy.  The Veteran reported current low back pain "every day, non stop."  She reported that her back hurts to the touch and so did her right leg.  She reported that, prior to her recent job, she called in sick a couple of times due to low back pain.  Regarding flareups, she reported that when she worked at warehouse job in 2021, she was out for about ten days due to her back.  During flareups, her ROM was reduced by about 

80 percent.  Regarding functional loss or impairment, the Veteran reported that she could not lift heavy objects.  She could not bend without feeling pain.  She could not stand or sit for any prolonged period; at about 30 minutes she had to change positions.  Initial ROM testing showed 80 out of a normal 90 degrees of forward flexion with pain.  The VA examiner did not test passive ROM because it was medically contraindicated (e.g., it may cause the Veteran severe pain or the risk of further injury).  The Veteran had pain with active motion.  She had tenderness to palpation of the lower lumbar spine and to the right of the lower lumbar spine.  There was no additional loss of function or ROM after three repetitions or with repeated use over time.  

During flareups, the VA examiner estimated that forward flexion would be limited to 80 degrees due to pain even after considering the Veteran's own estimate of a further 80 percent reduction of active ROM during a flareup.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensation testing were normal.  There was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or IVDS.  Straight leg raising testing was negative.  Regarding radiculopathy, there was mild intermittent pain (usually dull), paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve.  There was no other neurological abnormality noted on physical examination.  The VA examiner noted that September 2016 lumbar x-rays showed "Mild nonspecific anterior L5 type I Modic endplate change."  

Regarding the impact on the Veteran's ability to work, the VA examiner wrote that "When she worked at . . . previous job in 2021 she says was out for about 10 days due to her back.  Has been working at her current job for 6 months.  Now works . . . as a wastewater operator.  This job not a physically strenuous on her back like the Amazon job."

Analysis

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is rated at 10 percent, and she is seeking a higher rating.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating more than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to pain, pain during flareups, and pain during repetitive use over time.  However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by her statements about her flareups, which were specifically mentioned in her September 2022 VA examination as duly considered by the September 2022 VA examiner, would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees.  Additionally, the Veteran had some tenderness to palpation, but did not have muscle spasms or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

Consideration has also been given to assigning a rating under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  However, the Veteran does not have IVDS, and the evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  Neither VA examiner diagnosed IVDS, and a review of the record did not show that her medical providers had prescribed any bed rest.

Regarding neurological impairment, the Veteran has already been granted service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) and the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has any other neurological abnormality associated with the spine disability.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating more than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating more than 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).  The appeal is denied.

G.	Right Leg Stress Fracture of Tibia with Shin Splints and LCL Sprain

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5262, for impairment of the tibia and fibula.  Under DC 5262, a 10 percent rating is warranted for malunion of tibia and fibula with slight knee or ankle disability.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for malunion of the tibia and fibula with moderate knee or ankle disability.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for malunion of the tibia and fibula with marked knee or ankle disability.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for nonunion of the tibia and fibula with loose motion requiring a brace.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5262.

According to MERRIAM WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "slight" means small in amount. "Moderate" means limited in scope or effect. "Marked" means having a distinctive or emphasized character.

Effective February 7, 2021, VA amended the rating criteria for disabilities of the knee and leg.  The amended DC 5262 continues to provide a rating for impairment of the tibia and fibula.  The rating criteria are split into three categories: medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS), or shin splints; malunion; and nonunion.

For MTSS, or shin splints, a noncompensable rating is warranted for treatment less than 12 consecutive months, one or both lower extremities.  A 10 percent rating is warranted where treatment is required for no less than 12 months, and unresponsive to either shoe orthotics or other conservative treatment, one or both lower extremities.  A 20 percent rating is warranted where treatment is required for no less than 12 consecutive months, and unresponsive to surgery and either shoe orthotics or other conservative treatment, one lower extremity.  A maximum 

30 percent rating is warranted where treatment is required for no less than 

12 consecutive months, and unresponsive to surgery and either shoe orthotics or other conservative treatment, both lower extremities.

For malunion of the tibia and fibula, evaluate under diagnostic codes 5256, 5257, 5260, or 5261 for the knee, or 5270 or 5271 for the ankle, whichever results in the highest evaluation.

A 40 percent rating is warranted for nonunion of the tibia and fibula, with loose motion, requiring brace.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  Thirty-eight C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  

Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

Material Facts

In August 2021, the Veteran had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed right leg stress fracture of tibia and shin splints.  The Veteran reported that she had injured her knee while running during service in 2014 and her condition had progressed or worsened since then.  Her current symptom was constant pain.  She had tried physical therapy between 2014-18, but it did not help.  She took over-the-counter Tylenol as needed.  Right knee ROM testing measurements were "all normal," but she did have pain on weight-bearing, active motion, and passive motion that caused functional loss.  Regarding the impact on her ability to work, the VA examiner found that, due the stress fracture of the lower leg, the Veteran would have "Difficulty standing, walking, bending right knee, climbing stairs."

In September 2022, the Veteran had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed right leg stress fracture with shin splints and LCL sprain.  The Veteran reported that when her lower back has pain, her right leg pain was at its worst.  She tried not to bend her right knee.  Her right knee pain was "usually behind my knee."  Her right knee pain is daily because "I am on my feet alot."  She also has pain on her right shin that "comes and goes" and was not daily.  It was made worse when she walks a great deal.  She denied flareups, instability or recurrent            subluxation of the knee, and a history of frequent effusion of the knee.  

Regarding functional loss or impairment, she avoided doing any running, stairs, tried not to bend her knee to pick up objects.  She had a "claw" that she used to pick up objects from the floor.  Initial ROM testing showed that she had a flexion endpoint of 120 degrees out of normal 140 degrees due to pain on active motion.  The posterior of her knee was tender to palpation.  There was no decrease in ROM after three repetitions.  The VA examiner found that there would be no decrease in ROM with repeated use over time or during a flareup.  There was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or joint instability.  The Veteran occasionally used a brace.  An August 2020 x-ray had shown "No acute bony injury."  

Regarding the impact on her ability to work, the VA examiner wrote that the Veteran "has been at her current job for 6 months.  There are lots of stairs and she has knee pain going up and down the stairs.  The veteran works . . . as a wastewater operator."

Analysis

The Veteran has current 10 percent rating right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain and seeks a higher rating. 

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating more than 10 percent for right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.  A review of the record did not show nonunion or malunion of the tibia and fibula with loose motion that required brace.  Neither did a review of the record show MTSS, or shin splints, requiring treatment for no less than 12 consecutive months and unresponsive to surgery and either shoe orthotics or other conservative treatment of one or both lower extremities.

The Board has also considered the other DCs pertaining to the knee and leg. Other disability ratings may be assigned only if the symptoms for a disability are not duplicative or overlapping with the symptoms of any other disability.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits paying compensation twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment).  

Regarding DC 5256, there was no evidence of ankylosis.  Regarding DC 5257, there was no evidence of or subjective reports of recurrent subluxation or instability or patellar instability.  Regarding DC 5258 and 5259, there was no evidence of dislocated or removal of semilunar cartilage.  Regarding DC 5260, the Veteran had 120 degrees of right knee flexion.  Regarding DC 5261, there was no evidence of abnormal right knee extension.  Regarding DC 5263, there was no evidence of genu recurvatum.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating more than 10 percent for right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating more than 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.  The appeal is denied.

H.	Dyshidrotic Eczema

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's dyshidrotic eczema is rated under DC 7806.  A General Rating Formula for the Skin applies to DCs 7806, 7809, 7813 to 7816, 7820 to 7822, and 7824.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.  

Under this formula, a noncompensable rating is assigned for no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period and at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of exposed areas affected.  

A 10 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period.  

A 30 percent rating is assigned at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period.  

A 60 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA), or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period.  Or rate as disfigurement of the head, face, or neck (DC 7800) or scars (DC's 7801, 7802, 7803, 7804, or 7805), depending on the predominant disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating for the Skin for DCs 7806, 7809, 7813-7816, 7820-7822, and 7824.

Regulations explicitly state that systemic therapy is treatment that is administered through any route other than the skin, and topical therapy is treatment that is administered through the skin.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118(a).

Material Facts

In April 2020, the Veteran reportedly had three episodes of hidradenitis suppurativa in the past year and prescribed doxycycline.  She reported a recurrent cyst in her armpits and groin that have required incision and drainage.  She reported that she had never been on any antibiotics, nor has she ever been diagnosed with the cause of her cyst.  In August 2020, she reported a few flares, but discontinued the doxycycline because she did not feel that she needed the medication and has noticed a decline in flares.  Early October 2020, she had a fine raised tiny rash at the back of hairline.  Her skin was "cool, dry, anicteric, no rashes or bruises."  In mid-October 2020, her skin color was "usual," "warm," and "dry," with "No wounds, pressure ulcers or other skin problems."  In November 2020, she had a boil under her right arm.  She reported that this was the seventh time she had an abscess of right axilla.  Otherwise, she had "no skin rashes, itching, or lesions."  In March 2021, she was treated for a cold sore and herpes labialis.

The Veteran's increased rating claim has been continuously pursued since April 2021.  She reported: "My contact dermatits [sic] is getting worse.  My hands are breaking out so bad that I cannot sleep because they itch and hurt so bad.  Sores and blisters are horribly forming."

In August 2021, she had a VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed psoriasis.  The Veteran reported dry scaly skin, bumps, and bad blisters on hands, feet, and scalp.  Her treatment included ultraviolet light and topical hydrocortisone cream.  The VA examiner noted that the frequency was six weeks or more, but not constant.  The total body area affected was recorded as five percent to less than 20 percent.  The exposed area was less than five percent.  The VA examiner found no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

In July 2022, she was prescribed clobetasol ointment twice daily as needed to the raised itchy area on the foot for her dyshidrotic eczema.  In August 2022, she was treated for three to four boils in her left axilla and one in her right axilla.  Areas were painful and red.  She denies any drainage.  She reported that she was unable to sleep secondary to the pain.  She was previously ordered medication, which had not helped.

In September 2022, she had another VA examination.  The VA examiner diagnosed dyshidrotic eczema.  The Veteran reported that she had stopped the ultraviolet treatment in 2018 because it was "not highly effective" and went back to using ointments.  She reported current problems her right foot and some flareups on hands. "Right now I don't have it on my hands."  Most of the times she got the rash on her hands and feet.  She reported that the area of rash burns and was itchy, particularly when she took a shower.  She sometimes slept with ice packs and placed her hand on the packs under the pillow. 

 The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had used the ointment for six weeks or more, but not constantly.  The total body area affected was recorded as less than five percent.  The exposed area was none.  The VA examiner found no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

Analysis

The Veteran dyshidrotic eczema was rated at 10 percent, and she was seeking a higher rating.

Here, the evidence of record demonstrates that the predominant disability is dyshidrotic eczema, as noted in most recent VA examination in September 2022.  

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a rating greater than 10 percent because the Veteran's dyshidrotic eczema did not more nearly approximate characteristic lesions involving more than 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or systemic therapy required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects.  Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms and these reports are credible.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  However, the Veteran does not assert, and medical treatment records do not show, that the dyshidrotic eczema more nearly approximates the criteria in the next higher rating.

The Board has considered whether any other DCs related to disabilities of the skin would provide for a higher disability evaluation.  However, the evidence does not reflect that the dyshidrotic eczema would warrant a higher rating under a different diagnostic code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim of a rating more than 10 percent for dyshidrotic eczema.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating more than 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.  The appeal is denied.

II

EFFECTIVE DATES

Legal Criteria

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of pension, compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.? 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

For direct service connection, the effective date is the "Day following separation from active service or date entitlement arose if claim is received within 1 year after separation from service; otherwise, date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later."  Id.

For increases, the effective date is generally the date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.? Id.? The earliest effective date that can be awarded is the date as of which it is factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record that an increase in disability had occurred if a complete claim or intent to file a claim is received within one year, otherwise, date of receipt of claim.? Id.

Continuous pursuit of a claim or an issue can be achieved by timely and properly filing an appropriate review option, generally within one year of an AMA decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500(c).

Pursuant to applicable law and regulation, the Board may dismiss any appeal that fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  

38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  

Material Facts

In June 2019, the AOJ, among other things, granted service connection for PTSD with TBI (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances) with a 50 percent rating, asthma with a 10 percent rating, lumbosacral strain with a 10 percent rating, psoriasis (claimed as eczema) with a 10 percent rating, and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain with a 10 percent rating, and migraine headaches with a 10 percent rating, all effective December 7, 2018.  No appeal or additional evidence was received from the Veteran or an authorized representative within one year of the notice of the June 2019 AOJ decision, and the decision became final.

On April 5, 2021, a new claim was received for increased ratings, including for lumbosacral strain, migraine headaches, asthma, and allergic rhinitis.  These claims have been continuously pursued ever since.  On April 13, 2021, a new claim was received for increased ratings, including for psoriasis (claimed as eczema), right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, and PTSD with TBI (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances).  These claims have been continuously pursued ever since.

In July 2021, the AOJ denied an increased ratings of asthma, lumbosacral strain, allergic rhinitis, and migraine headaches.  In August 2021, the AOJ denied increased ratings of PTSD with TBI (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances), psoriasis (claimed as eczema), and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.

In July 2022, a supplemental claim was received, including for increased ratings for PTSD with TBI, psoriasis, right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, asthma, allergic rhinitis, migraine headaches, and lumbosacral strain.

In September 2022, the AOJ granted increased ratings from 50 to 70 percent for PTSD, 10 to 30 percent for asthma, 0 to 30 percent for migraine headaches, all effective July 7, 2022; granted a separate 40 percent rating for TBI, effective July 7, 2022; and denied increased ratings for dyshidrotic eczema (previously rated as psoriasis), lumbosacral strain, and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, and allergic rhinitis.

In September 2023, the Veteran's Board Appeal was received, including for increased ratings of PTSD, asthma, migraine headaches, TBI, dyshidrotic eczema (previously rated as psoriasis), lumbosacral strain, and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, and allergic rhinitis and earlier effective date for the grant of service connection of TBI.  With this appeal, the Veteran's authorized representative also submitted argument, liberally construed as including in favor of earlier effective dates for PTSD, asthma, migraine headaches, dyshidrotic eczema, lumbosacral strain, right leg stress fracture, and allergic rhinitis.

A.	Lumbosacral Strain, Right Leg Stress Fracture of Tibia with Shin Splints and LCL Sprain, and Dyshidrotic Eczema

Analysis

The Board dismisses the Veteran's appeal for earlier effective dates for increased ratings of lumbosacral strain, right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain, dyshidrotic eczema because the appeal failed to identify the specific issues with which the Veteran disagrees.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  

There were no effective dates of increases that can be appealed because there were no increases.  The September 2022 decision on appeal denied increased ratings for lumbosacral strain, dyshidrotic eczema (previously rated as psoriasis), and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.  The Veteran's authorized representative noted that the Veteran had continuously pursued these claims since April 13, 2021, and contended that the Board should grant her entitlement to benefits from this date.  But, as noted, no increased ratings were granted either prior or since this date.  There is, therefore, no specific case or controversy before the Board as to earlier effective dates for increase ratings.  Consequently, the Board dismisses the appeals for earlier effective dates for increased ratings of lumbosacral strain, dyshidrotic eczema (previously rated as psoriasis), and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.

The Board also cannot provide relief by construing such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  The Board cannot, for example, interpret the Veteran's authorized representative's contentions more broadly to include earlier effective dates for the grants of service connection (rather than increased ratings as specified on his September 2023 Notice of Appeal) without a more specific allegation of clear and unmistakable error within the July 2019 AOJ decision (as opposed to the September 2022 AOJ decision).   38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.1400-11.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that, once there is a relevant final decision on an issue, there cannot be a "freestanding claim" for an earlier effective date.  Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 296 (2006).  In other words, a claimant is not entitled to subsequently make an earlier effective date claim after a prior final denial was not properly appealed.  In Rudd, the Court held that VA claimants may not properly file, and VA has no authority to adjudicate, a freestanding claim for an earlier effective date to overcome the finality of an unappealed VA decision.  20 Vet. App. at 299-300.

In this case, the Veteran's claims may be considered effectively "freestanding claims" for earlier effective dates for the grants of service connection for lumbosacral strain, psoriasis (claimed as eczema), and right leg stress fracture of tibia with shin splints and LCL sprain.  The July 2019 AOJ decision that had set the effective date for grants of service connection was already final and is not now on appeal.  These claims, if they are indeed claims about the effective dates of current 10 percent ratings of each disability, are therefore "freestanding claims" for earlier effective dates, and the Court held in Rudd that there can be no such claims.  The claims are dismissed.

B.	Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder

Analysis

The Veteran's initial claim for an increased rating for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with Traumatic brain injury (TBI) (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances) was received on April 13, 2021, and has been continuously pursued ever since.  As noted above, a review of the claims file shows that the Veteran called Veterans Crisis Line and endorsed suicidal ideation on May 6, 2020, and was admitted for a week of VA inpatient care after a suicide attempt in October 2020.  The Board finds that it was factually ascertainable that an increase of her PTSD disability had occurred on May 6, 2020, which was within one year of her April 2021 claim.  Therefore, the earliest effective date that can be awarded is May 6, 2021.  The appeal is granted.

C.	Traumatic Brain Injury

Analysis

The Veteran's initial claim for an increased rating for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with Traumatic brain injury (TBI) (claimed as memory loss, and sleep disturbances) was received on April 13, 2021, and has been continuously pursued ever since.  

In August 2021, a VA examiner, who was a psychiatrist, was unable to differentiate the Veteran's TBI symptoms from her PTSD symptoms.  The Veteran's TBI VA examination, which was performed by a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine, found that it was "not possible to determine the contributor whether TBI or PTSD although the memory and cognitive concerns are more likely related to TBI."  

The August 2021 AOJ decision continued to address these two conditions under one rating in denying an increased rating.  

In September 2022, however, both the Veteran's TBI and PTSD VA examinations were both performed by the same psychiatrist, who was able to differentiate the symptoms.  The more recent VA examiner identified medical findings of the previous VA examiner about which they disagreed.  The September 2022 VA examiner noted that "the previous examiner identified several symptoms as being part of the overall TBI residuals but which appear to be at least as likely as not associated only with her [PTSD]."  

Further, the September 2022 VA examiner remarked that the "abnormalities previously associated with the traumatic brain injury on facets one, three, and eight are less likely than not associated with the traumatic brain injury and more likely than not associated with her [PTSD] only."  

The Board gives greater weight to the medical findings of the September 2022 VA examiner than those of the August 2021 VA examiner because of the September 2022 VA examiner specialized in psychiatry and had access to a more complete record of medical evidence to review.  The September 2022 AOJ decision on appeal granted both an increased rating of the Veteran's PTSD and a separate rating for TBI.  

Based on the medical findings of the September 2022 VA examiner, the Board finds that the effective date of the Veteran's separate TBI rating should be April 13, 2021, which was the date of the Veteran's continuously pursued initial increased rating claim.  A review of claims file does not show that an increase of her TBI symptoms had occurred within a year of this claim (see above), however, so an even earlier effective date is not available.  The appeal is granted.

D.	Migraine Headaches

The Veteran's initial claim for an increased rating for migraine headaches was received on April 13, 2021, and has been continuously pursued ever since.  A review of claims file does not show that an increase of migraine headache symptoms had occurred within a year of this claim (see above), however, so an even earlier effective date is not available.  The appeal is granted.

E.	Asthma

The Veteran's initial claim for an increased rating for asthma was received on April 13, 2021, and has been continuously pursued ever since.  A review of claims file shows that an increase of her asthma disability had occurred on May 20, 2022, when her VA primary care physician noted that she was using her inhaler three times a day and switched her medications.  While this date is later than the date of her initial claim, an even earlier effective date is not factually ascertainable.  Prior to this date, a review of the medical record of evidence shows that she was using inhaled medications not daily, but only "intermittently," as noted, for example, on her June 2021 VA examination report (see above).  The appeal is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

A.	Increased Rating of Right Lower Extremity Sciatic Nerve Radiculopathy

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.  Mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R § 4.124a.  The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various DCs are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  

38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The issue of entitlement to an increased rating of right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a September 2022 examination report prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  However, the September 2022 VA examination report did not adequately consider all the Veteran's symptoms associated with right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy.  

The September 2022 VA examination report for peripheral nerves conditions provided no responses on the severity evaluation for lower extremity nerves, trophic changes, or sensory examination.  Only the diagnosis section was completed: "SEE BACK/LUMBAR SPINE DBQ for RADICULOPATHY."  The September 2022 VA examination report for back conditions, however, also did not include a severity evaluation of her radiculopathy or address trophic changes.  The Board cannot, in making its decisions, assert its own medical opinion.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991).  A new VA examination is warranted.

B.	Increased Rating of Left Foot Toe Fracture

The Veteran's left foot toe fracture is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284, for other foot injuries.  Under DC 5284, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate other foot injuries.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe other foot injuries.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe other foot injuries.  A Note to DC 5284 instructs that with actual loss of use of the foot rate as a maximum 40 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284.

The issue of entitlement to an increased rating of left foot toe fracture is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a September 2022 examination report prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  However, the September 2022 VA examination report did not adequately consider all the Veteran's symptoms associated with left foot toe fracture.  The September 2022 VA examination report on foot conditions provided no response on the severity of her left foot toe fracture disability.  The Board cannot, in making its decisions, assert its own medical opinion.  Colvin, 1 Vet. App. at 175.  A new VA examination is warranted.

C.	Earlier Effective Dates for Right Lower Extremity Sciatic Nerve Radiculopathy and Left Foot Toe Fracture

Because a decision on the remanded issues of increased ratings of right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and left foot toe fracture could significantly impact a decision on the issues of earlier effective dates for the ratings of right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and left foot toe fracture, the issues are inextricably intertwined.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991), overruled on other grounds, Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 178 (2009) (en banc)  (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a Veteran's claim for the second issue).

A remand of the claims for earlier effective date for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and left foot toe fracture is required.

D.	Dependents' Educational Assistance

Finally, because of the decisions above on earlier effective dates and remanded issues of increased ratings of and earlier effective dates for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and left foot toe fracture could significantly impact a decision on the issue of entitlement to an earlier effective date for basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance based on permanent and total disability status, the issues are inextricably intertwined.  See Harris, 1 Vet. App. at 183. A remand of the claim for an earlier effective date for Dependents' Educational Assistance is required.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

(Continued on the next page)

?

1.	Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

2.	Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected left foot toe fracture.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hekel, James D. 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.