Citation Nr: A25030009
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 241118-487477
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the symptoms of his unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety began during his active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.384, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9210.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1966 to February 1968.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2022 Rating Decision.  In March 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior December 2022 decision.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

A September 2017 Rating Decision denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for anxiety disorder, personality disorder, and stress disorder (nightmares).  In August 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking service connection for any and all mental health conditions.  In response, a December 2022 Rating Decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the Veteran's claim for service connection.  This is a favorable finding by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to the address the claim on the merits.  See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the Veteran's claim for service connection, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection generally will be awarded when a Veteran has a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  To establish service connection on a direct basis, the evidence must show: (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a link between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service (the "nexus" element).  See Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

The Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a claimant is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the competency, credibility, and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence that it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1335-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance, which includes but is not limited to equipoise, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety is granted.

The Board finds that service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety, is established.

The Veteran maintains that during his active service, he hit his head on a fire hydrant and began to experience severe headaches and hallucinations.  He described his headaches as if someone was pushing his finger into his head and the headache was so severe that he had to fall on his knees.  He also described his headaches as being caused by an "alien" pushing on his brain.  After his headaches subsided, he began having nightmares and continued hallucinations.  He described having nightmares and hallucinations of a "creature" sitting on his chest while he slept and the sensation of falling asleep in one location, either Korea or his home, and waking up in the other location.

The Veteran's April 1966 Report of Medical Examination reflects that on clinical evaluation, no psychiatric abnormalities were noted.  The Veteran denied frequent trouble sleeping, frequent or terrifying nightmares, depression or excessive worry, and nervous trouble of any sort in the August 1966 Report of Medical History.  The Veteran also denied ever having been a patient, either voluntary or committed, in a mental hospital or sanitarium.  The Veteran's VA treatment records, private treatment records, and examination reports do not show that he reported a history of psychiatric problems or treatment prior to service.  Accordingly, the Veteran's mental health is presumed sound at entrance.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1111.

The Veteran's service treatment records demonstrate he injured his left knee in June 3, 1966, when he fell against a fire hydrant.  A November 12, 1967, service treatment record states that the Veteran reported vague stiffness in his head for the past two to three months and throbbing migraine-like pain.  A November 13, 1967, service treatment record provides that the Veteran advised of smoking marijuana on numerous occasions and was assessed with anxiety reaction and prescribed Librium.  A November 20, 1967, service treatment record shows that the Veteran was assessed with anxiety reaction.  On the Veteran's January 1968 Report of Medical History for separation, he indicated that he had frequent or severe headache and the physician summary advised that he had a severe parietal headache on the left for one month, the neurological examination that time and presently is within normal limits, and he does not have current symptoms. 

VA treatment records, including a November 2010 VA Outpatient Individual Psychology Note; and examination reports, including a July 1997 VA Mental Disorders Examination and a May 1999 VA Mental Disorders (Not Initial PTSD or Eating Disorders) Examination, detail an extensive history of mental health treatment and related symptoms.  Related, the Veteran has carried numerous psychiatric disorder diagnoses, including alcohol dependence, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), adjustment disorder, anxiety disorder, bipolar disorder, schizoaffective disorder, unspecified personality disorder, and schizotypal personality disorder.  The Veteran consistently reported symptoms of hallucinations, anxiety, and nightmares that he advised began during his active service.

A November 2024 private medical opinion provides that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety are related to his military service.  The medical opinion states that the Veteran hit his head on a fire hydrant during his active service and then he began suffering from headaches.  While the Veteran was in Korea, he reported symptoms consistent with a psychotic process: he developed insomnia, anxiety, panic attacks, nightmares, and perceptual disturbances.  He began to self-medicate with alcohol and marijuana.  He also described confusion and intermittent states of dissociative amnesia. 

The November 2024 private medical opinion states that the Veteran indicated that his perceptual disturbances, insomnia, drinking excessively, smoking marijuana, and dealing with panic attacks had their onset during his active service in Korea.  The Veteran advised that his perceptual disturbances are related to his in-service head injury or to being attacked by an alien that pushed into his brain and caused his head pain.  The Veteran's nightmares and excess drinking occurred as a result to manage his fears.  He also reported dissociative-like symptoms and periods of confusion as he had trouble determining whether he was in Korea or at home during his service in Korea.  The medical opinion states that the Veteran has consistently self-reported experiencing perceptual disturbances and insomnia during his active service.

The November 2024 private medical opinion further states that following the Veteran's separation from active service, his mental health continued to decline.  His mental health was treated with multiple medications with some symptom relief, but he has a pattern of self-discontinuing because of side effects and distrust of medical providers.  The medical opinion concludes that the Veteran's symptoms are not consistent with a schizotypal personality disorder as such a disorder is characterized by constricted affect, odd beliefs, intermittent/unusual perceptual experiences, odd speech, paranoia, and social anxiety.  However, the Veteran exhibits, at times, expansive affect, ongoing perceptual disturbances, bizarre beliefs, paranoid ideation, and impaired reality testing.  The Veteran is being treated with antipsychotic medication for schizophrenia and anxiety rather than for schizotypal personality disorder.

The Board finds that the November 2024 private medical opinion is probative, as it represents the conclusion of a medical professional specializing in mental health disorders, is based on examination of the Veteran and review of his medical history, and is supported by an explanation that is consistent with the evidence of record.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"); see also Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992) (reflecting that the Board is free to assess medical evidence and is not obligated to accept a physician's opinion).  

The Veteran's claims file also contains an October 2022 Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  The examination report demonstrates that the Veteran has diagnoses of unspecified personality disorder and alcohol use disorder, moderate.

The Veteran's claims file contains an October VA medical opinion that provides that his diagnosis of unspecified personality disorder was less likely than not incurred in or caused by anxiety noted during his active service.  The medical opinion states that the Veteran reported nervous trouble in the military, but it was indicated that he was smoking marijuana at the time.  The Veteran's separation examination was negative for psychiatric concerns.  He had reportedly been abusing drugs in the military which likely explained his anxiety at the time.  The medical opinion concludes that generally, personality disorders, by their nature, are considered to have their origins in early childhood experiences and a genetic disposition.  Thus, the Veteran's personality disorder is considered unrelated to his military service.

A separate October 2022 VA medical opinion states that the Veteran does not meet criteria for a nervous condition.  The Veteran's anxiety is part of his unspecified personality disorder and alcohol use disorder, moderate which are less likely than not related to anxiety in the military.  The medical opinion indicates that the Veteran's alcohol use disorder is unrelated to anxiety in the military, which is considered related to marijuana use.  The Veteran's alcohol use disorder is considered due to his own willful misconduct.

While the October 2022 VA examiner is competent to provide the above medical opinions as a medical professional specializing in mental health disorders, the Board assigns no probative weight to the opinions in determining whether the Veteran's unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety is related to his active service.  See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-89 (2000) (Generally, the degree of probative value which may be attributed to a medical opinion issued by a VA or private treatment provider accounts for such factors as its thoroughness and degree of detail, and whether there was review of the claims file).  The October 2022 VA medical opinions address diagnoses of unspecified personality disorder and alcohol use disorder rather than unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety.  Additionally, the November 2024 private medical opinion thoroughly advises why the Veteran's symptoms more accurately warrant a diagnosis of unspecified schizophrenia as opposed to a personality disorder.  

The Veteran's claims file contains a November 2024 written statement from his sister advising that the Veteran did not have any mental health trouble during his childhood.  The written statement further states that when the Veteran returned home from Korea, he was anxious, detached, nervous around other people, and easily frustrated.  These issues continued over the years.  The written statement also indicates that the Veteran has trouble sleeping at night, lacks motivation, has self-destructive thoughts, and memory issues.  The written statement concludes that the Veteran is not the same person as he was before his active service.

The Veteran and his sister are competent to report his psychiatric symptoms before, during, and after his separation from service; there is no evidence that they are not credible in this regard.  Layno, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470.  There is thus a consistent probative lay record of such symptoms, notably, hallucinations, anxiety, and nightmares, later diagnosed as unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety.  Such is bolstered by the consistent report of these symptoms over many years contained his VA treatment records in furtherance of treatment.

Thus, resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that his unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety, began during his active service, specifically considering his consistent reports of hallucinations, nightmares, and anxiety, during and after his active service; thereby establishing a causal connection between his current disability and service.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.307(a)(3), 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9210; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.  Therefore, the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for unspecified schizophrenia and other specified anxiety, is granted.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mussey, Sean

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.