Citation Nr: A25030141
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 220708-263358
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Prior to May 19, 2024, entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depressive disorder is granted, subject to the laws and regulations applicable to the payment of monetary benefits.

From May 19, 2014, to November 21, 2018, entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder is denied.

As of November 21, 2018, entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date of May 30, 2014, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to November 21, 2018, the Veteran's PTSD and depressive disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform activities of daily living, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation, without more severe manifestations productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, deficiencies in most areas, or total occupational and social impairment.

2. As of November 21, 2018, the Veteran's PTSD and depressive disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, without more severe manifestations productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

3. On May 30, 2014, the Veteran submitted a written statement that may be considered an informal claim for benefits and a specific medical record that contained a reasonably ascertainable diagnosis of OSA.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to May 19, 2024, the criteria for an initial rating of 30 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes (DCs) 9411, 9434.

2. From May 19, 2024, to November 21, 2018, the criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DCs 9411, 9434.

3. As of November 21, 2018, the criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DCs 9411, 9434.

4. The criteria for an effective date of May 30, 2014, for the award of service connection for OSA have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5109A, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.151, 3.155, 3.160, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1972 to December 1975.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2022 statement of the case (SOC) issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  

Within the framework of the AMA, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge in July 2022.  See July 2022 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  The Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2(d), 20.301.

By way of background, the Veteran's increased rating claims were previously addressed in a December 2023 Board decision.  At that time, the Board denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder prior to May 19, 2014, granted entitlement to a 30 percent rating for PTSD and depressive disorder from May 19, 2014, and denied entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder prior to November 21, 2018, and to a rating in excess of 50 percent thereafter.  See December 2023 BVA Decision.  

However, the Board subsequently discovered that it did not have jurisdiction over the Veteran's increased rating claims at the time of the December 2023 decision, and as such, found that vacatur was required.  In this regard, in a subsequent March 2025 decision, the Board vacated its December 2023 decision and dismissed the appeal on its own motion pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 20.1000(a).  Specifically, the Board noted that the March 2020 VA Form 10182, which prompted the Board to issue its December 2023 decision, was improper and that the issues remained in the legacy system of review.  Based on this procedural error, the Board vacated the portions of the December 2023 decision that denied entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder prior to May 19, 2014, to a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder prior to November 21, 2018, and to a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD and depressive disorder from November 21, 2018, in a March 2025 vacatur.  However, the March 2025 vacatur also left the portion of the December 2023 decision that granted entitlement to a 30 percent rating for PTSD and depressive disorder from May 19, 2014, undisturbed.  See March 2025 BVA Decision.  

However, the Veteran properly opted into the AMA from the May 2022 SOC, and as such, the Board has jurisdiction to adjudicate the merits of the appeal under the AMA appellate framework.  See 38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d)(2).  Accordingly, the current issues on appeal are properly before the Board.

In addition, the Board notes that the Veteran filed timely appeals to a September 2019 decision and a September 2021 rating decision for the issues of entitlement to a clothing allowance for 2019 and entitlement to service connection for bilateral shoulder and hip disabilities, respectively.  See May 2020 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement; October 2021 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  In addition, the Veteran filed a timely appeal to an April 2020 rating decision for the issues of entitlement to earlier effective dates for the awards of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU), basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA), service connection for radiculopathy of the left and right lower extremities, and increased disability ratings for his service-connected radiculopathy of the left and right lower extremities, osteopenia, and hepatitis B and C.  See May 2021 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  These issues will be addressed in separate decisions under different docket numbers.

The Board further acknowledges that the March 2025 decision vacated the portion of the December 2023 Board decision that denied entitlement to a TDIU prior to March 25, 2015, to include on an extraschedular basis.  See March 2025 BVA Decision; see also December 2023 BVA Decision.  In this regard, the Board notes that an April 2020 rating decision granted the Veteran's claim of entitlement to a TDIU and assigned an effective date of March 25, 2015.  See April 2021 Rating Decision - Narrative.  The Veteran was notified of the April 2020 rating decision in a May 2020 letter, and as discussed above, he subsequently filed a timely appeal to that decision in May 2021.  See May 2020 Notification Letter (e.g., VA Form 20-8993, VA Form 21-0290, PCGL); May 2021 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  Thus, as the Veteran explicitly appealed the issue of entitlement to an effective date prior to March 25, 2015, for the award of entitlement to a TDIU in his May 2021 VA form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, and as that claim is pending review in a different AMA appeal stream, the Board will defer action on that issue.  As stated above, the issue will be addressed in a separate decision under a different docket number.

Lastly, the Board notes that additional evidence, to include updated VA medical records, was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claims, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that particular rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent prior to May 19, 2014, in excess of 30 percent from May 19, 2014, to November 21, 2018, and in excess of 50 percent thereafter for PTSD and depressive disorder.

As an initial matter, the Veteran submitted a claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD, major depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder in May 2014.  See May 2014 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim; May 2014 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.  The Board granted entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depressive disorder in a November 2017 decision.  See November 2017 BVA Decision.  Thereafter, in a December 2017 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) implemented the November 2017 Board decision and assigned a 10 percent rating for PTSD and depressive disorder, effective June 25, 2013, the date that the Veteran was diagnosed with symptoms of anxiety.  The AOJ also awarded a higher, 30 percent evaluation, effective March 25, 2015.  See December 2017 Rating Decision - Narrative.  In addition, a subsequent March 2019 rating decision granted an increased 50 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder, effective November 21, 2018.  See March 2019 Rating Decision - Narrative.  Thereafter, as noted above, in the December 2023 decision, the Board, in pertinent part, granted an increased 30 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder from May 19, 2014, and the March 2023 Board vacatur left the above portion of the Board decision undisturbed.  See December 2023 BVA Decision; March 2025 BVA Decision.

Throughout the periods on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder have been rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DCs 9411, 9434-9411.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 10 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or by symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, panic attacks more than once a week, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks), impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting), or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  If the evidence shows that the veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002); Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran stated that he felt "well" and had support from his wife in March 2013.  He also acknowledged that he was on probation, but indicated that he was compliant with the terms thereof and that a court was evaluating his motion to end probation.  On examination, the examiner found the Veteran to be alert and fully oriented with good mood and congruent affect.  His thought processes were noted to be logical, coherent, and relevant, and the examiner found that he was able to make decisions independently and with full awareness of the risks and possible consequences of such.  The Veteran also denied suicidal and homicidal ideation, auditory and visual hallucinations, and distress from psychotic symptoms.  The Veteran subsequently reported that he felt good and that everything had been "regular" in his personal, health, and family stressor levels in April 2013.  See April 2015 CAPRI.

In August 2013, the Veteran endorsed little or no interest or pleasure in doing things and indicated that he had been feeling down, depressed, or helpless for several days.  He also reported nightmares or thoughts about stressor events; in this regard, he explained that he tried hard not to think about stressors and avoided situations that reminded him of such.  However, the examiner indicated that depression and PTSD screenings conducted at that time were negative.  See April 2015 CAPRI.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a private medical report from Dr. M.Q. dated on May 19, 2014.  Dr. M.Q. noted that the Veteran experienced depressed mood, nervousness, anxiety, increased irritability, difficulty in adapting to work and social relationships, inability to establish and maintain effective work and social relationships, periods of isolation, easy crying, insomnia with nightmares and flashbacks of traumatic experiences in service, excessive daytime somnolence, morning sluggishness, and fatigue.  Dr. M.Q. further noted that the Veteran was in comprehensive psychological therapy with poor control of symptoms.  The diagnoses included generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disease, and PTSD.  See May 2014 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.  However, the Board notes that Dr. M.Q. did not state whether he interviewed or examined the Veteran or reviewed any evidence in connection with his private medical report.  

A May 2014 mental status psychological evaluation obtained in connection with a claim for Social Security Administration (SSA) disability benefits shows that the Veteran reported that he had been experiencing psychiatric symptoms, to include sadness, crying spells, nightmares, panic attacks, anxiety, and feelings of frustration since service.  He further noted that he had been married to his wife since 1974 and indicated that he had six adult children.  Following the evaluation, the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran showed adequate understanding and concentration but indicated that he seemed unwilling to sustain social interactions and showed difficulty adapting into new situations.  See April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA; March 2017 Correspondence.  

A May 2014 functional report obtained in connection with the Veteran's claim for SSA disability benefits shows that he denied spending time with others and explained that he had problems getting along with family, friends, neighbors, and others because he wanted to be alone.  He also reported that he did not get along with authority figures but subsequently acknowledged that he had never been fired or laid off from a job because of problems getting along with other people.  See April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA.  

A June 2014 psychiatric admission evaluation note shows that the Veteran reported that he had been depressed for many years.  He also endorsed constant guilt regarding his poor parenting history, irritability, self-isolation, chronic sleep impairment, and weight gain despite poor appetite and indicated that he had a short temper.  He further reported that he was unemployed, lived with his ex-wife, and had six children, although the examiner subsequently indicated that he had good family support.  In addition, the Veteran explained that he had been incarcerated for drug-related charges for many years prior to the evaluation.  On examination, the examiner found that the Veteran was alert, oriented, and cooperative and that his speech was clear, productive, and goal-directed.  His mood was sad and tearful with a blunted affect, and insight and judgement were fair but superficial.  In addition, the Veteran denied hallucinations and homicidal and suicidal ideation.  In this regard, the examiner indicated that the Veteran would benefit from starting the use of antidepressants and referred him to a day hospital for outpatient treatment.  See April 2015 CAPRI.

One week later, the Veteran stated that he had been feeling depressed and endorsed isolation, irritability, decreased energy tolerance, decreased interest in activities he previously enjoyed, and chronic sleep impairment.  He further explained that he quit his job several months prior because he felt unable to work due to his health problems.  The Veteran also stated that he had been married and divorced twice, continued to live with his first ex-wife, and had six children.  In addition, the Veteran noted activities of leisure, to include going to restaurants, participating in social activities, reading, listening to music, playing table games, using the internet, receiving visits from his children, and taking care of his dog.  He also denied auditory and visual hallucinations, toxic habits, and any suicidal or homicidal ideas.  A subsequent social work note, dated one day later, also shows that the Veteran endorsed anxiety, anger, insomnia, crying spells, self-isolation, and that he reacted with impulsivity toward his partner.  He further stated that he finished his parole in March 2014 and reported lack of motivation apart from his involvement in a community organization.  See April 2019 CAPRI.

In July 2014, the Veteran reported that he felt depressed and endorsed isolation, poor energy, anhedonia, guilt, crying spells, anxiety, irritability, nightmares, avoidance, hypervigilance, and reexperiencing events.  See April 2020 CAPRI.  

An August 2014 disability determination explanation shows that the Veteran denied feeling depressed and indicated that he was not receiving treatment or taking any medications for any emotional conditions, apart from attending mandatory sessions with a social worker.  An August 2014 Disability Determination and Transmittal form shows that SSA found the Veteran to be disabled from April 30, 2014.  Osteoarthrosis and allied disorders were noted as his primary diagnoses and disorders of the back were listed as secondary diagnoses.  Notably, SSA did not find that the Veteran's psychiatric disorders, to include PTSD and depressive disorder, were a part of his disability.  See April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination for mental disorders in March 2015.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified depressive disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or by symptoms controlled by medication.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that he was living with his wife, though he went on to explain that he and his wife were previously married, divorced in the 1980s, and later remarried.  He also noted that he separated from his previous job as a salesman at a private company in or around April 2014.  The examiner noted the following symptoms: depressed mood; anxiety; disturbances of motivation and mood; increased stress when traveling in a moving vehicle; disturbing memories; nightmares; loss of appetite; unprovoked anger; difficulty concentrating; and guilt.  See March 2015 C&P examination.

In September 2016, the Veteran endorsed anhedonia and low moods but indicated that he had support from his wife and daughters.  See January 2021 CAPRI.  The Veteran subsequently reported a history of unspecified depressive disorder and anxiety and endorsed mood swings, anhedonia, and some irritability in January 2017.  At that time, he stated that he felt less sad than he had in previous months and indicated that he had good support from his wife and family.  In addition, he continued to deny any suicidal ideation or ideas, disorganized behavior, active hallucinations or delusions, recent mania or hypomanic episodes, recent disruptive, aggressive, or impulsive behaviors, problems with memories, fear to specific situations or objects, and feeling worried or constantly preoccupied with muscle tension.  See April 2020 CAPRI.  

In March 2017, the Veteran endorsed sadness, anger, guilt, anxiety, irritability, frustration, physical aggression, isolation, nightmares, insomnia/hypersomnia, and loss of appetite.  See January 2021 CAPRI.

During a July 2017 psychological consultation, the Veteran endorsed nightmares and guilt related to an in-service motor vehicle accident.  He further stated that he continued to experience stress, anxiety, irritability, and anger when he got into a car and indicated that he seldom drove.  He noted that he had been married to his wife since April 2017 and stated that he had six children and seven grandchildren.  In this regard, he stated that he had regular relationships with his children despite seldom leaving the house.  The working diagnoses were chronic PTSD, depressive disorder not otherwise specified, and polysubstance abuse in sustained remission.  See September 2017 Correspondence.

From August 2017 to October 2018, the Veteran endorsed sadness, anxiety, anhedonia, insomnia, poor concentration, recurrent and intrusive distressing recollections of stressor event, recurrent and distressing dreams of stressor event, and avoidance.  However, he also consistently denied homicidal and suicidal ideation, manic symptoms, auditory or visual hallucinations, psychotic symptoms, and cognitive symptoms, and examiners consistently encouraged him to continue being socially active with family and friends.  See January 2021 CAPRI.

On November 21, 2018, the Veteran reported that he was unable to secure or follow any substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder, OSA, and lumbar spine disability.  Specifically, he explained that the combined impact of his service-connected disabilities prevented him from performing his duties in a responsible and professional manner.  He further stated that his pain was too unbearable to function as he would have liked to and prevented him from performing all of his duties, despite accommodations provided by his previous employer.  See November 2018 VA Form 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

The Veteran next underwent a VA examination for PTSD in December 2018.  The examiner found that the Veteran's PTSD and recurrent major depressive disorder were manifested by symptomatology that resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that he had been divorced twice and indicated that he remarried his first wife in 2016 after 10 years of a common-law relationship.  He also reported that he had six children and described his family relations as good.  In addition, the Veteran stated that he had a bachelor's degree in psychology and that he last worked as a salesman in a private company in 2014.

The examiner noted the following symptoms: depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; sleep disturbances; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of, and recurrent distressing dreams related to, stressor event; avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with stressor event; persistent negative emotional state; markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; persistent inability to experience positive emotions; problems with concentration; and inability to enjoy formerly pleasurable social, recreational, and occupational activities.  In addition, the examiner found that the Veteran was alert, coherent, relevant, logical, appropriate, and oriented to person, place, and time.  He also found that the Veteran's judgment and insight were good, with no indications of perceptual or thought disorders, and noted that the Veteran denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation during the examination.  See December 2018 C&P examination.

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination for PTSD in March 2019.  The examiner found that the Veteran had mild PTSD that was productive of occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or by symptoms controlled by medication.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that he lived with his wife and noted that he had adult children. The examiner noted the following symptoms: depressed mood; anxiety; disturbances of motivation and mood; recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of stressor event; avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with stressor event; inability to remember an important aspect of stressor event; persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world; hypervigilance; and sleep disturbance.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran was appropriately dressed, with adequate hygiene and that he was oriented to person, place, and time.  His thought processes were coherent and logical, and he repeatedly denied any suicidal ideas, plans, or attempts.  

In addition, the examiner found no signs of delusions or hallucinations and indicated that the Veteran did not have any phobias, obsessions, or panic attacks.  Following the examination, the examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms were not severe enough to interfere with his marital relationship, parenting performance, daily activities, family responsibility, financial debts, or social functioning.  In this regard, the examiner acknowledged that the Veteran retired in 2014 after more than 35 years of gainful employment and indicated that his mental disorder did not preclude him from any "sedentary" labor activity.  See March 2019 C&P examination.  

From April 2019 to September 2021, the Veteran reported the following symptoms: anxiety, hypervigilance, hyperarousal, irritable mood, poor concentration, sadness, avoidance, nightmares, flashbacks, and chronic sleep impairment.  In addition, he repeatedly denied any homicidal or suicidal ideation and delusions or hallucinations, and examiners consistently encouraged him to remain socially active with family and friends.  See January 2021 CAPRI.

In June 2020, the Veteran's attorney argued that the disability ratings for the periods on appeal prior to November 2018, were based upon VA examination reports that concluded the Veteran did not have PTSD or a related in-service stressor event.  In this regard, she stated that the VA examinations conducted prior to November 2018 were based on diagnostic and clinical conclusions that had been rejected by VA and, as such, that they merited no weight.  In contrast, she argued that the December 2018 VA examination report was based on an accurate factual premise, and as such, a rating of no less than 50 percent was warranted throughout the periods on appeal.  See June 2020 Third Party Correspondence.  

Lastly, the Veteran endorsed increased anxiety related to dealing with his grandchildren's therapies and to his safety as well after one of his son's relocated to Texas in February 2022.  However, he also indicated that he spent time with family during the holiday season, which improved his overall mood.  See March 2022 CAPRI.

The Board will first address the period on appeal prior to November 21, 2018.  In this regard, after a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD and depressive disorder were manifested by psychiatric symptomatology productive of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal).  Thus, the Board finds that a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted throughout the period on appeal prior to November 21, 2018.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board acknowledges and has considered the attorney's arguments that the March 2015 VA examination should be considered inadequate because the examiner found that the Veteran did not have PTSD.  See June 2020 Third Party Correspondence.  However, the Board finds this argument unpersuasive.  In this regard, there is no indication, other than the representative's assertion, that the March 2015 VA examination was not detailed or adequate.  To the contrary, although the examiner found that the Veteran did not have PTSD, the report reflects that she diagnosed him with unspecified depressive disorder, identified relevant symptoms, performed a physical examination, and documented the symptomatology and functional impairment described by the Veteran at the time of the examination.

In this regard, the Board finds that the evidence of record predominantly shows that prior to November 21, 2018, the Veteran experienced psychiatric symptoms specifically contemplated by the 30 percent rating criteria, to include depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment, as well as symptoms compatible with occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, to include increased irritability, frustration, periods of isolation, easy crying, insomnia, excess daytime somnolence, fatigue, poor concentration, nightmares, little or no interest or pleasure in activities he previously enjoyed, thoughts about traumatic events, and avoidance.  See April 2015 CAPRI; April 2019 CAPRI; April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA; March 2017 Correspondence.  

Moreover, the March 2015 VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was manifested by no worse than transient or mild symptoms; however, the Board finds probative the finding that he experienced depressed mood, anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, increased stress when traveling in a vehicle, disturbing memories, nightmares, loss of appetite, unprovoked anger, difficulty concentrating, and guilt.  See March 2015 C&P examination.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a 30 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder throughout the periods on appeal prior to November 21, 2018.

The Board has considered whether a higher rating is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder at any time prior to November 21, 2018.  However, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted because the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was not shown to have resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The evidence does not reflect symptoms of flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; or gross impairment in thought process or communication. 

In this regard, the Board acknowledges and has considered the Veteran's reports that his PTSD and depressive disorder were manifested by disturbances of motivation and mood, low moods, and mood swings, and that he was easily aggravated and frustrated.  See March 2015 C&P examination; April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA; April 2015 CAPRI; April 2019 CAPRI.  The Board also recognizes the Veteran's reports that he had problems getting along with family, friends, neighbors, or others, seemed unwilling to sustain social interactions, and that he did not get along with authority figures.  See April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA.  However, the Board finds that the cumulative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's symptoms were indicative of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  To the contrary, the Board notes that the Veteran consistently reported that he had a good and supportive relationship with his wife and children, and medical records dated throughout the relevant period show that he was encouraged to continue being socially active with family and friends.  In addition, the Veteran reported that he was still motivated to be involved in community organization in March 2014 and indicated that he participated in activities of leisure, to include going to restaurants, participating in social activities, reading, listening to music, playing table games, using the internet, receiving visits from his children, and taking care of his dog in June 2014.  See April 2015 CAPRI; September 2017 Correspondence; April 2019 CAPRI; January 2021 CAPRI.  Moreover, the May 2014 functional report shows that the Veteran reported that he had never been fired or laid off from a job because of problems getting along with other people.  See April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA.  

In addition, the Board notes that the May 2014 private medical report from Dr. M.Q. indicates that the Veteran was unable to establish and maintain effective work and social relationships.  See May 2014 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.  However, as noted above, Dr. M.Q. did not state whether he interviewed or examined the Veteran, identify what, if any, evidence he reviewed in connection with his report, or provide rationale to support his findings.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).  Moreover, the Board finds that Dr. M.Q.'s findings related to the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms are outweighed by the more probative evidence of record.  As stated above, the evidence shows that the Veteran consistently reported that he had a good and supportive relationship with his wife and children and was regularly encouraged to continue being socially active with family and friends throughout the relevant period.  

The Board has also considered the Veteran's reports of unprovoked anger, physical aggression, as well as his reports that he had a short temper and reacted with impulsivity toward his partner.  See April 2015 CAPRI; April 2019 CAPRI; January 2021 CAPRI.  However, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran consistently denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation and any recent disruptive, aggressive, or impulsive behaviors throughout the period.  Moreover, although the Veteran spent time in jail for drug-related charges, there is no indication that he engaged in any violence during the period.  Thus, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively indicates that the symptomatology attributable to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder, at most, resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks during the period on appeal prior to November 21, 2018.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder throughout the period on appeal prior to November 21, 2018.

As of November 21, 2018, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology associated with his service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder was productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, and as a result, entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted during the period on appeal from November 21, 2018.

As described in greater detail above, the Veteran endorsed the following symptoms during the relevant period: depressed mood; anxiety; hypervigilance; hyperarousal; disturbances of motivation and mood; irritable mood; sadness; chronic sleep impairment; sleep disturbances; nightmares; poor concentration; flattened affect; avoidance; recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories and recurrent distressing dreams related to stressor event; avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with stressor event; flashbacks; inability to remember an important aspect of stressor event; persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world; persistent negative emotional state; markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; persistent inability to experience positive emotions; problems with concentration; and inability to enjoy formerly pleasurable social, recreational, and occupational activities.  See December 2018 C&P examination; March 2019 C&P examination; January 2021 CAPRI; March 2022 CAPRI.

The Board notes that the above-mentioned symptoms are largely consistent with those specifically contemplated by the criteria for a 50 percent evaluation.  In addition, the Board notes that the Veteran has reported chronic anxiety and depression throughout the period on appeal; however, the Board finds that these symptoms have not been so severe as to affect his ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, as is contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria.  In addition, while the Veteran was shown to desire isolation, the Board finds he was not unable to establish and maintain effective relationships during the relevant period based on the evidence showing his strong connections to his family.  In this regard, the Veteran reported that he maintained a "common law" relationship with his wife until they married in 2016 and consistently described their relationship as good and supportive throughout the relevant period.  In addition, he reported that he maintained contact and close relationships with his six children during the December 2018 VA examination.  See December 2018 C&P examination.  

The Board further acknowledges that the Veteran was unemployed throughout the relevant period.  Although he indicated that he was unable to secure or follow any substantially gainful occupation due, at least in part, to his service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder, he subsequently reported that pain made it unbearable for him to function as he would have liked and prevented him from performing all of his duties despite accommodations.  Significantly, the Veteran did not indicate that his psychiatric symptoms prevented him from securing or following any substantial gainful employment, and as noted above, the August 2014 Disability Determination and Transmittal form shows that SSA found the Veteran to be disabled from April 30, 2014, with osteoarthrosis and allied disorders noted as his primary diagnosis and disorders of the back listed as secondary diagnoses.  Notably, SSA did not find that the Veteran's psychiatric disorders, to include PTSD and depressive disorder, rendered him disabled.  See April 2015 Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA.

In addition, the Board emphasizes that the March 2019 VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms were not severe enough to interfere with his marital relationship, parenting performance, daily activities, family responsibility, financial debts, or social functioning.  In this regard, the examiner acknowledged that the Veteran retired in 2014 after more than 35 years of gainful employment but found that his mental disorder did not preclude him from any "sedentary" labor activity.  See March 2019 C&P examination.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology associated with his service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder was not productive of occupational impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, family relations, judgment, and thinking during the period.

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder warrant a higher 100 percent rating during the period on appeal from November 21, 2018.  However, for the reasons discussed above, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disability was not productive of total occupational and social impairment required to warrant such a rating and was not manifested by gross impairment in thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an initial 30 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder throughout the period on appeal prior to November 21, 2018.  The Board also finds that the evidence is persuasively against assignment of a rating in excess of 50 percent on and after November 21, 2018.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, DCs 9411, 9434.

Earlier Effective Dates

Unless specifically provided otherwise in the statute, the effective date of a rating and award for pension, compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after a final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  In Roper v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 173 (2006), the Court held that effective dates for both primary and secondary conditions are governed by 38 C.F.R. § 3.400, which provides that the effective date is the later of the date the condition arose or the date the veteran applied for benefits.  See also Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2008).

With regard to compensation for disabilities for which service connection was granted on a secondary basis, the effective date can be no earlier than the date of the claim for service connection on a secondary basis.  Ellington v. Nicholson, 22 Vet. App. 141, 145 (2007) (finding that the effective date for a grant of service connection for diabetes and hypertension as secondary to leukemia was the date of the claim for secondary service connection, not the date of the claim of service connection for leukemia), aff'd sub nom.  Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Ross v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 528, 532-33 (2008) (holding that the effective date for a grant of secondary service connection for depression with anxiety was the date of the secondary service connection claim, not the date of the claim for service connection for the primary heart condition).

A claim for VA benefits, whether formal or informal, must be in writing and must identify the benefit sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5101; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(p), 3.151, 3.155; Rodriguez v. West, 189 F.3d 1351 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377 (1999).   Prior to March 24, 2015, any communication or action indicating intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, was considered an informal claim.  Such informal claim must identify the benefit sought.  Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim has not been filed, an application form will be forwarded to the claimant for execution.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(a).  While the VA should broadly interpret submissions from a veteran, it is not required to conjure up claims not specifically raised.  Brannon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 32 (1998); Talbert v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 352, 356-57 (1995).

2. Entitlement to an effective date prior to May 21, 2015, for the award of service connection for OSA.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an effective date prior to May 21, 2015, for the award of service connection for OSA.

By way of procedural history, VA received the Veteran's informal claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea on May 30, 2014.  See May 2014 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim; May 2014 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.  In an April 2015 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for OSA.  See April 2015 Rating Decision - Narrative.  Thereafter, the Veteran filed a timely notice of disagreement (NOD), the AOJ issued a statement of the case (SOC) in August 2016, and the Veteran submitted a substantive appeal in October 2016.  See April 2016 NOD; August 2016 SOC; October 2016 VA Form 9.  

In a November 2017 decision, the Board, in pertinent part, granted the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA, and the AOJ subsequently implemented the Board decision in a December 2017 rating decision and assigned a 50 percent rating, effective December 2, 2017, the date the AOJ found that the diagnosis was confirmed.  See November 2017 BVA Decision; December 2017 Rating Decision - Narrative.  Thereafter, in a May 2022 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 21, 2015, for the award of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  At that time, the AOJ noted that a May 2015 sleep study showed that the Veteran had been diagnosed with OSA.  See May 2022 Rating Decision - Narrative.  

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran submitted a private medical report from a physician, M.Q., dated on May 30, 2014.  M.Q. noted that the Veteran experienced excessive daytime somnolence, morning sluggishness, fatigue, headaches, loud cyclical snoring with cessation episodes, and thrashing movements of the extremities during sleep.  The diagnoses reflected in the medical report included OSA.  See May 2014 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination for sleep apnea in March 2015.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that he had been experiencing sleeping problems for approximately 20 years and endorsed trouble falling asleep.  He also reported that he was easily awakened, snored loudly, and woke up gasping for air.  However, the examiner found that the Veteran did not have, and had never had, sleep apnea.  In this regard, the examiner acknowledged that M.Q. mentioned a diagnosis of OSA in his May 2014 private medical report but found that the Veteran had not reported his symptoms to his primary care physician or undergone a polysomnogram.  However, the examiner also noted findings, signs, or symptoms attributable to OSA, to include hypersomnolence.  See March 2015 C&P examination.

The Veteran also sought treatment for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and snoring in May 2015.  At that time, he underwent a portable sleep study, which revealed moderate OSA.  See May 2022 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

In July 2017, the Veteran, through his attorney, argued that the appropriate effective date for the award of service connection for OSA was no later than May 30, 2015, the date of the Veteran's claim.  See July 2019 Correspondence.  

Thereafter, in a July 2022 statement, the Veteran's attorney argued that the Veteran's service-connected OSA should be granted from June 25, 2013, the date he was awarded service connection for PTSD with depressive disorder.  In this regard, the attorney acknowledged that the March 2015 VA examination report found that the Veteran did not have OSA but emphasized that the examiner also identified symptoms compatible therewith, to include persistent day time hypersomnolence, and failed to perform a sleep study.  In this regard, the attorney noted that the Veteran underwent a sleep study and was diagnosed with OSA less than two months later.  In addition, the Veteran's attorney noted that he had been experiencing sleep disturbances for more than 20 years, and the May 2014 report from M.Q. documented symptoms compatible with OSA, to include excessive daytime somnolence, morning sluggishness, fatigue, loud cyclical snoring with breathing cessation episode and thrashing of extremities during sleep.  See July 2022 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  The July 2022 statement was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed; to the extent that this statement constitutes argument concerning the currently appealed claim, however, the Board can consider it under the AMA.

Following a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for OSA is warranted beginning May 30, 2014, but no earlier, the date VA received the Veteran's informal service connection claim.

In this regard, the Board finds the Veteran's written statement received on May 30, 2014, may be considered an informal claim for benefits and, after resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, finds that it is factually ascertainable from the medical evidence that his OSA has been present since the date of his initial informal claim.  In this regard, although the March 2015 VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have, and had never had, OSA, he also indicated that the Veteran had not undergone a sleep study and that one was not performed in connection with the examination.  In addition, the Board finds it significant that the May 2014 report from M.S. documented a diagnosis of OSA and symptoms compatible with OSA, to include excessive daytime somnolence, morning sluggishness, fatigue, headaches, and loud cyclical snoring with cessation episodes and thrashing movements of the extremities during sleep.  Further, he subsequently underwent a sleep study and was formally diagnosed with OSA in May 2015, approximately two months after the March 2015 VA examination.  See May 2014 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility; May 2022 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The Board has considered the attorney's argument that the Veteran should be awarded an effective date of June 25, 2013, based on the date he was awarded service connection for PTSD with depressive disorder.  See July 2022 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  However, as discussed above, the effective date assigned for a secondarily service-connected condition is governed by 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Consequently, the effective date for the Veteran's secondarily service-connected OSA is based solely on the date VA received his claim for service connection for such disability and, as such, does not relate back to the effective date assigned for his service-connected PTSD and depressive disorder.  Thus, the Board finds that the evidence does not support assignment of an effective date prior to May 30, 2014, the day of receipt of his claim, for the award of service connection for OSA.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the criteria for an effective date of May 30, 2014, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for OSA have been met.  The appeal is granted. 

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Justis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.