Citation Nr: A25030646
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-460796
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a dental condition is dismissed without prejudice.

Service connection for hearing loss is denied.

Service connection for a left foot disorder, to include left foot neuropathy, is denied.

Service connection for a back disorder, characterized as a lower back/spine condition, is denied.

Service connection for rheumatoid arthritis is denied.

Service connection for a thyroid condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the hands and feet, to include osteoarthritis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder, to include right foot neuropathy, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for melanoma is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In October 2024 correspondence, the Veteran, through his representative, expressly requested that his claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental condition be withdrawn.

2. The evidence of record is against finding that the Veteran has, or has had at any time during the current appeal, a current diagnosis of hearing loss.

3. The Veteran's left foot disorder and back disorder were not shown in service or for many years thereafter and are not otherwise etiologically related to active duty service.

4. The Veteran's rheumatoid arthritis and thyroid condition are not disorders that are subject to presumptive service connection based upon exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, were not shown in service or for many years thereafter, and are not otherwise etiologically related to active duty service, including exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal of the appeal of the denial of the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental condition have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for service connection for hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left foot disorder, to include left foot neuropathy, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

4. The criteria for service connection for a back disorder, characterized as a lower back/spine condition, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

5. The criteria for service connection for rheumatoid arthritis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

6. The criteria for service connection for a thyroid condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1971 to September 1974.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2024.  Therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeal Modernization Act (AMA) applies.

In August 2024, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), where he elected the hearing option.  In October 2024, the Board the Veteran testified at hearing before a Veterans Law Judge.  A transcript of the hearing is of record.

Given that the Veteran elected the hearing option, the Board will consider the evidence of record when the AOJ issued the July 2024 rating decision on appeal and any evidence submitted by the Veteran and/or his representative at the hearing and up to 90 days after the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a) (January 21, 2025).  Neither the Veteran nor his representative submitted any additional evidence either at the hearing or during the 90 day period following the hearing.

Finally, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that a deferred rating decision does not constitute the necessary "adjudicative determination" from which a notice of disagreement may be filed, and that the AOJ's deferral of an issue is not a final decision.  Shipley v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 458, 461-62 (2011).  In the August 2024 NOD, the Veteran indicated that he sought to appeal the issues of entitlement to service connection for chronic cholelithiasis status-post cholecystectomy and entitlement to an increased disability rating for scars.  In the July 2024 rating decision, the AOJ deferred a decision concerning his entitlement to service connection for chronic cholelithiasis status-post cholecystectomy and entitlement to an increased disability rating for scars.  Thus, the AOJ's deferral of a decision concerning his entitlement to service connection for chronic cholelithiasis status-post cholecystectomy and entitlement to an increased disability rating for scars in the July 2024 rating decision was a not a final decision that the Veteran could appeal to the Board.  Accordingly, his claims of entitlement to service connection for chronic cholelithiasis status-post cholecystectomy and entitlement to an increased disability rating for scars are not on appeal.  

The Board reminds the Veteran's attorney that his ethical duties preclude him bringing or defending a proceeding unless there is a basis in law and fact for doing so that is not frivolous, which includes a good faith argument for an extension, modification, or reversal of existing law.  See Model Rules of Professional Conduct R. 3.1; see also 38 C.F.R. § 14.632(d) (an attorney shall not engage in behavior or activities prohibited by the rules of professional conduct).  It is unclear why he appealed the non-final decisions concerning the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for chronic cholelithiasis status-post cholecystectomy and entitlement to an increased disability rating for scars but is reminded that a frivolous appeal violates the ethical duties for attorneys.

Withdrawal of Claim

1. Entitlement to service connection for a dental condition

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative.  Id. 

Here, in October 2024 correspondence, the Veteran's representative indicated that the Veteran sought to withdraw his appeal of the denial of his claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental condition.  The Veteran also indicated that he sought to withdraw his appeal of the denial of his claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental condition at the October 2024 Board hearing.  In view of the Veteran's expressed desire, the Board concludes that his intent was to withdraw this claim and further action with respect to this claim is not appropriate.  Indeed, no allegation of error of fact or law remains for appellate consideration.

Accordingly, the Board no longer has jurisdiction to review the claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental condition and it is dismissed.  

Service Connection

Under the relevant laws and regulations, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110.  Generally, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 505 (1995).

Certain chronic diseases may be presumed to have been incurred during service if they become manifested to a compensable degree within one year from separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  This presumption is rebuttable by affirmative evidence to the contrary.  Id.  Moreover, evidence of continuous symptoms since active duty is a factor for consideration as to whether a causal relationship exists between an in-service injury or incident and the current disorder as is contemplated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Finally, 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 and 3.309 allow presumptive service connection for certain enumerated diseases related to exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune.  Under the regulations, a veteran who had no less than 30 days (consecutive or nonconsecutive) of service at Camp Lejeune during the period beginning on August 1, 1953, and ending on December 31, 1987, shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to the contaminants in the water supply, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the individual was not exposed to contaminants in the water supply during that service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(7).

If a veteran, or former reservist or member of the National Guard, was exposed to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune during military service and the exposure meets the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(7), the following diseases will be service-connected even though there is no record of such disease during service, subject to the rebuttable presumption provisions of § 3.307(d): (1) kidney cancer; (2) liver cancer; (3) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; (4) adult leukemia; (5) multiple myeloma; (6) Parkinson's disease; (7) aplastic anemia and other myelodysplastic syndromes; and (8) bladder cancer.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f).  

2. Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for hearing loss.  Specifically, he contends that he currently experiences hearing loss that began during the last 18 months of his service at Camp Lejeune and was caused by his exposure to hazardous noise during service, including tanks and weapons, without hearing protection.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted because the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss for VA compensation purposes.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), (d).

It is well established that impaired hearing will be considered to be a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz (Hz) is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the above frequencies are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  Here, the report from the March 2024 VA examination documents the results of audiometric testing performed during the examination and shows that the auditory thresholds in his right ear were 15 decibels (dB) at 500 Hz, 15 dB at 1000 Hz, 15 dB at 2000 Hz, 10 dB at 3000 Hz, and 20 dB at 4000 Hz.  The auditory thresholds in his left ear were 20 dB at 500 Hz, 15 dB at 1000 Hz, 5 dB at 2000 Hz, 10 dB at 3000 Hz, and 25 dB at 4000 Hz.  The examination report also reflects that he had a speech discrimination score of 100 percent in his right ear and 98 percent in his left ear.  The record is also devoid of any evidence controverting the results of the audiometric testing set forth in the examination report or otherwise showing hearing loss in either ear for VA disability compensation purposes under the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  

Accordingly, service connection for hearing loss is not warranted because the evidence of record does not show that he has a current diagnosis of hearing loss for VA compensation purposes under 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disorder, to include left foot neuropathy

4. Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder, characterized as a lower back/spine condition

5. Entitlement to service connection for rheumatoid arthritis

6. Entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a left foot disorder, a back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and a thyroid condition.  With respect to a left foot disorder, he contends that service connection is warranted because his current left foot disorder was caused by physical activities, such as distance running in boots, during his active duty service.  With respect to a thyroid condition, he contends that service connection is warranted because the drinking water at Camp Lejeune caused him to develop his thyroid condition.

As a preliminary matter, service connection for rheumatoid arthritis and a thyroid condition, to the extent that the Veteran asserts that those conditions have been caused by his exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune, is not warranted on a presumptive basis.  Although the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune because he had the requisite service at Camp Lejeune under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(7)(iii), rheumatoid arthritis and his thyroid condition are not among the diseases for which service connection is granted based upon exposure under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 and 3.309.  Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for rheumatoid arthritis and a thyroid condition on a presumptive basis.

Although the Veteran's rheumatoid arthritis and thyroid condition are not entitled to presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 and 3.309, the Veteran is not precluded from establishing service connection for them with proof of actual direct causation as due to active duty service.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1041-42 (Fed. Cir. 1994). 

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted for a left foot disorder, a back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and a thyroid condition.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d), 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

Initially, the Board finds that the Veteran's service treatment records fail to establish that his left foot disorder, back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and thyroid condition began during or are otherwise etiologically related to his active-duty service.  Specifically, his service treatments do not reflect that he was diagnosed with, reported symptoms of, or sought treatment for any of these disorders during his active-duty service.  Indeed, the July 1974 separation examination report reflects that his feet and spine were normal, and does not reflect that the examining physician observed any signs or symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis or a thyroid condition.  

Next, the post-service evidence fails to show that the Veteran has experienced continuous symptoms related to a left foot disorder, a back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and a thyroid condition.  In this case, the clinical evidence of record shows significant gaps between the Veteran's separation from service and when he first sought treatment for these disorders after his separation from service in September 1974:

"	With respect to a left foot disorder, the objective medical evidence does not show a diagnosis of, any symptoms of, or any treatment for symptoms that could be related to a left foot disorder until February 2015, more than 40 years after his separation from service.

"	With respect to a back disorder, the objective medical evidence does not show a diagnosis of, any symptoms of, or any treatment for symptoms that could be related to a back disorder.  Although the Veteran testified that he experienced symptoms of a back disorder at the October 2024 Board hearing, he attributed such symptoms to his age rather than his active duty service.

"	With respect to rheumatoid arthritis, the objective medical evidence does not show a diagnosis of, any symptoms of, or any treatment for symptoms that could be related to rheumatoid arthritis until March 2018, more than 43 years after his separation from service.  

"	With respect to a thyroid condition, the objective medical evidence does not show a diagnosis of, any symptoms of, or any treatment for symptoms that could be related to a thyroid condition until May 2004, more than 29 years after his separation from service.  In fact, the Veteran is not truly claiming continuous symptoms of a thyroid condition given that he attributes his thyroid condition to his exposure to the drinking water at Camp Lejeune.

Given the significant gaps between his separation from service in September 1974 and when he first sought treatment for a left foot disorder, a back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and a thyroid condition, the fact that he does not attribute his back pain to his active duty service, and the fact that he is claiming that his thyroid condition has been caused by exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune rather than show by continuous symptoms, a continuity of symptoms based upon the clinical evidence is not sufficient to support a direct nexus, including for purposes of the chronic disease presumption under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(3).

Finally, service connection may be granted when the evidence establishes a medical nexus between active-duty service and the current diagnosis.  However, there is not sufficient evidence in the medical records to demonstrate a nexus between the Veteran's active-duty service and a left foot disorder, a back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and a thyroid condition.  Indeed, there is no objective evidence linking these conditions to an event during his active-duty service.  The Board also notes that the Veteran has not provided sufficient evidence, including private opinions and/or medical evidence, to establish a nexus between his active service and these conditions.

Additionally, the evidence includes the opinions of the March 2024 VA examiner who considered the etiology of the Veteran's rheumatoid arthritis and thyroid condition.  With respect to rheumatoid arthritis, the March 2024 VA examination report reflects that the examiner opined that the Veteran's rheumatoid arthritis was less likely than not caused by his service at Camp Lejeune because no credible or scientific medical literature suggests a causative relationship between veterans' exposures and rheumatoid arthritis.  The examiner further explained that rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder for which several factors, including genetics, play a role.

With respect to a thyroid condition, the March 2024 VA examination report reflects that the examiner opined that the Veteran's thyroid condition was less likely than not caused by his service at Camp Lejeune because not credible scientific or medical literature suggests a causative relationship between veterans' exposure and thyroid conditions.  The examiner further explained that thyroid nodules or lumps in the thyroid can be caused by several factors, including overgrowth of normal thyroid tissue, iodine deficiency, and thyroid cysts.  

Given the examiner's reliance on medical literature and explanation of the factors that can cause the development of rheumatoid arthritis and thyroid conditions, which did not include the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, the Board finds that these opinions are probative and further show that these conditions are not etiologically related to his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In arriving at its conclusion, the Board has also considered the Veteran's statements relating a left foot disorder to physical activity in boots during his active duty service, his rheumatoid arthritis to his active duty service, and his thyroid condition to his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  The Federal Circuit has held that "[l]ay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional."  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377).

In this case, however, the Veteran is not competent to provide testimony regarding the etiology of his left foot disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and thyroid condition.  See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377, n.4.  Although he can provide competent testimony regarding symptoms, these conditions are not conditions that can be diagnosed by their unique and identifiable features as they do not involve a simple identification that a layperson is competent to make.  In any event, the diagnoses of dysfunctions and disorders, and their respective etiologies, are medical determinations and generally must be established by medical findings and opinion.  See id. at 1376-77.  Thus, to the extent that the Veteran believes that these conditions were the result of his active-duty service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, he is a lay person without appropriate medical training and expertise to provide a medical diagnosis and etiological opinion.

By virtue of the foregoing, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted for a left foot disorder, a back disorder, rheumatoid arthritis, and a thyroid condition.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the hands and feet, to include osteoarthritis, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder, to include right foot neuropathy, is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for melanoma is remanded.

The Board finds that the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the hands and feet, to include osteoarthritis, a right foot disorder, and melanoma must be remanded.  With respect to arthritis of the hands and feet, the March 2024 VA examiner considered whether the Veteran's exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune caused him to develop arthritis.  The March 2024 examiner did not address a January 1974 service treatment record reflecting that he injured his left hand during his active duty service and the December 1976 report of medical history reflecting that he may have broken his right foot during his active duty service.  With respect to melanoma, the March 2024 VA examiner did not address the Veteran's contention that his exposure to the sun during his active duty service caused him to develop melanoma, instead focusing only on his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  

Because the examiner failed to address the relevant treatment records when opining on the etiology of the Veteran's arthritis and failed to address his contentions concerning sun exposure when opining on the etiology of his melanoma, these examinations are inadequate, and addendum opinions are required.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); Miller, 32 Vet. App. at 262 (holding that "where the examiner failed to address the veteran's lay evidence and the Board fails to find the veteran not credible or not competent to offer lay evidence, the proper remedy is for VA to obtain a new examination").

With respect to a right foot disorder, the evidence, including a December 1976 report of medical history reflects that he may have sustained a broken right foot during his active duty service.  Accordingly, the Board must remand this claim for a VA examination concerning whether he has a current right foot disorder that is etiologically related to his active duty service.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should return the claims file to the VA examiner who performed the March 2024 hand and fingers VA examination and the March 2024 skin diseases VA examination.

The examiner is asked to provide addendum opinions as to (1) whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher, that the Veteran's arthritis of the hands and feet, to include osteoarthritis, is etiologically related to his active duty service and (2) whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher, that the Veteran's melanoma is etiologically related to his active duty service.  

In providing the requested opinion concerning the Veteran's arthritis of the hands and feet, to include osteoarthritis, the examiner should consider the January 1974 service treatment record reflecting that the Veteran sustained a left hand injury during his active duty service, the December 1976 report of medical history reflecting that he may have broken his right foot during active duty service, and any other relevant medical evidence.

In providing the requested opinions concerning the Veteran's arthritis of the hands and feet, to include osteoarthritis, and his melanoma, the examiner should also address the Veteran's lay statements.  With respect to melanoma, the Veteran has contended that his exposure to the sun has caused his melanoma, and the examiner should address this assertion when providing the addendum opinion.

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should provide an explanation stating why this is so.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

2. Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations by an appropriate clinician or clinicians to determine the nature, extent, onset, and etiology of the Veteran's right foot disorder, to include right foot neuropathy.  The claims file should be provided to the examiner(s) for review. All indicated studies deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed, and all findings of those tests should be reported in detail.  

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher, that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a right foot disorder, to include right foot neuropathy that is related to his active duty service.

In providing the foregoing opinion, the examiner should address the December 1976 report of medical history reflecting that he may have broken his right foot during active duty service, any other relevant medical evidence, and the Veteran's lay statement regarding his right foot disorder.  

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should provide an explanation stating why this is so.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.C., Counsel