Citation Nr: A25030072
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240429-436170
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

A rating of 70 percent for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted for the entire period on appeal.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas during the period on appeal; they do not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 70 percent for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2013 to July 2015.

On appeal are two rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The first is a February 2024 rating decision that granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 50 percent disability rating effective August 30, 2023.  The second is a March 2024 rating decision that continued the 50 percent rating assigned for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.

In April 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

During the pendency of this appeal, in a September 2024 rating decision, the RO increased the rating for PTSD to 70 percent effective April 16, 2024.

The matter is now before the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) for further adjudication.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately compensate the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Although the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings, the Board is to consider the Veteran's medical history in determining the applicability of a higher rating for the entire period in which the appeal has been pending. Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31 (1999).

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent prior to April 16, 2024, and in excess of 70 percent thereafter, for PTSD.

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for her service-connected PTSD, which is currently rated 50 percent prior to April 16, 2024, and 70 percent thereafter.

After review of the medical and lay evidence in this case, the Board finds that a disability rating of 70 percent is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD for the entire period on appeal.

PTSD is rated pursuant to the criteria of Diagnostic Code 9411 under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, but with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete task); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideations; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of the veteran's personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform the activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Board notes that post service treatment records from the Indianapolis VAMC are associated with the Veteran's claims file. In summary, these records reflect the Veteran has a current diagnosis of PTSD and that she is receiving mental health treatment. For example, an October 2023 psychiatry note reflects the Veteran was seen for a history of Military Sexual Trauma (MST) and that the Veteran reported "she sometimes wishes she would fall asleep and not wake up."

Private treatment records are also associated with the Veteran's claims file. In summary, these records reflect the Veteran has a current diagnosis of PTSD and that she is receiving mental health treatment. For example, a September 2023 record reflects the Veteran was present in office to obtain care and is here to resume taking her medication. She had to be off medication for military service. She says she recently graduated from college and re-commissioned into the National Guard. She notes that she had a lot of depression when she went through a divorce in college and that she also faced sexual harassment and other mistreatment (e.g., false accusation of misconduct) in the military. She says she is having "huge panic attacks." She has been on Vistaril which helps the panic attacks. However, she is still "extremely irritable."

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in January 2024. The examiner noted 2 mental health diagnoses: major depressive disorder with anxious distress and dependent personality disorder. The Veteran reported a history of MST. A platoon Sgt sexually harassed her then tried to put his hands on her, but she yelled and stopped it. After that, she was mistreated by him and another Sgt. Her husband during her time in the Army, stalked her; would try to put his hands on her after they weren't living together; and, then abandoned her and their baby. The Veteran is currently in the National Guard and is a self-employed Real Estate Agent. For VA rating purposes, the examiner noted the Veteran's mental health symptoms include depressed mood; anxiety; and, chronic sleep impairment. The examiner also specifically noted the Veteran reported, "I have thought that I do not want to live like this. I have passive thoughts of running off the road. I would never actually do it." The examiner determined the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The Veteran underwent another examination in February 2024. This examiner noted 3 mental health diagnoses: (1) PTSD due to military sexual trauma; (2) major depressive disorder; and, (3) female sexual interest/arousal disorder. The examiner stated it is not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis. With regard to homicidal/suicidal ideation, the examiner noted the Veteran denied thoughts of harm to others, but she reported passive thoughts of death. "The best way to explain it, if I could go to sleep and I knew the loss of me would not affect my kids, and I could stop feeling this, I would love it. Passive, no intention of doing it, but almost weekly I wonder what the point is." For VA rating purposes, the examiner indicated the Veteran's symptoms include depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; and, disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner made the following behavioral observations: As for her appearance, the Veteran was casually and appropriately dressed, fairly groomed, and appears her stated age. Face and clothing appeared clean. The Veteran was seen via Tele-C&P through the use of HIPAA-compliant video conferencing. Her affect was alert, distressed, tearful, and dysphoric. Her eye contact was appropriate and direct. Her grooming/hygiene was adequate although the Veteran stated she hasn't been motivated to wash her hair. Her behavior was cooperative. Her thought process was goal directed, although she did jump around a bit with details. Her thought content was congruent with reality. Her speech had normal rate, volume, and tone. She was oriented to person, place, time, and situation. No hallucinations. As for memory, the Veteran reported issues with forgetting and concentration. Her attention span was within normal limits. Her insight/judgment was intact. She denied suicidal/self-harm but had some passive thoughts. The examiner determined the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran underwent another VA examination in June 2024, however the results of this examination was not considered as the exam was after the rating decisions on appeal. As noted above, if the Veteran would like VA to consider the June 2024 VA examination, or any other evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.   

 Upon review of the above evidence, the Board finds that, for the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD has been manifested by symptoms such as suicidal ideation (which is a symptom found only in the 70 percent rating criteria), as well as difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting) and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships (the Veteran is twice divorced). In fact, it was specifically noted by each of the examiner's above that the Veteran had made statements suggesting suicidal ideation. The January 2024 VA examiner quoted the Veteran as stating, "I have passive thoughts of running off the road." The February 2024 VA examiner quoted the Veteran as stating, "if I could go to sleep and I knew the loss of me would not affect my kids, and I could stop feeling this, I would love it." This is similar to the reports of the Veteran's treating physicians at the Indianapolis VAMC who quoted the Veteran as stating she "sometimes wishes she would fall asleep and not wake up." As such, these symptoms have resulted in a level of impairment productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, specifically warranting a 70 percent rating for the entire period on appeal.

However, the Board further finds that the record does not support a 100 percent rating as the evidence of record has not shown that the Veteran has experienced total occupational and social impairment, due to symptoms of such severity as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, inability to maintain activities of daily living, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss of close relatives or own name. Rather, her thought processes were regularly noted to be logical, and she was consistently described as oriented to person, time, and place. 

In conclusion, the Board finds that for the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD symptoms demonstrated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  Therefore, a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD is warranted for the entire period on appeal. 38C.F.R. §4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. The appeal is granted.

 

 

T. Raymond

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bess, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.