Citation Nr: A25030468
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240312-426471
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to the service-connected disability of unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder or due to in-service participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1986 to January 1997.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In March 2024, the Board received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal electing the Direct Review docket to review the March 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(a).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of OSA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for OSA

The Veteran contends multiple things may have caused his OSA.  The first was that he worked day shifts and night shifts while in service.  He believes this always changing sleep pattern, along with traveling through different time zones contributed to or caused his sleep apnea.  See August 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  Next, the Veteran asserts his OSA was secondarily caused by his psychiatric disorders and his traumatic brain injury (TBI).  See August 2023 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  Lastly, the Veteran argues that his OSA was due to his exposure to burn pits/environmental hazards/particulate matters/oil well fires.  See April 2023 VA examination opinion.

Pursuant to the March 2024 Rating Decision, the RO made the following favorable findings: the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA, evidence showed a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, in that participation in TERA was conceded, and the Veteran was service connected for unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder with TBI.  

In August 2022, the Veteran's spouse stated that she first noticed the Veteran began to snore very loudly after he returned from deployment.  She stated she would attempt to turn him over, hoping the snoring would stop; however, that did not work.  The Veteran's spouse reported that she had witness the Veteran stop breathing.  She remembers him choking and gasping in his sleep.  As a result, he would seem tired in the mornings.  The Veteran's spouse stated that when he left the military in January 1997, he was still snoring loudly.  This continued until his sleep study in January 2022, until the Veteran started using his CPAP machine.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2022.  The examiner found the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) were silent for any evidence of sleep related issues.  The examiner stated OSA is characterized by repetitive episodes of nocturnal breathing cessation due to upper airway collapse.  Risk factors include snoring, obesity, and a variety of structural abnormalities such as a large neck circumference, nasal obstruction, enlarged tonsils/adenoids, macroglossia and low-lying soft palate.  The examiner found there was a lack of evidence supporting sleep impairment as causal for the development of OSA.  The examiner stated it has been hypothesized that the sleep deprivation resulting from chronic insomnia might compromise the upper airway muscle tone; however, no empirical studies have been found to support or dispute this pathway.  

In April 2023, the VA examiner rendered another opinion as to whether the Veteran's OSA was caused by TERA due to his service in Southwest Asia.  The examiner stated, "[a]ccording to the Mayo Clinic the 'leading risk factor of OSA is excess weight [and] obesity.'"  The examiner stated the Veteran's advanced age of 56 put him at an increased risk for upper airway obstruction due to age-related loosening and progressive laxity of the pharyngeal walls and the throat muscles causing blockage of air movement as he sleeps.  The examiner opined it was much more likely that the condition was due to obesity, very small nasopharynx, very large neck, and age-related contraction of the throat causing obstruction.  In this case the most obvious and likely causes are anatomic.  The examiner stated they found no evidence of respiratory obstruction or central apnea that could be attributed to any toxic exposure while in the service.  Further, the literature, TERA memo, and job aids did not support any such connection.  Therefore, the examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA was caused by TERA due to service in Southwest Asia.

In June 2023, another VA opinion was issued.  The examiner stated that the conditions of OSA and unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder with TBI were not medically related.  OSA was a separate entity entirely from the psychiatric disorders.  The examiner found that a significant risk factor for the development of OSA is obesity.  The Veteran's body mass index (BMI) had been over 37 which was in the "obese" range.  Additionally, the Veteran's mental health diagnosis was related to trauma experienced in 1994 and the Veteran's OSA was diagnosed in 2022.  The examiner expressed that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship and a nexus had not been established.  The examiner explained that OSA is caused by conditions that block airflow through your upper airways during sleep.  A person's age, family history, lifestyle habits, other medical conditions, and some features of their body can raise the risk of sleep apnea.  

The examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA was due to or aggravated by his service-connected unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and unspecified depressive disorder with TBI.  The examiner also opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA was due to or the result of obesity.  "While medical literature discusses a correlation between depressive disorders and weight gain, it does not establish a direct or causal relationship, i.e., depression does not cause weight gain."

In September 2023, the VA rendered another opinion.  The examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his service.  The examiner explained, the Veteran's STRs did not show evidence of initial manifestations of this condition during active service.  Further, the STR's did not support the Veteran's contention of having chronic fatigue or having sleep related breathing issues during service.  The examiner found that as there was no evidence in the treatment records, from time of separation from service to time of the OSA diagnosis, that the Veteran had initial clinical manifestations of OSA that had started during active service.  Thus, the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not incurred during active service.

In February 2024, another VA opinion was tendered.  The examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA.  The examiner found the Veteran had an extensive smoking history which has caused lower respiratory tract and upper respiratory tract obstruction as well as respiratory depression.  The Veteran's advanced age of 57 puts him at increased risk for upper airway obstruction due to age-related loosening and progressive laxity of the pharyngeal walls and the throat muscles causing blockage of air movement as he sleeps.  The examiner opined it was much more likely that the condition was due to the Veteran's obesity, smoking, very small oropharynx, very large neck, and age-related contraction of the throat causing obstruction.  Thus, in this case the most obvious and likely causes are anatomic.  The examiner found no evidence of respiratory obstruction or central apnea that could be attributed to any toxic exposure while in the service.  The risk factors outside of the military service far outweigh the factors identified in the TERA.  The literature, TERA memo, and job aids did not support any such connection.

The Board finds the above opinions to be inadequate.  The VA's duty to assist includes conducting a thorough and comprehensive medical examination.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2).  The Board is required to ensure that medical opinions are made on the basis of sufficient facts or data and the application of reliable medical principles.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008).  A medical opinion is adequate if it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and describes the Veteran's condition in sufficient detail so as to allow the Board to make a fully informed evaluation.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007); see also Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994).  This requires the opinion to "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two."  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

First, the conclusions reached are not supported with analysis that is adequate for the Board to consider and weigh against other evidence of record.  Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124.  For example, in the June 2023 opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not due to or the result of his obesity.  Yet, the examiner goes on to state that "while medical literature discusses a correlation between depressive disorders and weight gain, it does not establish a direct or causal relationship."  The opinion, however, does not discuss whether the Veteran's obesity could have caused or aggravated the Veteran's OSA.  Instead, the opinion skipped that step and jumped to the next step of whether the Veteran's obesity was caused by his psychiatric disorders.  Further, there was no rationale behind the negative opinion other than while literature puts obesity and psychiatric disorders together, the word causal was not used.  

In addition, while the February 2024 and April 2023 opinions found the Veteran's OSA was not caused by the indicated TERA, these opinions failed to provide a rationale.  The examiners merely stated they found no evidence of respiratory obstruction or central apnea that could be attributed to any toxic exposure while in the service.  The examiners further found the literature, TERA memorandum, and job aids did not support any such connection.  However, the opinions failed to specifically address the Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER), which reflected exposures to airborne hazards, open burn pits, oil well fires, and other various substances.  

Second, the VA examiners appear to ignore the statements from the Veteran's spouse that he has exhibited OSA symptoms during service and since service.  The VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  Lay testimony is competent to prove that a claimant exhibited certain lay-observable symptoms and the time that those symptoms appeared.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  Lay evidence cannot be determined to be not credible merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 133637 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  The Veteran's spouse is competent to identify the onset and duration of observable symptoms, such as snoring and apneic events.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307-08 (2007). The Veteran's reports are internally consistent and thus entitled to probative weight.  If these reports were discounted, there was no explanation provided by the VA examiner as to why.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not take into account the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history).

Additionally, the VA examiners seemed to focus solely on the Veteran's STRs and post-service medical records.  The fact that there are no complaints, treatments, or diagnoses in the Veteran's STRs and no historical post-service treatment for same are not fatal to his claims for service connection.  See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  "Symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology."  Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 496 (citing Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 16, 19 (1991)).  Further, VA regulations do not provide that service connection can only be shown through medical records, but rather allow for proof through lay evidence.  Smith v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 512, 514-15 (1992).  The law specifically provides that service connection may be satisfactorily established by lay evidence without the support of official records.  Sheets v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 512, 514-15 (1992).

Finally, some of the opinions contradict one another.  The April 2023 and February 2024 examiners stated, "it was much more likely that the Veteran's OSA was due to his obesity."  However, the June 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not due to or the result of his obesity.  

Once the VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Thus, a remand is warranted to correct these pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA.  

The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner is asked to address:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's OSA was incurred in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is due to any of his service-connected disabilities, to include his acquired psychiatric disorders or TBI.

(c.) Whether the Veteran's OSA has been aggravated by any of his service-connected disabilities, to include his acquired psychiatric disorders or TBI.  

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are separate and distinct concepts and require separate rationales.  The examiner should provide specific evidence of record to support any conclusions, such as references from this Veteran's relevant medical history and/or medical literature.  In formulating any opinion, the examiner must address the Veteran's contentions, including his spouse's statements of the onset of symptoms and the symptoms she has witnessed.

(d.) The examiner must specifically address obesity as an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his OSA.

Please address:

i.	Whether any of his service-connected disabilities caused him to become obese or aggravated his obesity.  The examiner must render an opinion on both causation and aggravation.

ii.	If yes, (his obesity/weight gain was caused by or aggravated by his service-connected disability) please opine whether his obesity was a substantial factor in causing his OSA disability; and

iii.	If yes, (his obesity/weight gain was caused by or aggravated by his service-connected disability) please opine whether his OSA disability would not have occurred but for the obesity/weight gain caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.

(e.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is etiologically related to his exposure to airborne hazards, burn pits, and/or oil well fire smoke.

(f.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is related to the total potential exposure through all contaminants the Veteran may have been exposed to during service.

(g.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is related to the synergistic combined effect of all his toxic exposure risk activity.

In rendering these opinions, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history.  Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the examiner must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing the answer to that question.

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Simons

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.