Citation Nr: A25030336
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240123-411611
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for tinnitus. 

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1986 to September 1990. 

This matter is on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision.

In a January 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

In the November 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that new and relevant evidence had been received, thus, readjudication of the claim was warranted.  The AOJ readjudicated and denied the claim on the merits.  The Board is bound by the prior favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was received sufficient to readjudicate the claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Service connection for tinnitus. 

The Veteran contends that he has tinnitus related to in-service noise exposure.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that his tinnitus started during service and was caused by in-service job duties.  See June 2023 Higher Level Review (HLR) Informal Conference.  

Initially, in the November 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has tinnitus and conceded the Veteran's in-service noise exposure based on his MOS, which had a high probability for noise exposure.  The Board is bound by these?prior favorable findings, which were not clearly and unmistakably erroneous.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Furthermore, in a June 2023 memo, VA established the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on his MOS of Fire Protecting Specialist.  The memo established the Veteran's exposure to carbon monoxide, benzene, sulphur dioxide, hydrogen cyanide, aldehydes, hydrogen chloride, dichlorofluoromethane, and particulates, perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), Hexafluoropropylene Oxide Dimer Acid (also known as "GenX"), arsenic, asbestos, benzoapyrene, 1,3-butadiene, cadmium, diesel engine exhaust, dioxin, formaldehyde, pentachlorophenol, polychlorinated biphenyls, radionuclides, and soot from duties.  VA also established the Veteran's exposure to jet engine emissions, which similarly to diesel exhaust emissions, include volatile organic compounds and particulate matter consisting of an inorganic carbon core with associated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and metals. 

While the Veteran was provided an August 2022 VA audiological examination, and an additional July 2023 opinion, the Veteran was never provided a specific TERA examination.  

As such, the Board finds that the failure to provide the Veteran a TERA specific VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand is required to correct the error and afford the Veteran a TERA examination and opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Additionally, a VA opinion by an ENT is necessary.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an ENT to determine the nature and etiology of his tinnitus.  The examiner should review the entire claims file in conjunction with the examination. 

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A TERA examination/opinion should also be obtained.

A rationale should be provided for opinions expressed.? If an opinion cannot be offered without resorting to speculation, the reason for this should be fully explained in the opinion.? Any medical literature consulted should be cited.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fyffe, Michael C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.