Citation Nr: A25030719
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240727-459511
DATE:         April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder to include, sleep disturbance, anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The bilateral plantar fasciitis was caused by an in-service injury or event. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 5103, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1998 to May 2002.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of August 2023, and October 2023, rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). See Rating Decisions, dated August 8, 2023, and October 30, 2023. The appeal will therefore be considered pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). See Pub. L. No. 115-55, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1). On July 27, 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) and selected the Direct Review Docket. 

Under the AMA, the evidentiary record the Board may consider depends on the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in the decision on appeal and the Veteran's docket selection on the NOD. In considering the August 2023, rating decision, the Board notes that the decision was ordered to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors identified in the May 2023, higher-level review (HLR) rating decision. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated May 31, 2023. When a HLR decision orders correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors, as is the case here, the subsequent readjudication is not a HLR decision, but instead is a supplemental claim decision. The August 2023, rating decision therefore constitutes a supplemental claim. The October 2023, rating decision was appealed directly to the Board. Based on the Veteran's selection of the Direct Review Docket when submitting the NOD, when determining entitlement to service connection the Board may consider the evidence of record on August 8, 2023, for plantar fasciitis, and October 30, 2023, for a sleep disturbance. 38 C.F.R. §?20.301. 

If evidence was submitted after the August 8, 2023, rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision regarding entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision, including the new evidence in addition to the evidence 

previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

If evidence was submitted after the October 30, 2023, rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision regarding entitlement to service connection for a sleep disturbance. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ during readjudication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Finally, the Board recognizes that when a Veteran makes a claim for entitlement to service connection, they are seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). The Board has therefore broadened and recharacterized the claims. First, entitlement to an acquired psychiatric disorder to include sleep disturbance, anxiety, depression, and PTSD to comport with the evidence of record and to ensure that the Veteran's claim is afforded every consideration. Next, the Veteran initially sought service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis, however, the AOJ characterized the issue as right foot plantar fasciitis and left foot plantar fasciitis. In acknowledgement of the Veteran's original intent, the issue is recharacterized as entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis. Id.

Service Connection - Relevant Legal Principles

Generally, establishing service connection requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Furthermore, VA regulations provide that a Veteran will be considered to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that an injury or disease existed prior thereto and was not aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b); Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Once the presumption of soundness has attached, the burden of proof shifts to and remains with VA to prove that both (1) the Veteran's disease or injury pre-existed service, and (2) that the disease or injury was not aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111. Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 U.S.C. § 1153.

Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is due to or the result of a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Harder v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 183, 187 (1993). The controlling regulation has been interpreted to permit a grant of service connection not only for disability caused by a service-connected disability, but for the degree of disability resulting from aggravation of a non-service-connected disability by a service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

In deciding an appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material favorable to the claimant. Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990). When all the evidence is assembled, the Board must determine whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Entitlement to Service Connection for Bilateral Plantar Fasciitis

The Veteran contends that the diagnosed bilateral plantar fasciitis is the result of his active-duty service. See NOD, received July 27, 2024.

Here, the AOJ has made several concessions favorable to the Veteran's claim. The AOJ has conceded the Veteran's current diagnosis of bilateral pes planus and bilateral plantar fasciitis. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated August 4, 2023. They have also conceded that wearing boots was consistent with the Veteran's with the Veteran's active-duty service and therefore constitutes a qualifying in-service event, injury, or disease. Id. The Board is bound by these findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Evidence also includes a VA medical opinion connecting the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis to his active-duty service. See C&P Exam, received July 27, 2023. In rationalizing the opinion, the examiner indicated that although plantar fasciitis was not noted in the Veteran's service treatment records, the Veteran made several complaints regarding bilateral foot pain. Id. That same examiner had previously indicated that these in-service complaints later progressed to plantar fasciitis with persistent foot pain. See C&P Exam, received April 14, 2023. Based on the concessions of the AOJ, and the April 2023, and July 2023, VA medical opinions, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board acknowledges the AOJ's determination that entitlement to service connection was not warranted because the bilateral plantar fasciitis pre-existed the Veteran's service with no objective evidence of worsening. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated April 19, 2023. However, the notion of a pre-existing plantar fasciitis disability was firmly rejected by the April 2023 VA examiner, "An aggravation opinion for plantar fasciitis is inappropriate for this Veteran. . . [who] had pre-existing pes planus. . ." See C&P Exam, received April 14, 2023. Even if the Board were to ignore the competency and credibility of the VA examiner's opinion, the record is absent any evidence that would allow the AOJ to rebut the presumption of soundness, or prove, clearly and unmistakably, that the Veteran's plantar fasciitis existed prior to service and was not aggravated by service.

Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Additionally, under the AMA, the Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim, not just pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Id.

The Veteran contends that the sleep disturbance, to include, anxiety, depression, and PTSD is the result of his active-duty service, or, in the alternative, is caused or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus. See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, received December 12, 2023.

It is well established that VA's duty to assist includes the provision of an adequate examination when additional medical evidence is needed to substantiate a claim on appeal. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). Still, the Court has consistently held that VA's duty to assist is not a one-way street. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). Veterans must cooperate in VA's efforts to obtain evidence in support of their claims, including attending scheduled VA examinations, and/or promptly communicating with VA as to why they cannot attend a scheduled VA examination. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (requiring claimant to "cooperate fully with VA's efforts" to obtain both VA and non-VA medical records).  In situations where a Veteran fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with a compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record unless good cause is shown as to why the appointment was not attended as scheduled. 

The Board recognizes that by requesting the examinations in September 2023, the AOJ attempted to comply with the prescribed duty to assist. However, there is no indication of when or how the Veteran was notified that the examination had been scheduled or that they had been missed. Therefore, the Board finds a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran the opportunity to attend VA examinations necessary to address the claim on appeal.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.	Contact the Veteran regarding the necessary examination. Advise the Veteran that he must cooperate in VA's efforts to obtain evidence in support of his claims, this includes attending scheduled VA examinations or promptly communicating to VA why the appointment cannot be attended; his failure to do so will result in his claim being assessed based on the evidence of record, and possibly denied. 

***Please note: Documentation of the actions taken to schedule and notify the Veteran of the appointments must be associated with the Veteran's electronic claims folder.

***If the Veteran cannot or does not attend the examination, a medical opinion should still be obtained based on the available evidence.

2.	Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an examiner possessing the necessary expertise to fully assess and render an opinion regarding the nature, severity, and likely etiology of the claimed acquired psychiatric disorder to include sleep disturbance, anxiety, depression, and PTSD. 

Following the examination and/or a review of the relevant records, the examiner should identify all acquired psychiatric disabilities and offer an opinion as to the following for the identified disability(-ies):

(a.)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, if not higher) that any diagnosed acquired psychiatric disability, manifested during active-duty service?

(b.)	For each identified disability, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it was caused by the service-connected tinnitus disability? 

(c.)	For each identified disability, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it was aggravated by the service-connected tinnitus disability? 

***Please note: (i) if an opinion cannot be completed without a full examination, then one should be scheduled; (ii) permanent worsening need NOT be shown, and ANY increase in disability is sufficient to demonstrate aggravation. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to testify as to the nature as to the severity of any symptomatology, and the onset of any symptoms. 

If there is a medical reason to doubt the accuracy of the Veteran's statements this should be clearly expressed with a rationale as supported by the evidence.

A full rationale for any opinion offered should be provided. If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.

 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Offutt, Marty N. (she/her/hers)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.