Citation Nr: A25030680
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-426566
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted subject to the laws and regulations governing monetary awards.

FINDING OF FACT

Giving the benefit of the doubt, the Veteran's GERD symptoms manifested with persistently recurring epigastric distress with pyrosis accompanied by substernal pain and occasional dysphagia with no evidence of greater impairment throughout the appeal period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for GERD are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.114, DC 7399-7346.

Effective May 19, 2024, the digestive system regulations were updated to include DC 7206 for rating GERD.  The new rating system was not in effect at the time of the rating decision on appeal, so is not applicable to this appeal.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Marines from January 2016 to January 2020. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of the VA Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged" rating is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999). VA adjudicators must consider whether to assign different ratings at different times during the rating period to compensate the Veteran for times when the disability may have been more severe than at others. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (the Court) since has extended this practice even to established ratings, not just initial ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; however, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative of the symptomatology of the other condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

The Veteran's GERD is rated by analogy pursuant to Diagnostic Code (DC) 7346 for hiatal hernia. Where the service-connected disability is not listed, it may be rated by analogy to a closely related disease in which not only the functions affected, but also the anatomical location and symptomatology are closely analogous. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27; Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015) (holding that "when a condition is specifically listed in VA's schedule for rating disabilities, it may not be rated by analogy.") 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

Under DC 7346, a 10 percent rating is warranted for two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity. A 30 percent rating is warranted for persistently recurring epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. The maximum 60 percent rating is warranted for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

Dysphagia is defined as difficulty in swallowing. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 587 (31st ed. 2007). Pyrosis is defined as heartburn. Id. at 1587. Hematemesis is defined as the vomiting of blood. Id. at 842. Melena is defined as the passage of dark-colored feces stained with blood pigments or with altered blood. Id. at 1142.

The terms "severe impairment of health" and "considerable impairment of health" are not defined in the rating schedule. For reference, "considerable" is defined as "large in extent or degree." Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 267 (11th ed. 2012). "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful." Id. at 1140.

Factual History

The Veteran contends that his GERD symptomatology is worse than the rating currently assigned. A review of the post-service VA treatment records notes complaints and treatment for GERD, mostly treated with lifestyle modifications, dietary restrictions, and medications. The Veteran's initial claim for GERD was in November 2021. Service connection for GERD was granted as secondary to the disability of flatfoot (pes planus) and hallux valgus with plantar fasciitis in January 2022, with a 10 percent rating effective November 1, 2021.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2021. His diagnosis of GERD was confirmed. He reported symptoms of recurrent acid reflux and started while in service. He says that the symptoms of frequent heartburn, reflux, regurgitation, and sleep disturbances have gotten progressively worse. He reported requiring OTC medication at least twice a week initially. At that time, he did not have difficulty swallowing. The Veteran reported that his lack of sleep from his GERD symptoms caused daytime fatigue, trouble thinking, mood changes, irritability, depressed mood, frequent yawning, hard time staying on task and concentrating, among other symptoms. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD was at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected pes planus and hallux valgus with plantar fasciitis, due to medication usage. The examiner cited the rationale that daily and long-term NSAID use is a significant risk factor for GERD symptoms.

The Veteran underwent a second VA examination in April 2023. He reported that his symptoms have worsened. In addition to the above symptomatology mentioned in the previous examination, the Veteran now had persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, and substernal chest pain. He continues to have significant sleep disturbances. He is currently using frequent omeprazole and Tums. Although he reported occasional dark stools, he does not have any melena, hematemesis, or anemia.

The Board finds that the VA opinions are adequate, as they were based upon a complete review of the evidence of record, consideration of the Veteran's lay statements and contentions, and clinical examinations of the Veteran. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). These opinions are also probative because they are based on an accurate medical history and provide explanations that contain clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

A March 2023 statement in support of his claim revealed that the Veteran complained of many of the above symptoms, including heartburn, regurgitation, dysphagia, voice changes, chest pain, and occasional dark stool. The Veteran emphasized that the symptoms make him anxious and stress. They required fairly aggressive changes in his diet. He also noted difficulty sleeping because of the current GERD symptoms. He noted his lack of sleep has caused difficulty concentrating, daytime fatigue, mood changes, irritability, paranoia, low sex drive, irritability, depressed mood, frequent yawning, difficulty concentrating, memory issues, self-neglect in personal care, and trouble controlling his motions and actions, overall having a profound effect on the rest of his life in his overall health and well-being. 

Analysis 

Based on the evidence of record, and giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's GERD meets the criteria for a 30 percent rating. The pertinent medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran experiences persistently recurring epigastric distress with pyrosis, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain that is productive of considerable impairment of health. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's GERD has been rated by analogy, and that when a condition is rated by analogy it need not meet each of the precise symptoms listed. See Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377 (2023). Otherwise, if not for this, the Board observes that DC 7346 is written with conjunctive criteria and would therefore require that all criteria listed in the 30 percent category be met-including persistently recurrent epigastric distress and substernal or arm or shoulder pain-which the Veteran has not demonstrated during the period on appeal. See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision meant that all conditions listed must be met). 

However, a rating of 60 percent is not warranted. While the latest VA examinations report noted worsening of his symptoms, the vast majority of the pertinent medical evidence does not contain severe symptoms. Additionally, the medical evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran has experienced material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or any other symptom combinations that is productive of severe impairment of health at any point during the appeal period. As such, a 60 percent rating is unwarranted. 

Based on the evidence of record, and giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's GERD meets the criteria for a 30 percent rating. Specifically, the pertinent medical and lay evidence demonstrates that the Veteran experiences persistently recurring epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. 

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Seibert, Andrew L. II

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.