Citation Nr: A25030251
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231120-397906
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for Meniere's syndrome, claimed as dizziness, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Navy on active duty from August 1989 to August 1993.

The issue comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the remanded claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for Meniere's syndrome, claimed as dizziness, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from Meniere's syndrome related to his active service, to include in-service hazardous environmental and military exposures during his service in Southwest Asia.

In October 2023, the RO provided an ear conditions examination.  The VA examiner provided the diagnosis of Meniere's syndrome.  The Veteran reported his condition began in 1998 as ringing in his ears.  The Veteran reported current symptoms of ringing in ears, loss of balance, dizziness, feeling of blood rushes to his head, difficulty standing, difficulty getting out of bed, headaches, shortness of breath, falling, and difficulty concentrating.

The October 2023 VA examination contained the medical opinion stating that the Veteran's claimed condition is less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies) (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The examiner reported that Meniere's is an inner ear condition, with an uncertain exact cause.  Further, the examiner opined that while burning wells produce smoke with various pollutants that can affect respiratory health, this specific link to Meniere's disease has not been documented in medical literature.

The Veteran's September 1988 enlistment examination is absent reports of dizziness, hearing loss, or ear trouble.  The Veteran's December 1992 VA treatment record showed the Veteran presented with peril ears.  On the Veteran's August 1993 report of medical history at separation, the Veteran reported a history of dizziness, hearing loss, and ear trouble.  The examiner noted the Veteran reported getting dizzy when standing and noted observing slight hearing loss.  

VA has a duty to provide the veteran a thorough medical examination with medical opinion that considers the veteran's prior medical history and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability is fully informed.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  An examination with a medical opinion adequately informing the Board of the Veteran's disability while considering prior medical history requires thorough consideration of the Veteran's lay reports of symptomatology.  Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 257 (2020).

In the present case the October 2023 examination failed to adequately address the Veteran's reported symptoms of dizziness and an ear condition in service.  While the October 2023 VA examiner addressed the contention that the Veteran's condition is related to in-service TERA, the medical opinion did not address the Veteran's reported symptoms of dizziness, hearing loss, and fullness of his ears in service noted in the Veteran's medical treatment history.  Accordingly, VA has not provided an adequate medical opinion sufficiently informing the Board of the Veteran's medical history of his current disability or addressing whether the Veteran's condition incurred in service.  

Thus, remand is required to address VA's pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and provide further development addressing the Veteran's medical evidence and the Veteran's lay reports of symptomatology favorable to the Veteran's diagnosed Meniere's syndrome.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's Meniere's syndrome from an appropriately qualified VA medical professional.  If the clinician determines that an examination is needed to provide the requested opinion, then such examination should be scheduled.  The claims file should be reviewed in conjunction with the examination.  A copy of this remand should be made available to the examiner.

Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's Meniere's syndrome had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached.  Conclusions must not be based solely on the lack of records.  References or citations to the objective medical findings must be provided.  

In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability.  If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. V. Bona

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.