Citation Nr: A25030755
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240407-431332
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left arm/elbow disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The persuasive weight of evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of left arm/elbow disability that had its onset in service, or that is otherwise related to service.

2. The evidence of record is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left arm/elbow disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (3), 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2004 to August 2006.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO).  

In the April 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

SERVICE CONNECTION

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases, such as tinnitus and arthritis, will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).  To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

1. Entitlement to service connection for left arm/elbow disability is denied.

While the Veteran filed a claim for broken left arm, the evidence of record indicates that he contends he suffers from a left arm/elbow disability.  Therefore, the Board has expanded the issue on appeal to include a left arm and elbow disability consistent with the holding in Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

For reasons outlined below, the Board finds the claim on appeal must be denied.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, it is not reasonably in dispute that the Veteran had complaints of left elbow pain in his service treatment records on September 1, 2004.

The Veteran's DD-214 indicates that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was as an aircraft armament systems journeyman.

September 2004 service treatment records reflect a normal left forearm with no osseous, articular, or soft tissue abnormality, and normal alignment. September 2004 service treatment records indicate that the Veteran was treated for left elbow pain due to a possible fracture. April 2005 service treatment records indicate that the Veteran was treated for a fractured left elbow. March 2006 service treatment records indicate that the Veteran presented to clinic with an abrasion to the left medial portion of his forearm.  He reported that he came into contact with a fiber glass sign while digging to recover oil due to an over spill. May 2006 service treatment records reflect that the Veteran "hit a wall" and was told that he had injured the tissue in his left elbow.  He was given a sling to wear for a week and provided Vicodin for the pain.  During a follow-up appointment he complained of constant pain in the left elbow despite wearing the sling.  The clinician noted a left elbow contusion with swelling and pain located on the lateral side of the elbow.

After service, the records are thereafter silent for any complaints, treatment or diagnoses related to the left elbow or arm for almost a decade. In April 2016, the Veteran was given x-rays for various joints, but as it pertained to his elbow, the records indicated no evidence of fracture, dislocation, or joint effusion. 

Similarly, December 2023 post-service treatment records from the Veteran's private medical facility reflect that there is no radiographic evidence of acute fracture or dislocation of the left forearm.  No significant degenerative changes were seen, and the soft tissue structures appeared unremarkable.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2024, where the examiner reviewed the relevant military and post-service evidence as well as conducted a physical examination and considered the Veteran's lay statements.

As to the Veteran's contentions that he suffered a broken arm in service and now has residuals of said in-service broken arm, the examiner opined that the Veteran did not likely suffer any such in-service injury and even if he did, there is no current evidence of residuals of such an injury.  Indeed, although there is evidence of minor injuries to the elbow in-service (described as a contusion), the examiner found the military records unremarkable for a fracture/broken arm or any significant left elbow condition whatsoever.  In any case, the Veteran does not have any current claimed residual that would likely be derived from the described in-service injuries as "objective findings on exam do not support a diagnosis for the claimed broken arm...." 

It is further worth noting that the VA examination report as a whole did not support any functional impairments of the left arm or left elbow. That is, there were no complaints of painful motion on flexion or extension, or on forearm supination or pronation.  Left elbow range of motion was determined to be all normal with no evidence of pain, and the examiner noted that the Veteran's left arm disability did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.

In short, while there is no reasonable dispute that the Veteran had some complaints and/or injury of the left elbow/arm in service, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that he incurred any chronic disability therein. Indeed, it appears the in-service injuries were largely minor, described as a contusion or tissue injury. 

After service, further, despite subjective complaints of pain, there is no evidence the Veteran has a left arm or left elbow chronic disability currently or at any time during the pendency of this appeal.

In that regard, the Board acknowledges, that "pain" can be a disability for purposes of service connection if it reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Nonetheless, subjective pain is not enough to establish the presence of a disability, there must be competent evidence specific to the claimant tending to show that the impairment has risen to a level of a functional impairment. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020); but see McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007) (the current disability requirement is satisfied if the disability existed at any time during the pendency of the appeal even if resolved currently).

Here, the Board considered whether the Veteran's description of left arm / left elbow pain at any point during the pendency of this appeal rose to the level of a functional impairment such that it could be considered a disability for service connection purposes. The persuasive weight of the evidence indicates to the contrary. Indeed, there is evidence to the contrary.

As outlined above, the VA outpatient treatment records are largely silent as to the left elbow/arm after service, other than an April 2016 x-ray report, which was negative for any abnormality. Similarly, private treatment records, to include imaging was silent to any abnormalities related to the left arm and elbow. 

The January 2024 VA examiner not only found no pathology to render a diagnosis, but also indicated no complaints of painful motion and no objective findings of limited range of motion.  Under these circumstances, the Board finds no basis in which to conclude the Veteran has a left arm/left elbow disability. 

Nonetheless, the January 2024 VA examiner further concluded that any such disability was unlikely related to the in-service injuries / complaints found related to the Veteran's left arm/elbow as those were minor contusions and there is no support in the record to indicate the Veteran had a fracture associated with these injuries or any chronic residual thereof. 

The Board finds the VA examiner's opinion to be persuasive and premised on a thorough review of the relevant records, a physical examination, and consideration of the Veteran's lay statements. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).  There are no contrary medical opinions in the evidence of record as to the etiology of any left arm/elbow disability, and the evidence does not otherwise indicate that the Veteran has a left arm/elbow disability that is related to service.

The evidence as a whole persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a left arm/elbow disability that can be attributed to service. As the evidence weighs persuasively against the issue on appeal, the Board finds the appeal must be denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). 

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Veteran contends he has tinnitus as a result of in-service acoustic trauma. 

At the outset, the Board notes that tinnitus is a disorder with symptoms that can be identified through lay observation alone.  See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).  If a veteran reports ringing in his or her ears, then a diagnosis of tinnitus is generally applied without further examination.

Here, as will be discussed below, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance and, therefore, will resolve doubt in his favor.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's service treatment and personnel records indicate he had a military occupational specialty (MOS) of Aircraft Armament System Journeyman, which is generally consistent with significant noise exposure. 

A November 2003 Master Workplace Exposure Date Summary indicates that the Veteran performs functional weapons systems checks, configurations and troubleshooting on B-1B aircraft.  It added that noise dosimetry indicates workers are routinely exposed to hazardous noise and that they are on the Hearing Conservation Program.

A January 2005 in service Hearing Conservation Examination indicates that the Veteran reported ringing in his ears and use of foam plugs and earmuffs as hearing protection. 

His April 2005 in-service Hearing Conservation Examination reflects repeated exposure to motorcycles, loud music, firearms, farm equipment, construction equipment, chain saws, and power tools, but the Veteran did not have ringing in his ears.

The May 2006 Hearing Conservation Examination also reflects that the Veteran does not experience ringing in his ears and that he used single flange plugs for hearing protection.

After service, it is clear the Veteran did not specifically seek treatment for or complain of tinnitus for decades, but he does contend he had tinnitus since service, which continued since that time. He was afforded a VA examination in January 2024 where the examiner noted the Veteran's contentions of in-service onset. In particular, the examiner noted that the Veteran stated that he noticed the tinnitus one night while trying to sleep in the barracks which were near a runway and that it feels like it is progressing over time.  The examiner also emphasized the Veteran's report that tinnitus was intermittent, and that there were no other significant hearing loss findings in the service records or after service.  As such, the examiner found it unlikely that the Veteran's current tinnitus was related to military noise exposure.  Instead, the examiner highlighted that the Veteran reported working in heavy construction since service.  The audiologist concluded that based on hearing tests in service and the Veteran's recorded denial of tinnitus on hearing conservation forms, there is no nexus established linking current reported tinnitus to military noise exposure.  

In short, service treatment records indicate the Veteran had military duties consistent with significant noise exposure and, indeed, complained of tinnitus during service. On the other hand, he also had significant post-service noise exposure working in construction with no complaints of hearing or tinnitus for decades until the filing of this claim. The VA examiner, further, found the Veteran's tinnitus far more likely related to his post-service occupation in light of the lack of significant hearing loss findings in service and post-service complaints for many years. 

Nonetheless, the Veteran is competent to report on when his tinnitus began and the continuity of said symptomatology. At a minimum, the evidence is at least in approximate balance and, therefore he is entitled to resolution of doubt in his favor. Finding service-connection for tinnitus warranted, the appeal to the extent is, therefore, granted. 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Maddox, Rolen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.