Citation Nr: A25030222
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230907-375411
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip iliopsoas tendinitis with left myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (painful), is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip iliopsoas tendinitis with left myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (extension), is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip iliopsoas tendinitis with left myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (flexion), is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right hip iliopsoas tendinitis with right myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (painful), is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip iliopsoas tendinitis with right myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (extension), is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip iliopsoas tendinitis with right myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (flexion), is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for spinal stenosis with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity (LLE) radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity (RLE) radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1989 to June 1993. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In September 2023, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, as the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip iliopsoas tendinitis with left myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (painful).

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip iliopsoas tendinitis with left myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (extension).

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip iliopsoas tendinitis with left myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (flexion).

4. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right hip iliopsoas tendinitis with right myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (painful).

5. Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip iliopsoas tendinitis with right myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (extension).

6. Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip iliopsoas tendinitis with right myositis, quadratus lumborum muscle (flexion).

7. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for spinal stenosis with IVDS.

8. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for LLE radiculopathy (sciatic nerve).

9. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for RLE radiculopathy (sciatic nerve).

The Veteran is seeking increased ratings for her back, bilateral hip, and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy disabilities. However, the Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by ensuring that all relevant VA treatment records have been obtained for consideration in her appeal. 

In this regard, the most recent VA treatment records on file are dated in July 2022; however, in April 2023, the Veteran submitted September 2022 and undated VA treatment records reflecting relevant treatment and findings pertinent to her back, bilateral hip, and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy disabilities, thereby suggesting that she receives ongoing VA treatment for such disabilities. Thus, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining the Veteran's updated VA treatment records dated since July 2022. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain the Veteran's updated VA treatment records dated since July 2022. All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Clark

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.