Citation Nr: A25030376
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432580
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a back disability is denied.  

Service connection for a neck disability is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's back disability was the result of his active service.

2. The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's neck disability was the result of his active service.

FCONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for a neck disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the U. S. Air Force from February 1984 to March 1986. 

A rating decision in April 2024 denied service connection for a back disability and a neck disability. In April 2024, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and selecting the Direct Review Docket, a process by which the Board is only allowed to review the evidence up to the April 2024 rating decision.  To the extent that evidence was received after the rating decision denying the claim, the Board may not by operation of law review it.  Should the Veteran wish to have this evidence reviewed he may file a supplemental claim and either identify or resubmit the evidence.  Instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Service connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service (nexus). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The nexus requirement, in pertinent part, can be established through objective medical evidence; the application of statutory presumptions for chronic diseases like sensorineural hearing loss, when manifested to a compensable degree within a year of separation from service; or based on a continuity of symptomatology. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

1. Back

In a statement dated April 2023, the Veteran reported that he injured his back in service when he fell out of a jet plane while working on it and landed hard on the tarmac.  He contends that he has continued to experience back pain since separating from service.

Service treatment records (STRs) do not show any complains of or treatment for any back condition. The Veteran's separation physical in February 1986 showed normal spine condition. On his report of medical history in conjunction with separation physical, the Veteran specifically denied recurrent back pain but reported other medical conditions such as hearing loss and broken bones, etc. The medical officer noted that the Veteran had a history of a fractured little finger. 

VA treatment records show that the Veteran established primary care with VA in May 2006. Review of systems at that time indicated that the Veteran had occasional right knee pain and low back pain which did not limit his activities of daily living.  A physical examination in September 2009 showed no back CVA or spinal tenderness. In September 2011, the Veteran was seen for low back pain lasting for five days. At that time, he denied recent injury or history of low back pain. He reported that pain started when initially stood up from sitting or lying; and that he worked as a computer technician and sit a lot at his job. X-rays at that time showed DJD at L5-S1. The physician recommended daily back stretches. In June 2017, the Veteran reported having experienced worsening back pain during sleep which woke him up at night. He reported that his back pain started approximately five to six years before. A lumbar MRI in July 2017 showed arthritis that was not severe enough to require surgery. The physician ordered a hospital bed to make it easier to ge into and out of bed, and recommended physical therapy or acupuncture, or daily stretching in addition to pain medication for treatment. 

A VA examination in March 2021 showed that the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbar spondylosis and indicated that such diagnosis was made in September 2011. 

While the Veteran reported that his back pain started in service and continued since separation, the medical records showed that this is not the case.  STRs show no complains of or treatment of any back condition. The Veteran specifically denied recurrent back pain at the time of his separation. When he first established primary care with the VA in 2006, only occasional low back pain was noted. The VA treatment records show that he did not seek any treatment for back condition after 2006 until September 2011, when he was seen for acute back pain lasting for five days. At that time, he denied any history of back pain. He reported that pain started when initially stood up from sitting or lying; and that he worked as a computer technician and sat a lot at his job. In June 2017, he was seen for worsened back pain and reported that his back pain onset approximately five or six years before. Hence, the records show that the Veteran's chronic back condition began in 2011, which is approximately 25 years after he separated from his service. 

While the Veteran has reported falling out of a jet onto the tarmac, his account of this incident and reported injuries to his neck and back are not found to be credible.  First, there is no documentation of the fall in the STRs.  While this fact alone is not dispositive, the fact is the Veteran had a detailed separation physical at which he completed a medical history survey.  Had the fall occurred and caused neck and back injuries, it would be logical that the Veteran would have mentioned such at separation physical, given his willingness to report other conditions at that time.  Following service, the Veteran initially filed for service connection for tinnitus and hearing loss, but made no mention of any neck or back problems.  Likewise, when the Veteran first reported for medical care of his neck and back, he made no mention of any traumatic fall in service, or continuity of symptomatology from such an incident.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's account of an in-service fall is insufficient to trigger VA's duty to provide an examination.

The Board notes, that a VA nexus opinion was not obtained for the Veteran's back disability. Under McLendon v. Nicholson,20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), for service connection claims, the VA must provide a VA medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 

Here, the Veteran's generalized statement that his back pain began during his service is related to service is insufficient to trigger VA's duty to provide a medical examination or opinion, as STRs do not show any back complaints and post service records show that his back condition began approximately 25 years after service.  Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278(Fed. Cir. 2010).

Accordingly, service connection for a back disability is denied. 

Neck

In a statement dated April 2023, the Veteran reported that he injured his neck in service when he fell out of a jet plane while working on it and landed hard on the tarmac; and that he continued to have neck pain since separating from service.

STRs do not show any complains of or treatment for any neck condition. The Veteran's separation physical in February 1986 showed a normal spinal condition. On his report of medical history in conjunction with separation physical, the Veteran did not report any neck condition but reported other medical conditions such as hearing loss and broken bones, etc. The medical officer noted that the Veteran had a history of fractured little finger. 

VA treatment records show that the Veteran established primary care with VA in May 2006. Review of systems at that time indicated that the Veteran had occasional right knee pain and low back pain, but did not reveal any neck pain. In January 2008 and February 2008, the Veteran was seen for left shoulder pain, but denied any neck pain. In January 2014, the Veteran was seen for neck pain that had started one week before. He reported he was unable to turn his head to the right without sharp pain and he denied any recent injury to the neck. The assessment was acute cervical strain or sprain. Neck x-rays showed arthritis and muscle spasms. The physician indicated that the neck pain was due to a neck sprain, and he prescribed a muscle relaxer, and recommended to apply moist heat to the neck and use a comfortable pillow to use at night.

While the Veteran reported that his neck pain started in service and had continued since separation, the medical records showed that this was not the case.  STRs show no complains of or treatment of any neck condition. The separation physical showed normal spine condition. The Veteran did not report any neck issue at the time of his separation while reporting other medical conditions. When he first established primary care with the VA in 2006, no neck condition was noted even though occasional back pain was noted. The Veteran denied any neck pain when he sought treatment for his left shoulder in January and February 2008. The VA treatment records show that he did not seek any treatment for neck condition until January 2014, when he was seen for acute neck pain lasting for one week. Hence, the records show that the Veteran's neck condition did not occur until 2014, which is approximately 28 years after he separated from his service. 

The Board notes, that a VA examination was not conducted for the Veteran's neck disability. Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), for service connection claims, the VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 

Here, the Veteran's generalized statement that his neck pain began during his service is related to service is insufficient to trigger VA's duty to provide a medical examination or opinion, as STRs do not show any neck complaints and post- service records show that his neck condition began approximately 28 years after service.  Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278(Fed. Cir. 2010).

Accordingly, service connection for a neck disability is denied. 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Wang, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.