Citation Nr: A25030151
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240425-435398
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Service connection for right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU) is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's GERD is not manifested by persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.

2. The evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran's right knee right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy was caused by the Veteran's service-connected left ankle injury. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.20, 4.21, 4.27, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7399-7346 (2023).

2. The criteria for an award of service connection for a right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from November 1994 to November 1998.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from three rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office dated May 2023, August 6, 2023, and August 25, 2023. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in April 2024, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the rating decision was promulgated.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent for GERD. He contends that a higher rating is warranted for his initial rating.

He is currently evaluated pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7399-7346. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires the use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the rating assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. When an unlisted disease, injury, or residual condition is encountered, requiring rating by analogy, the diagnostic code number is "built up" with the first two digits being selected from that part of the schedule most closely identifying the part, and the last two digits being "99" for an unlisted condition. Id.

VA revised the schedule of ratings for the digestive system (38 C.F.R. § 4.114), effective May 19, 2024. See 89 Fed. Reg. 19,735 (Mar. 20, 2024). One revision was the creation of a specific DC for GERD, DC 7206. DC 7346 was also amended. The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise. See Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). However, the Board is not precluded from applying prior versions of the applicable regulation to the period on or after the effective dates of the new regulation if the prior version was in effect during the pendency of the appeal. Applied to this case, that means the "old" digestive criteria can be applied for the entire appeal period, while the "new" digestive criteria can only be applied from May 19, 2024, forward. Because the record before the Board in this matter ended on August 6, 2023, the "new" criteria does not apply here.

Under the "old" Diagnostic Code 7346, the following ratings apply: a 60 percent rating is warranted for hiatal hernia with symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health; a 30 percent rating is warranted for hiatal hernia with persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of a considerable impairment of health; and a 10 percent rating is warranted for hiatal hernia with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent rating of less severity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7346.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a lay statement in support of claim for service connection. According to the Veteran, His GERD symptoms resulted from medications. The symptoms he reported are heartburn with acid reflux, a sore throat with painful swallowing, chest pain that radiates into his shoulders, upper abdominal pain, frequent coughing, changes in his voice and hoarseness, and tooth enamel damage from stomach acid coming into his mouth at least once a day. He reported using Tums 4-5 times a week to help with heartburn and avoiding foods that cause flare-ups such as spaghetti, fried food, coffee, chili, and fatty foods. He contends that the limitations on his diet have caused vitamin deficiencies. He also contends that his GERD symptoms impact his sleep. He now must prop his head up on pillows in order to fall asleep and is not able to sleep more than four hours at a time. He assigns many deficits to this sleep deprivation including difficulty concentrating, daytime fatigue, trouble thinking, mood changes, weight gain, low libido, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood, frequent yawning, difficult enjoying social interactions, bouts of clumsiness, memory trouble, self-neglect, loss of interest, and trouble controlling emotions and handling stressful situations. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2023. The examiner noted the Veteran's reported symptoms of heartburn after eating certain foods; sleep disturbances a few times a year due to heartburn; episodes of epigastric distress, substernal pain and nausea with episodes occurring roughly once a year. With respect to the Veteran's signs and symptoms, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had infrequent episodes of epigastric distress. The Veteran was not using any prescribed medication and no diagnostic imaging studies had been undertaken. The primary impact to his social life was his dietary restrictions, which limited his social interactions and required him to brings his own food to social functions. The examiner did not indicate that the disability was productive of either considerable or severe impairment.

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's remaining VA treatment records, but they do not show any additional treatment or indicate any symptoms of worse severity than that noted during the VA examination.

Here the Board finds after a thorough review of the records that a 30 percent or higher rating is not warranted. The veteran's symptoms are not manifested to a degree of being "persistently recurrent" or by exhibiting symptoms that in combination are productive of considerable or severe impairment. While the Veteran has reported gastric burning symptoms, the Veteran has demonstrated, as noted above, infrequent episodes of epigastric distress, nausea once per year and less than once a day and vomiting once per year and less than once a day. Additionally, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran experienced "infrequent episodes" of epigastric distress which does not rise to the level of considerable or severe impairment. Moreover, as mentioned the VA examiner did not indicate impairment of either considerable or severe degree. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reported history of symptomatology related to the service-connected GERD. He is competent to report such symptoms and observations because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes through one's senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). In this case, although the descriptions of his symptoms are competent, they do not show that the criteria for a 30 percent rating for his GERD have been met at any time during the appeal period.

The Board has considered the full scope of the Veteran's claimed symptoms including difficulty concentrating, daytime fatigue, trouble thinking, mood changes, weight gain, low libido, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood, frequent yawning, difficult enjoying social interactions, bouts of clumsiness, memory trouble, self-neglect, loss of interest, and trouble controlling emotions and handling stressful situations. The Board notes that the Veteran is already service connected for an anxiety disorder encompassing many of the symptoms noted above. In that regard, the Board need not develop a second avenue of service connection for these symptoms. But see Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203-04 (2021) (the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that VA is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for the proper evaluation for the primary service-connected disability).  The Board also finds that although the Veteran is competent to report experiencing these symptoms, ascertaining whether the symptoms are the result of his service-connected GERD versus his service-connected anxiety disorder is a complex matter requiring specialized medical training and assessments of cause and effect, which are generally not identifiable by lay persons as they are not immediately observable through one's senses. To the extent the Veteran is competent to attribute some of these symptoms to his service-connected GERD, the Board assigns more weight to the VA examiner's assessment that his GERD does not result in considerable impairment of health based on the examiner's training and experience in evaluating medical issues. 

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's GERD during the period here at issue. His disability is not shown to have been productive of considerable impairment of health. The appeal of this issue must therefore be denied.

2. Service connection for the Veteran's right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy is granted. 

The Veteran is seeking service connection for his right knee disability secondary to his service-connected left ankle sprain. The Veteran's left ankle sprain was service connected as a non-compensable disability in an April 1999 rating decision effective November 1998.  He contends that his left ankle causes him to walk unevenly.  He cannot stand evenly and leans to one side. This has caused painful symptoms in his right knee including pain with motion, swelling, buckling, weakness, a feeling of the knee giving out, stiffness so severe the knee cannot move, cracking, and popping. 

By way of a brief background, the Veteran initially brought this claim as a bilateral disability affecting both knees. See April 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. The AOJ denied the claim as to both knees in June 2021. See June 2021 Rating Decision. In November 2021, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim as to the right knee. In February 2022 the AOJ again denied the claim after determining that new and relevant evidence had been received. In June 2022, the Veteran pursued higher level review as to both knees. The AOJ denied the claim as to both knees. Thereafter in April 2023, the Veteran submitted a second supplemental claim as to the right knee only. See VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim. The AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received but proceeded to deny the claim on the merits by the AOJ in May 2023. This appeal followed. The AOJ's determination that new and relevant evidence had been received is a favorable finding that the Board will adopt. As such, in the decision herein, the Board will only address the question of service connection for a right knee disability. 

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999).

Under applicable law, a disability which is due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury shall also be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists; and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

Aggravation for purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of a non-service-connected disability. Instead, secondary service connection is warranted for "any incremental increase in disability-any additional impairment of earning capacity-in non-service-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions, above the degree of disability existing before the increase-regardless of its permanence." Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019).

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" (rather than proximate) causation in direct and secondary service connection claims. In that regard, the Federal Circuit held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) is unlawful because it requires proximate causation to establish aggravation of a disability, rather than but-for causation. The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction. The Federal Circuit explained that secondary service connection is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but-for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability. Stated another way, but-for causation is broad and undisputedly broader than proximate cause. Thus, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

As a preliminary matter, in the May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made the following favorable findings: (1) An examination was conducted on May 3, 2023, which confirmed a diagnosis of right knee joint osteoarthritis status post-surgery; (2) the claimed primary disability is service connected. The Board is bound by those favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). In light of these findings, the issue before the Board is whether the Veteran's right knee disability was caused or aggravated by his service-connected ankle injury. There is no claim for direct service connection raised by either the Veteran or the record. 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. An approximate balance of the evidence includes, but is not limited to, equipoise. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the evidence, private treatment records from Norco Medical Group shows that the Veteran presented for right pain knee and swelling lasting a month. He described the pain as sharp and stated that it was preventing him from running or playing basketball. He denied any recent injury. In June 2019, he was diagnosed with right knee pain. The Veteran reported having participated in physical therapy to no effect. He stated that he may have torn something. He continued to have sharp pain with movement. 

In October 2020, Universal Care Surgery Center records show a diagnosis for bilateral knee pain. Imaging reports show a tear of the medial meniscal root with moderate degenerate changes.  The M.D. who performed the examination noted that the Veteran's history, physical examination, and diagnostic testing were all consistent with a meniscal tear. On that basis, the M.D. recommended a knee arthroscopy. 

In a November 2020 progress note from Ventura Orthopedics, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported knee pain for approximately one year. He characterized the pain as constant with clicking and popping; rated as an eight out of ten and making his daily activities difficult. He had tried stem cell injections and had failed multiple rounds of physical therapy. An antalgic gait is noted in the physical examination report.

A radiology report from the right knee dated May 2021 shows evidence of early osteoarthritis. In December 2021, the Veteran was evaluated for his right knee status post-meniscectomy. The Veteran's reported the date of onset being approximately three years prior without history of trauma. He continued to have constant diffuse pain.

In December 2021 the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in association with this claim. The examiner noted tenderness consistent with chronic inflammation and irritation of the joint due to knee strain. The Veteran reported being unable to run resulting in weight gain and pain with stairs requiring him to sleep downstairs. 

In 2022 the Veteran was seen for a series of right knee evaluations at a physical medicine and rehabilitation clinic. These evaluations continued to show knee pain, limping, and an altered gait that significantly impacts his ability to engage in his formerly active lifestyle.

In February 2022, a VA examiner evaluated the Veteran's right knee in association with this claim. The focus was whether a report of an injury in service from September 1998 was linked to his current knee pain. The examiner concluded that due to the remoteness of the in-service incident, it would be too speculative to find a nexus. There was no discussion of whether the Veteran's ankle injury aggravated an injury in the knee nor is there an analysis of whether the Veteran's antalgic gait had an effect on his knee. 

In July 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination associated with a different condition (foot pain). There, the Veteran reported right knee pain. He reported being given a cane by a prior provider. He also reported being unable to stand for prolonged periods and that he walked with a limp. 

The Veteran submitted a supportive medical opinion from April 2023 where a private PA-C, after reviewing all of the Veteran's available medical records, personnel file, imaging and lab reports, and VA examinations, and lay statements by the Veteran, opined that on a more probable than not basis, the Veteran's right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy was caused by his service-connected left ankle sprain. He explained that multiple medical studies show that alterations in joint kinematics affect major joints, including the ankles, knees, hips, and the lumbar spine, and over time can accelerate wear on these joints by altering plantar load distribution which studies show eventually leads to cartilage damage associated with chronic knee pain. Compensatory gaits can advance progression of degeneration in healthy joints beyond normal wear and tear. 

In May 2023 a VA examiner offered a negative nexus opinion after conducting an in-person examination and review of the medical records. The examiner explained that there was no clear evidence from the review of orthopedic literature suggesting that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in a major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy. The examiner also explained that meniscal tears can initiate and progress knee osteoarthritis, thus, suggesting an alternate explanation for the progressing degeneration in the Veteran's knee. The examiner did not address the sequela from the Veteran's antalgic gait. 

After a thorough review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for the Veteran's right knee disability as secondary to his service-connected ankle injury is warranted. The Board puts significant weight on the private examiner's opinion. The examiner undertook a thorough review of the medical evidence, reviewed the Veteran's record, and relied on medical literature. And significantly, the private examiner focused on the most salient issue which is whether the Veteran's altered gait contributed to injury and pain in his right knee.  By contrast, the Board assigns less probative weight to the two VA examinations to the extent that they fail to address the Veteran's primary contention-a factor that is well-documented in the Veteran's medical history. It is well within the Board's purview to reject a medical opinion if it is not based on the veteran's relevant medical history. See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 104 (2008) (holding that medical opinion must be based on veteran's prior medical history). Thus, although there are two negative nexus opinions, these are outweighed by the probative value of the private opinion from April 2023. 

In light of the above, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the right knee right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy is secondary to the service left knee disability. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The implementation of the award for service connection for right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy will impact the analysis as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render the Veteran unemployable. As such, these issues are intertwined.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After implementing the award of service connection for right knee arthritis status post meniscectomy and assigning a rating, adjudicate entitlement to a TDIU.

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	King, Laura E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.