Citation Nr: A25030364
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 221227-308452
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a right foot wound is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had an additional disability that was proximately caused by carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, or error in judgment on VA's part during or following the July 2021 foot debridement.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a right foot wound have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1151; 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1969 to August 1973.  

In November 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the October 2022 rating decision.  In December 2022, the Veteran was afforded an informal HLR conference.  In December 2022, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal. 

In the December 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on December 6, 2024.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket.  38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c).

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for right foot wound is denied. 

The Veteran seeks compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 stemming from a July 2, 2021, debridement of right foot diabetic callus at a VA medical center which resulted in a wound. At the December 2024 Board Hearing, the Veteran testified that the additional disability he is claiming occurred as a result of the VA treatment is increased pain and difficulty walking due to pain.

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 (a), compensation shall be awarded for a qualifying additional disability or death in the same manner as if such additional disability was service connected.  For purposes of this section, a qualifying additional disability is one in which the disability was not the result of the Veteran's willful misconduct; and, the disability was caused by hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination furnished the Veteran; and, the proximate cause of the disability was the result of carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA in furnishing the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination; or was the result of an event not reasonably foreseeable.  Id. 

To determine whether additional disability exists within the meaning of § 1151, the Veteran's condition immediately prior to the beginning of the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, examination, training and rehabilitation services, or compensated work therapy program upon which the claim is based is compared to his or her condition after such care, treatment, examination, services, or program has been completed.  Each body part or system involved is considered separately.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (b).  

To establish causation, evidence must show that the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination resulted in the Veteran's additional disability or death.  Merely showing that a Veteran received care, treatment, or examination and that the Veteran has an additional disability does not establish cause.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (c)(1).

Hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination cannot cause the continuance or natural progress of a disease or injury for which the care, treatment, or examination was furnished unless VA's failure to timely diagnose and properly treat the disease or injury proximately caused the continuance or natural progress. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (c)(2).

The proximate cause of disability is the action or event that directly caused the disability, as distinguished from a remote contributing cause.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (d).  To establish that carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on VA's part in furnishing hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination proximately caused a Veteran's additional disability, it must be shown that the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination caused the Veteran's additional disability or death (see 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (c)) and (i) that VA failed to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable health care provider or (ii) that VA furnished the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination without the Veteran's or, in appropriate cases the informed consent Veteran's representative.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (d)(1).

In this case, the Veteran does not assert (and the evidence does not show) that VA furnished the right foot callus debridement without the Veteran's informed consent. The Veteran only asserts that there was carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on VA's part in furnishing the debridement of his right foot callus and the care resulted in additional disability, to include increased pain.

Turning to the evidence, VA podiatry notes prior to the incident dated in January 2020, February 2021 and May 2021 revealed complaints of tingling and burning to the bilateral feet, as well as plantar calluses of the bilateral feet that caused pain with ambulation or standing.  The treatment records noted regular diabetic foot care examination, and debridement of callus tissue of the bilateral sub-fifth metatarsal heads.  The assessments prior the VA treatment at issue included calluses of the bilateral feet, left foot plantar fasciitis, peripheral nerve disease, and onychomycosis. 

On July 2, 2021, the VA treatment records show the Veteran received debridement of bilateral plantar calluses.  The calluses on both feet were noted to cause pain with walking and standing.  After examination, the clinician debrided the callus tissue of the sub-fifth metatarsal heads of the right foot; debridement was made on the left foot as well.  The clinician noted that accommodative padding was applied, and the Veteran was instructed to return in 12 weeks.  

Three days later, on July 5, 2021, the Veteran reported extreme pain in a nursing telephone encounter note.  The Veteran also complained of a big sore and gap on his right foot.  Positive responses were noted for skin swelling around the ulcer, and ulcer enlargement within the past two days.  The Veteran was then advised to seek additional care at the Birmingham VAMC emergency department. 

Birmingham VA Medical Center (VAMC) records dated July 5, 2021, show the Veteran presented to the emergency department with complaints of right foot pain at the site of the callus removal.  Examination of the right foot revealed a callus with a small open wound in the center over the head of the fifth metatarsal.  There was minimal surrounding pale erythema, and tenderness.  The Veteran was prescribed an anti-bacterial (Keflex) due to pain and his history of diabetes.  The diagnosis was iatrogenic foot wound with mild surrounding cellulitis.

An administrative note dated July 7, 2021, shows the Veteran requested non-VA treatment or community care.  At that time, he indicated that he was still taking Keflex.  The note indicated that the Veteran would continue to monitor the wound for signs/symptoms of infection. 

VA treatment records dated in December 2021 show the Veteran reported that his chief concern was a painful callus on the bottom of his right foot, as well as a sharp burning sensation when walking, standing, or wearing shoes.  The dermatological examination was positive for hyperkeratosis in the fifth sub-metatarsal of the right foot (but also the left), and significant pain upon palpation at the metatarsophalangeal joint (MPJ) level of the right (and left) foot.  

VA treatment records dated in September 2022 show the Veteran was seen for painful thick toenails and calluses on both feet, and some tenderness with walking standing and wearing shoes.  Relevant to the claim on appeal, there was hyperkeratosis of the fifth sub-metatarsal of the right (and left) foot, and significant pain upon palpation.  There was no sign of any contamination or indication of a current wound or ulcer.  The assessment included diabetes with neuropathy and bilateral onychomycosis, hyperkeratosis, pes planus, metatarsalgia, and difficulty walking.

In September 2022, the Veteran filed a claim for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 due to his callus debridement resulting in a right foot wound. 

The Veteran testified at his December 2024 Board Hearing that debridement treatment for his right foot diabetic callus went awry in July 2021 when a VA clinician at the Tuscaloosa VA Medical Center (VAMC) cut a callus on his right foot too deep, which resulted in an infection.  Although the infection was treated and resolved, the Veteran indicated that he had to use a cane while it healed.  He did not know if any scarring had occurred afterward.  He also reported constant, extreme pain when he wears tight-fitting shoes or walks.  The Veteran testified, however, that the normal treatment for his right foot callus had resumed, including cleaning, debridement and sanding down of the callus every couple of months.  He described his pain on a day-to-day basis as being between three and five on a scale of one to ten. He also indicated that the additional disability he is claiming is increased pain and difficulty walking due to pain.

In January 2025, and within 90 days of his Board hearing, the Veteran submitted photographs of his foot.  In a  photograph of the right foot callus area taken on July 2, 2021, a wound is shown.  In a more current photograph of the Veteran's right foot, a callus is observed. It appears to be a white color.

Upon review, the Board finds that the claim for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 must be denied.  

As noted above, the initial step in determining a claim for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 is whether the Veteran has an additional disability.  In this case, the Veteran does not have an additional disability during the pendency of, or approximate to, the September 2022 claim.

At the Board hearing, the Veteran reported an infected wound immediately after the July 2021 debridement of his callus by the VA clinician.  The Birmingham VA emergency room treatment records also show a diagnosis of iatrogenic foot wound with mild surrounding cellulitis.  However, the evidence indicates that both the initial infection in the wound area resolved prior to the claim on appeal.  

The Veteran testified that his infection lasted for four to six weeks after the July 2021 treatment, and there was no current infection.  See also September 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ (where he indicated that the infection lasted only two weeks).  The Veteran did not testify that the wound infection continued or that there was permanent scarring in that area from the debridement. There also is no evidence in VA treatment records showing the initial post-debridement wound had not healed or that there was re-infection of the right foot debridement area or scarring during the pendency or approximate to the claim.  VA treatment records dated in December 2021 show clinicians did not identify any recurrent wound, infection, or return of the cellulitis.    

The Board finds the treatment records probative.  The clinicians who treated the Veteran had the appropriate training, expertise and knowledge to evaluate the claimed disability.  The clinicians considered the Veteran's reported symptoms, his observable symptoms and relevant clinical history.  The treatment records show the Veteran's right foot was examined on a regular basis.  The treatment records provided the Board with a clear description of all relevant data points necessary to evaluate this claim.  

The evidence prior to the July 2021 right foot callus debridement shows the Veteran had pain, numbness, tingling and burning sensation in both feet, with calluses on both feet causing pain during walking or standing.  The evidence after the July 2021 treatment revealed similar symptoms, with no additional symptoms attributable to his July 2021 right foot callus debridement.   

While the Veteran believes there is a current additional disability in the form of increased pain that results in difficulty walking, he is not competent as a lay person to diagnose an additional, underlying right foot disability manifested as severe pain that is due to the July 2021 right foot callus debridement.  See Colantonio v. Shinseki, 606 F.3d 1378, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (recognizing that in some cases lay testimony "falls short" in proving an issue that requires expert medical knowledge).  

Regarding the Veteran's specific contention that his additional disability is the increased pain, he is competent to report that his pain has increased, particularly when wearing tight fitting shoes and when walking. VA treatment records and clinical history reflect that right foot pain predated the Veteran's July 2021 foot debridement.  The Board notes that pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis or underlying condition, can qualify as a disability if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-69 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  The Board also has considered the holding in Stevenson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 432, 440 (2022), where the Court held that the term "additional disability" for section 1151 purposes includes "more or added" functional impairment in earning capacity following VA treatment, even if the "additional disability" resolves during the pendency of the appeal.  In this case, however, there is no evidence or assertion of impaired earning capacity due to the additional pain symptoms related to the July 2021 VA right foot callus debridement.  The Veteran has not asserted, nor provided any supporting evidence of, impaired earning capacity due to the additional right foot pain.  The Veteran reported that he is retired and performs volunteer work for the American Legion and helps Vietnam veterans at his church. He indicated that his right foot callus treatment interferes with his volunteer activities only in the sense that he receives debridement every six weeks.

In sum, the credible and competent evidence persuasively weighs against finding that there an additional disability as a result of the debridement of the right foot callus at the Tuscaloosa VAMC on July 2, 2021.  As such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).  The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable military service; however, entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a right foot wound is denied. 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Vuong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.