Citation Nr: A25030707
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240811-462563
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for melanoma is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1987 to July 1991.

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (to be codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  That law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review.  The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019.

The Veteran filed his claim of service connection for melanoma in August 2023.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  In November 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the rating decision on appeal, in which the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim of service connection for melanoma.

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182) in which he opted into the modernized review system to have his appeal adjudicated under the AMA framework.  The Veteran selected the Board's Direct Review docket in which he sought review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) at the Board of the November 2023 Rating Decision (RD) that was issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

Service connection for melanoma is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for melanoma that was etiologically related to his active duty service.  

In support, the Veteran reports that he did not develop melanoma until after his military service was over and indicated that his active duty was spent experiencing significant and extensive sun exposure.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not contain complaints, treatment or diagnoses for melanoma or any skin cancer conditions.

However, the Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of service connection for melanoma because there is no VA examination or etiology opinion of record.

The VA is required to provide a medical examination or opinion "if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim" and (1) the record contains competent evidence of a current diagnosed disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disease; (2) the evidence establishes that the veteran suffered an in-service event, injury or disease; and (3) the evidence indicates that the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with the established in-service event, injury or disease or with another service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2006).

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Such an error would include failure by the RO to obtain a VA examination where one was warranted.

Here, it is clear that a VA examination was warranted.  The Veteran submitted private medical records that diagnose melanoma.  See Dartmouth Department of Dermatology Medical Records.  

Further, the medical records indicate that the Veteran was initially diagnosed with malignant melanoma in October 1993, approximately two years post-separation from service.  Thus, the record contains competent evidence of a current diagnosis for melanoma.

Additionally, the Veteran competently reports significant in-service sun exposure and contends that his melanoma is related to service, as his service constituted significant sun exposure that he asserts led to his melanoma.  

Here, although the Veteran's statements are competent to show that he suffered extensive sun exposure or significant sunburns while in service, he is not a medical professional and his statements about the cause of the melanoma are insufficient on their own to prove a nexus.  Therefore, an etiological opinion from an appropriate VA clinician is warranted.  

Thus, the Board finds remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by scheduling the Veteran for a VA examination and obtaining a VA medical opinion.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his melanoma.  

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is the Veteran's melanoma at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related, in part, to service, including Veteran's competent report of significant exposure to the sun during service?

The examiner should provide a comprehensive rationale for each opinion provided.  

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion.

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.  As appropriate, the AOJ should conduct additional development or supplement the record.

 

 

STEVEN D. REISS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ahmed, Zarar

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.