Citation Nr: A25032835
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-455624
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as due to a service-connected disability is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence weighs in favor of finding that a service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese. 

2. The Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing OSA.

3. The evidence weighs in favor of finding that OSA would not have occurred but for obesity caused by a service-connected disability. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA as due to a service-connected disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310; VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017).

?

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1986 to October 2006. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting a September 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review of an August 2023 decision, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Thus, if evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that new and relevant evidence had been submitted for the Veteran's claim seeking service connection for OSA. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the Board will not address the issue of new and relevant evidence to readjudicate this claim and will proceed to the merits of the issue.?

Entitlement to service connection for OSA is granted.

The Veteran generally contends that his OSA is linked to his service-connected disabilities. 

As service connection is being granted on a secondary basis, the Board will not discuss other theories of entitlement, to include direct service connection.

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists, (2) that there is an already service-connected disability, and (3) that there is "but for" causation or aggravation of the disability for which service connection is sought by a service-connected disability. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and holding a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

While obesity is not a disease or injury for purposes of 38 U.S.C. § 1110, it can be an "intermediate step" between a current disability and a service-connected disability under certain circumstance. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017). Secondary service connection with obesity acting as an "intermediate step" is warranted (1) if the service-connected disability caused or aggravated the obesity, (2) if obesity was a substantial factor in causing a subsequent disability, and (3) if the subsequent disability would not have occurred but for obesity. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017).

In Walsh v. Wilkie, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the Board needs to consider the obesity-intermediate step theory based on aggravation where appropriate. 32 Vet. App. 300, 306-07 (2020). Thus, the Court held that the proper interpretation of General Counsel Precedent Opinion 1-2017 requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation in its analytical framework: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the veteran to become obese or aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity or aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. Id. 

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the claimant prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the evidence, in the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has a diagnosis of OSA and is service connected for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); degenerative joint disease C4-C5 vertebrae; low back strain with minimal degenerative changes; left knee strain status post meniscectomy; and right knee strain with chondromalacia patella status post meniscectomy. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104. Therefore, the first two elements for establishing secondary service connection are established. 

Thus, the remaining issue is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have caused or aggravated the Veteran's current OSA. The record contains evidence in favor of and against such a relationship.

In October 2019, a VA medical opinion was obtained. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected GERD. The VA examiner explained that while OSA is capable of causing or worsening GERD, the causative connection does not go in the other direction. The VA examiner did not provide an opinion concerning aggravation. The Board affords this opinion little weight of probative value as it does not consider whether obesity is an intermediate step between GERD and OSA. Additionally, the opinion is incomplete as it does not address whether GERD aggravated OSA. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013).

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a private opinion from R.G., PA-C, MSPAS, in which she opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and obesity is due to his service-connected disabilities, OSA is secondarily linked to his service-connected orthopedic disabilities. R.G., PA-C, MSPAS, noted the Veteran's BMI at the time was 37.2 and further explained that the Veteran finds it difficult to exercise due to his chronic orthopedic pain which has caused him to gain weight. The Veteran's obesity most likely worsened his OSA. The Board gives this opinion sufficient probative weight as the medical expert considered all the pertinent evidence of record and provided a reasoned medical explanation with a clear conclusion.

In November 2023, a VA medical opinion was obtained. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected generalized anxiety and depressive disorder, right carpal tunnel of the median nerve, left carpal tunnel of the median nerve, degenerative joint disease C4-C5 vertebrae; low back strain with minimal degenerative changes; left knee strain status post meniscectomy; right knee strain with chondromalacia patella status post meniscectomy ; and GERD. The VA examiner explained that the most common cause of OSA in adults is obesity, male sex, and aging and a nexus did not exist between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and OSA. Additionally, part of the VA examiner's rationale noted that an article showed OSA is associated with several chronic health conditions including obesity. Lastly, the examiner opined that while OSA is not due to or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, it is due to or aggravated by obesity. The Board gives the November 2023 VA examiner's opinion regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused his OSA little weight of probative value as it does not contain a complete well-reasoned rationale. The opinion is inadequate concerning aggravation as it addressed whether aggravation was beyond natural progression of the condition in the aggravation opinion. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023). However, the opinion is given sufficient weight concerning obesity as a cause of the Veteran's OSA as it is consistent with evidence of record and supported by a well-reasoned rationale. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the evidence, in particular the July 2023 private opinion, weighs in favor of a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities contributed to the Veteran's obesity, which in turn caused his OSA. 

?

Therefore, service connection for OSA is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Green, Janelle

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.