Citation Nr: A25032037
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240919-475267
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

A rating of 100 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and Major Depressive Disorder is granted, subject to the rules and regulations governing the payment of VA monetary benefits.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder results in total occupational and social impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 100 percent for PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from May 1989 to March 1993. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

A rating of 100 percent for PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder is granted. 

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected PTSD is more severe than the rating currently assigned. As outlined below, the Board finds that an increased rating of 100 percent is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder. 

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Board should consider only those factors contained in the rating criteria. Massey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 204 (1994).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Board will also consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Veteran's psychiatric disorder is currently rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, 9411. Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms. The use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the Diagnostic Code. VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign for psychiatric disabilities, however, the Board's "primary consideration" is the Veteran's symptoms. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss of names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

In an August 2023 VA treatment record the Veteran stated he has no feelings and does not care about anything. He stated his anxiety is low, he is sleeping well, and work is going "ok." The mental health provider observed the Veteran to be oriented; casually dressed and adequately groomed; cooperative attitude with good eye contact; fluent speech with normal rate; "ok" mood; concerned affect; no suicidal or homicidal ideation; no hallucinations, delusions, paranoia, or evidence of mania; linear thought process; sustained attention and concentration; adequate insight and judgment; and no gross cognitive deficits. 

In a September 2023 correspondence, the Veteran stated that he experiences depression and anger issues. He stated that he has become severely withdrawn from his family. He stated he has completely alienated himself from his family. He also stated he has used unscheduled leave from work due to his condition. He stated there are days he is unable to get out of bed for work. He stated when he does work, he is not effective at his job. He stated he is in a position to lose his job due to him being unreliable. 

In the October 2023 VA PTSD examination, the examiner indicated he has a diagnosis of PTSD and Major Depressive Disorder. The Veteran stated his wife has told him of the poor hygiene. He stated he does not have any social outlets or connections with people. He stated he does not socialize with his family. He stated that outside of work, he does not leave his home. He stated that last year he missed 35 percent of workdays. He stated missing work is starting to become a problem at work. He also stated that he has difficulty feeling "as if he is in his body."  The examiner indicated the Veteran experiences depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; impairment of short- and long- term memory; speech intermittently illogical; difficulty in understanding complex commands; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. The examiner observed the Veteran to be oriented to person, time, place, and circumstance; irritable and difficult to engage; heightened anxiety; poor hygiene and disheveled; poor eye contact; tearful; no hallucinations; poor insight and judgment; and denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. Of note, the examiner specifically found the Veteran's PTSD to cause "occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas." 

The VA examiner remarked that the Veteran's supervisor has discussed the Veteran's problems with attendance and poor hygiene with him. The examiner observed that when they discussed his employment, the Veteran began to cry. The examiner concludes that the Veteran struggles with feelings of shame due to poor hygiene and are related to the initial in-service stressor. The examiner noted the Veteran experiences nightmares when he has a meeting at work or a gathering he must attend. He stated he often has nightmares about in-service stressor events and has recurrent thoughts about the in-service stressor daily. He stated that he experiences sleep paralysis when he is transitioning out of sleep. The Veteran stated that he avoids people when possible and orders items online. 

On the VA examination, the Veteran stated he has a consistent feeling of anxiety "all of the time." The Veteran stated that he has trouble breathing and feeling tightness in his chest. The Veteran stated he no longer likes to drive and would rather be in his home. He stated he still blames himself for his in-service stressor and he has distrust of others. He stated he experiences emotional numbness, difficulty accessing positive emotions, and does not engage in any significant activities. He also stated he is hypervigilant and has difficulty with focus/concentration. The Veteran stated he has difficulty sleeping and sleeps four to five hours per night, but he usually sees the clock every hour. The examiner noted the Veteran is prescribed melatonin, however, the Veteran reported the prescription lacks effectiveness. 

The VA examiner further remarked that the Veteran reported having poor nutrition. The Veteran stated he often eats canned food, such as a can of soup for dinner. He stated that he only eats when he feels that he needs to eat, but he does not plan intentional meals. 

The VA examiner added that the Veteran also meets the DSM-V criteria for Major Depressive Disorder given his feelings of sadness, guilt, shame, lack of pleasure in significant activities, difficulties maintaining hygiene, isolated, poor appetite, low motivation and energy, and difficulties with focus and concentration. The examiner stated there is some overlap with the PTSD symptoms. The examiner stated the Veteran acknowledges the need for individual therapy but has had difficulty making an appointment. The Veteran stated that he has "given up because it is too hard." The examiner found that the Veteran is in a difficult place where he is not able to help himself due to feeling alone and having a severely depressed mood that leads to low motivation and low energy, and a tendency to give up easily. The examiner stated that the Veteran would be a good candidate for a case manager and some type of more immediate intervention. The examiner stated the Veteran is not a danger to himself, but he seems to be decompensating and will continue to worsen without help. 

For the entire period on appeal, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for a disability rating of 100 percent. In this regard, the October 2023 VA examination shows the Veteran to have intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, specifically, neglect of personal hygiene and appearance and poor nutrition. The Veteran also reported being socially isolated, an inability to establish and maintain relationships, and a constant stated of anxiety and/or panic.  Of note, the Veteran also stated that he has difficulty feeling as if he is in his body. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's employment, however, the Board notes that the Veteran is missing 35 percent of work due to his symptoms and has been advised by his supervisor about absences and his poor hygiene. Finally, the VA examiner found that the Veteran would be a good candidate for a case manager to assist in intervention and care. Taken together, the Board finds that these symptoms demonstrate total occupational and social impairment. Accordingly, the Board finds that a 100 percent rating is warranted.

The Board also finds that the examination upon which it has relied in making this determination to be adequate and probative for rating purposes. The examination contains all information required for the Board to make an informed decision.

(continued on next page)

?

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology for the period on appeal most closely approximated the criteria for a 100 percent rating.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Thompson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.