Citation Nr: A25032608
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240404-430552
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent disabling for asthma claimed as burn pit exposure, cough, runny nose, congestion, with an inability to breathe through the nose is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent disabling for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record weighs pervasively against finding that the Veteran has or had a current diagnosis of sinusitis at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's asthma (also claimed as burn pit exposure, cough, runny nose, congestion, with an inability to breathe through the nose) has been manifested by, at worst, FEV-1 of 60 percent predicted and a FEV-1/FVC of 70 percent predicted without monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, intermittent or daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications, or more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure.

3. To date, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms have not more nearly approximated total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for sinusitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent disabling for asthma claimed as burn pit exposure, cough, runny nose, congestion, with an inability to breathe through the nose have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602.

3. The criteria for establishing entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent disabling for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had honorable active-duty service with the United States Army from April 2003 to April 2007.

Pursuant to an August 2022 Rating Decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD.  An evaluation of 30 percent disabling was assigned effective May 1, 2022.  

In March 2023, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review.  Therein, he requested an increased rating for PTSD. He also filed VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) for service connection for upper respiratory symptoms described as a cough, runny nose, congestion, with an inability to breathe through the nose due to burn pit exposure.

Also in March 2023, a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity Memorandum was associated with the record.  Therein, it was noted that the Veteran participated in TERA while on active duty. An Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record identified the dates, location and names of each chemical or toxic exposure that occurred during his period of active service.

 Pursuant to a May 2023 Rating Decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for asthma, also claimed as a cough, runny nose, congestion, with an inability to breathe through the nose due to burn pit exposure. An evaluation of 30 percent disabling was assigned effective August 10, 2022.

A Higher-Level Review Hearing Conference, also dated May 2023, indicated that the rating office (RO) failed to review and consider the Veteran's service treatment records for his period of service in the Republic of Vietnam.

A subsequent Rating Decision, dated May 2023, granted service connection for asthma claimed as burn pit exposure, cough, runny nose, congestion with an inability to breathe through the nose. An evaluation of 30 percent disabling was assigned effective August 10, 2022.

In August 2023, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review. Therein, he requested an increased rating for his service-connected asthma.

Later the same month, he also filed VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).  Therein, he alleged entitlement to service connection for sinusitis and rhinitis.

In December 2023, a Higher-Level Review Hearing Conference, indicated that the Veteran disagreed with the assigned evaluation for his service-connected asthma.

The assigned evaluation and effective date were continued pursuant to a December 2023 Rating Decision.

Thereafter, a February 2024 Rating decision granted service connection for allergic rhinitis and assigned a non-compensable evaluation effective August 10, 2022.  That decision also denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for sinusitis.

In February 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review.  Therein, he alleged entitlement to a higher evaluation for his service-connected allergic rhinitis and asthma.

Before the Rating office could act on that submission, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.  Therein, he alleged entitlement to an increased rating for his service-connected PTSD, asthma, and allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran also asserted entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Preliminarily, the Board observes that a June 2024 Rating decision readjudicated the Veteran's claim for a compensable evaluation for allergic rhinitis. The same month, the RO forwarded correspondence to the Veteran explaining that his higher-level review request for asthma was improper as a higher-level review evaluation had been previously conducted in December 2023.

Service connection, generallyService connection may be granted for any current disability that is the result of a disease contracted or an injury sustained while on active-duty service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (a), 3.304 (2020).Entitlement to service connection benefits is established when the following elements are satisfied: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service (the medical 'nexus' requirement).  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a) (2020).

Service connection also is permissible on a secondary basis for disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a) and (b) (2020).  See also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).  In order to prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

Furthermore, in determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (2020); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt will be given to the Veteran. Id.

The Board notes that it has thoroughly reviewed the record in conjunction with this case.  Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence submitted by the Veteran or on his behalf.  See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim.  See Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 129 (2000) (noting that the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant).  

Lay evidence, if competent and credible, may serve to establish a nexus in certain circumstances.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (2009) (noting that lay evidence is not incompetent merely for lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  When considering whether lay evidence may be competent, the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that "[w]hether lay evidence is competent and sufficient in a particular case is a factual issue.

1. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for sinusitis.  As discussed in more detail below, the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim.

In analyzing the claim, the threshold inquiry before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the medical evidence does not reveal symptomology sufficient to warrant a current diagnosis of sinusitis at any point during the appeal period. 

Review of service treatment records are largely silent for complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis of sinusitis. The Veteran repeatedly denied having any experience with sinusitis. However, in July 2004 a post deployment medical assessment documented complaints of a chronic cough with a runny nose.  Tours of duty with Operation Iraqi Freedom included deployments to multiple locations in Southwest Asia, including Kuwait, Baghdad, and Ramadi.  One year later, a screening note of acute medical care documented difficulty breathing with a cough, chest and nasal congestion due to an upper respiratory infection in December 2005.

Post-service records are silent for a current diagnosis of sinusitis.  In April 2023 respiratory conditions disability benefits questionnaire documented a current diagnosis of asthma only.  No findings consistent with sinusitis were indicated. Outpatient VA treatment records document a nonproductive cough in 2013. No complaints of symptoms were listed in primary care treatment records between 2016 and the present. However, the Veteran reports daily bouts with a productive cough, congestion, shortness of breath, and difficulty breathing through his nose.  Worsening symptoms were endorsed since 2022. A pack per day habit of excessive smoking was reported between 2005 and 2013.  

In making all determinations, the Board has fully considered all medical evidence and lay assertions of record. Generally, the Veteran is deemed competent to report his current symptoms and their onset. However, there is no evidence that he possessed the specialized skills and expertise necessary to render complex medical opinions or opine as to the nature and etiology of his current symptoms. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377.

In this case, there is no competent evidence of a current sinus disorder, or evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Further, there is also no evidence of record of a sinus disorder during the appeal period. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013). 

The Board has considered Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018); however, the Veteran has not suggested that he suffers from pain or other symptomatology of such severity involving his sinuses, that results in functional impairment or economic inadaptability. It is also noted that service connection has already been granted for asthma and allergic rhinitis.

Moreover, the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997). To date, the medical evidence has been consistently silent for a current diagnosis of sinusitis.

Accordingly, as the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim, the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b) regarding reasonable doubt are not applicable. Therefore, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for sinusitis must be denied.

Increased Ratings, Generally

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4 (2020).  The Board determines the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, and the assigned rating is based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairment of earning capacity in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10 (2020).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the assigned evaluation is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Although the recorded history of a particular disability should be reviewed in order to make an accurate assessment under the applicable criteria, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings.  Id.

The Court has held that staged ratings are appropriate for initial rating and increased rating claims when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

When all the evidence is assembled, the Board is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim, in which case, the claim is denied.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

2. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent disabling for asthma claimed as burn pit exposure, cough, runny nose, congestion, with an inability to breathe through the nose 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher evaluation for his service-connected asthma.  As discussed in further detail below, the evidence weighs pervasively against his claim.

In this case, an evaluation of 30 percent disabling has been assigned for the Veteran's asthma pursuant to Diagnostic Code 6602. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

Generally, Diagnostic Code 6602 provides ratings for bronchial asthma. Forced Expiratory Volume in one second (FEV-1) of 71- to 80-percent predicted value, or the ratio of Forced Expiratory Volume in one second to Forced Vital Capacity (FEV-1/FVC) of 71 to 80 percent, or intermittent inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy, is rated 10 percent disabling. FEV-1 of 56- to 70-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, or daily inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy, or inhalational anti-inflammatory medication, is rated 30 percent disabling. FEV-1 of 40- to 55-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids, is rated 60 percent disabling. FEV-1 less than 40-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, or more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure or requires daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications, is rated 100 percent disabling. 

A Note to Diagnostic Code 6602 provides that, in the absence of clinical findings of asthma at the time of examination, a verified history of asthmatic attacks must be of record. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

In this case, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a higher disability rating for his asthma. To establish entitlement to an evaluation of 60 percent disabling, the medical evidence must reveal FEV-1 of 40- to 55-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or; at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or; intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids, or; FEV-1 less than 40-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, or; more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or; requires daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications, to warrant a higher rating. Id. 

Post-bronchodilator studies are required to be used when pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are done for disability evaluation purposes, except when the results of pre-bronchodilator PFTs are normal or when the examiner determines that post-bronchodilator studies should not be done and states why. 38 C.F.R. § 4.96 (d)(4). In this regard, the Veteran's pre-bronchodilator PFTs during the April 2023 VA examination did not yield normal results and post-bronchodilator studies were documented during the same examination. Thus, the Board will discuss the diagnostic findings in its analysis below. 

Post-service treatment records document complaints of a nonproductive cough in 2013. No complaints of symptoms were listed in primary care treatment records from 2016 to present. However, the Veteran reports daily bouts with a productive cough, congestion, shortness of breath, and difficulty breathing through his nose.  Worsening symptoms were endorsed since 2022. A 1-pack per day habit of excessive smoking was reported between 2005 and 2013. 

On examination in April 2023, a current diagnosis of asthma was indicated.  Pulmonary function testing revealed FEV-1 of 60 to 70 predicted value (pre and post bronchodilation) and a FEV-1/FVC of 71 percent and 83 percent predicted value. Following a physical examination, the examiner found that the Veteran's asthma does not require the use of oral, parenteral, or inhaled corticosteroid medications. Similarly, antibiotics, bronchodilators, or outpatient oxygen therapy were not required to manage his asthma related symptoms. Given the above, the examiner determined that the Veteran's asthma has not required physician visits for symptom exacerbations over the previous 12-month period. Although lay reporting of functional impairments included daily bouts with a persistent cough, shortness-of-breath and a runny nose with decreased focus, concentration and productivity, the medical evidence is silent for evidence of treatment for asthma attacks with episodes of respiratory failure. 

In light of the above, the Board finds that the diagnostic criteria for a higher evaluation of 60 percent disabling for the Veteran's service-connected asthma is not warranted. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602.

The Board has considered the applicability of the other diagnostic codes to determine whether a higher rating is warranted for the Veteran's asthma. Findings to support a higher evaluation have not been shown.

Additionally, the Board has fully considered all medical evidence and lay assertions of record.  It also acknowledges the Veteran's competence to report on observable symptoms and notes that such statements are generally deemed credible to the extent that they articulate the Veteran's belief that he is entitled to a higher rating.  In this case, however, the Veteran's lay assertions are outweighed by competent and credible medical evidence which evaluated the true extent of his respiratory impairment to include consideration of his contentions as to worsening symptoms. In this regard, the Board notes that the VA examiners have the training and expertise necessary to administer the appropriate tests for a determination of the type and degree of the impairment associated with the Veteran's complaints.  For these reasons, greater evidentiary weight is placed on the examination findings in regard to the type and degree of impairment.

As the evidence of record weighs pervasively against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Therefore, the Board finds that an evaluation in excess of 30 percent disabling for the Veteran's service-connected asthma must be denied.

3. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent disabling for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher evaluation for his service-connected PTSD.  As discussed in further detail below, the evidence weighs pervasively against his claim.

Review of the record indicates that the Veteran has been assigned a higher rating for his PTSD, which is currently assigned a 70 percent rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 9411.

Under the General Rating Formula For Mental Disorders, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is assignable where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); and disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Consideration is given to the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remission, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a). Furthermore, when evaluating the level of disability arising from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment, but it shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b). It is necessary to evaluate a disability from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2.

Turning to the evidence of record, VA treatment records list a provisional diagnosis of PTSD in November 2013. Psychiatric symptoms included exposure to military trauma, an explosion, and post-service bouts with difficulty establishing and maintaining relationships.  Significant alcohol use due to self-medication (3-4 beers per night) was also reported. No suicidal or homicidal ideations were noted. The Veteran was described as oriented, alert, and without evidence of psychosis or a thought disorder. 

On examination in May 2022, a current diagnosis of PTSD was indicated. The Veteran's current symptomology was associated with occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. 

Current symptoms include a depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment and disturbances of motivation and mood. During active service, the Veteran endorsed good performance and received multiple awards and decorations including the combat infantry badge. However, he endorsed receipt of two article 15s (one for having alcohol in the barracks; making a false statement). Post-service, he reported having a good relationship with his wife. They were married in 2010. The Veteran suggested that symptomology related to his PTSD have taken a toll on his marriage. Despite the above, he reported good relationships with his son, parents, and sister. Good relationships were also endorsed with prior co-workers, peers, supervisors, and subordinates. Although the Veteran reported having friends, he denied participation in social activities. Periodic contact with his "old army buddies" was reported. Post-service, the Veteran endorsed work as a mechanic with participation in related trainings and certifications. 

Since separation, the Veteran has continued to experience PTSD related issues including problems with anger. Although he reported participation in counseling at the local Veteran's center, the Veteran acknowledged a history of self-medication with alcohol. Reportedly, his drinking increased after his second deployment in the Army. Consumption includes upwards of 1-2 drinks per week. He denied use of other substances.

In multiple lay statements, the Veteran reported exposure to traumatic events in service. Specifically, he endorsed witnessing an explosion and rollover accident involving a Humvee with injuries to soldiers in his unit. Since separation, the Veteran endorsed nightmares, feeling guarded or detached from others and his surroundings, becoming easily startled/discomfort in crowds, and reexperiencing traumatic events. 

In making all determinations, the Board has fully considered all medical evidence and the lay assertions of record. It also acknowledges the Veteran's competence to report on observable symptoms and notes that such statements are generally deemed credible to the extent that they articulate the Veteran's belief that he is entitled to a higher rating. In this case, however, the Veteran's lay assertions are outweighed by competent and credible medical evidence which evaluated the true extent of his psychiatric impairment to include consideration of his contentions as to worsening symptoms. In this regard, the Board notes that the VA examiners have the training and expertise necessary to administer the appropriate tests for a determination of the type and degree of the impairment associated with the Veteran's complaints. For these reasons, greater evidentiary weight is placed on the examination findings in regard to the type and degree of impairment.

The Board notes that the assigned evaluation for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was increased from 30 percent disabling to 70 percent disabling throughout the appeal period. 

Conversely, the Veteran's symptoms have not more nearly approximated total occupational and social impairment at any point during the appeal period. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. In particular, the medical evidence has documented bouts with social isolation, difficulty in crowds, hypervigilance, outbursts in anger, and nightmares.

However, the record is silent for more severe symptoms such as suicidal or homicidal ideations, persistent delusions, or an inability to maintain personal hygiene during the appeal period as contemplated by the 100 percent criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017). 

Accordingly, as the diagnostic criteria for an evaluation of 100 percent disabling has not been established, the benefit of the doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (2020). As the evidence weighs pervasively against an evaluation of 100 percent disabling, the Veteran's for an evaluation in excess of 70 percent disabling for PTSD must be denied.  

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Whitaker, Nakiya E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.