Citation Nr: A25032210
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 220916-277786
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for status/post left total knee arthroplasty is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for right knee osteoarthritis is granted. 

The April 2022 request to revise or reverse a rating decision on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 is dismissed without prejudice to refiling. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's adjustment disorder is related to his service. 

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether his left knee total knee arthroplasty is at least as likely as not related to service.

3. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether his right knee osteoarthritis is at least as likely as not related to service.

4. The April 2022 CUE request does not adequately set forth the alleged errors of fact or law in the challenged decision; the legal or factual basis for such allegations, and why the result would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for adjustment disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With resolution of reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for status post left total knee arthroplasty are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. With resolution of reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for right knee osteoarthritis are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. Because the pleading requirements for motions to revise a final decision of a VA Regional Office have not been met, the motion must be dismissed without prejudice to refiling. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5109A, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1987 to May 1991. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO)'s rating decision issued in July 2022; the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

As for the issue of service connection for left knee disability, in April 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim of left knee arthroplasty most recently addressed in a May 2021 rating decision  In July 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.  

In the September 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in-service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

As a general matter, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in-service, and; (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1. Entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder is granted. 

The Veteran contends that he has posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a result of his service; in support of his claim, he submitted a statement in which he reported his in-service stressor events. See April 2022 Veteran's statement. 

In June 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD that conforms to the DSM-5 criteria. However, a diagnosis of chronic adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was provided. The Veteran reported that while in service, he worked as a technical and machine repair personnel and that he was trained in drug interdiction skills, including boarding actions against smugglers, and involved in search and rescue operations at sea. 

As for stressors, the Veteran described that he had feared for his life during a rescue of stranded boaters during a hurricane, or during drug interdiction boardings. He also reported that he had encountered multiple civilian casualties while rescuing Central American civilians on the high seas.  

The examiner found that the Veteran's account of his experiences was credible and coherent and noted that some of his experiences while on active duty were sufficient to meet the DSM-5 criterion A for being of sufficient risk to him to produce an acute stress situation. Based on this assessment, the examiner determined that the Veteran's symptoms meet the DSM-5 criteria for a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, chronic (present for more than six months). 

As for the nexus, the examiner stated that his adjustment disorder, in some part, was caused by his experiences while on active duty. The rationale was stated as follows: 

As was noted, veteran provides a coherent and consistent credible history of symptoms dating to the early years after his service. It cannot be denied that veteran's adjustment disorder symptoms are also attributable to his chronic hereditary diseases and resultant chronic pain. Veteran also has financial stressors that arise from his inability to pursue competitive employment. His symptoms have been exacerbated in the time he has not been able to work. It is also impossible to assert that veteran's experiences while on active duty have not, in some part, impacted his adjustment.

The Board finds that the June 2022 VA examination and the medical opinion afford probative weight because they are consistent with the facts found and based on sound medical principles. Nieves-Rodriquez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008). No other medical opinion to the contrary has been provided. 

Moreover, the probative evidence of record is not inconsistent with the Veteran's reported in-service events, and the Veteran is competent to report his in-service experiences. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). His statements are credible because the events described by the Veteran are consistent with the military duty he was assigned. 

Accordingly, the probative evidence is for finding that the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorder is at least as likely as not related to his service. The claim is granted. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for status/post left total knee arthroplasty is granted. 

The Veteran contends that his left knee disability, though caused by his genetic osteopetrosis, was aggravated by his military service. 

A review of the Service Treatment Records (STRs) reflects reports of "broken bones" in the left leg and right forearm at the February 1987 enlistment Report of Medical History. The February 1987 enlistment Report of Medical Examination notes "full normal use of right upper limb" and left lower limb. A March 1991 Report of Medical Examination at discharge notes normal lower extremities. 

A September 1991 VA examination showed no abnormal limitations of motion of the lower extremities nor clinical evidence of atrophy or muscle weakness. 

In February 1992, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. An x ray for the left knee was noted as normal. The February 1992 VA examination reflects the Veteran's report that he had started having pain at both knees below the patella several years ago and he could not recall any injury. 

A January 2019 VA examination reflects a diagnosis of osteopetrosis of the left knee and status post left total knee arthroplasty (RKA). At the examination, the Veteran reported that he had begun having issues with his left knee during service and denied any trauma but the issue happened over time. He stated that he had complained of his knee during active duty but was never treated. He stated that he was diagnosed with a hereditary bone disorder, osteopetrosis and that he underwent a left knee total knee replacement in Novembre 2017 at VA. The January 2019 examiner provided a negative nexus opinion on the direct basis, stating that the in-service condition was acute only and there was no evidence of chronicity of care. 

A November 2021 statement by his buddy, submitted in April 2022, reports that the Veteran was born with an inherited bone condition and his bones breaks easily. 

In support of his claim, he submitted a December 2021 letter from a private clinician together with his claim in April 2022. In the letter, the clinician stated that the Veteran's claims file and his medical history were reviewed. The clinician noted that the Veteran has a "genetic condition called osteopetrosis, which causes the patient to have bones that are extremely brittle and easily broken with very little effort." After summarizing the Veteran's duty while in service, the clinician noted that "he worked on small boats again on even rougher waters and bigger swells, causing even more jolty movements which greatly contributed to his knee and ankle pain." The clinician further noted that the Veteran had "waxing and waning pain complaints" at the time of discharge and that "[t]hese ongoing pains were brought to the attention of military doctors and little to no treatment was offered." The clinician further stated that "[t]hese pain complaints have continued for greater than 25 years" and "[i]n the last 10 to 12 of those years the pain has become more and more significant." The clinician described that his pain was now debilitating to the point that he has difficulty ambulating. A knee x ray revealed tricompartmental osteoarthritis with a stage 3 Kellgren-Lawrence scale (left or right unidentified). The clinician noted that the Veteran was not a candidate for any surgical option secondary to his osteopetrosis. The clinician opined that "an individual with Osteopetrosis required to use his bones in a manner consistent with servicing on small boats for a period of four years would create a substantial hazard to his general health especially his joint and bones." The clinician stated that "[a]lthough the Veteran's condition will continue to degenerate over time, the condition was exaggerated beyond its natural progression by his service." 

In April 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. The examiner documented pertinent medical evidence available in the claims file from the Veteran's December 1986 entrance examination to the December 2021 letter by the private clinician as summarized above. A diagnosis of left knee osteoarthritis nad osteopetrosis was documented in VA treatment records in 2017. The examiner provided a diagnosis of status post left TKA and osteopetrosis impacting his left knee. The April 2022 examiner provided a positive nexus opinion that the Veteran's left knee disability, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The April 2022 examiner noted the December 2021 letter and also cited an article published by the Journal of Arthroplasty which indicates that osteopetrosis is an uncommon endocrine disease characterized by defective osteoclast resorption of bones and this causes a hard, sclerotic, and brittle bone throughout the skeleton. Moreover, the article indicated that fractures and unforgiving subchondral bones are common in this condition, both of which can lead to osteoarthritis and that total knee arthroplasty is often the treatment of choice but presents challenges due ot the hard and sclerotic bone present throughout the metaphysis and diaphysis of the femur and the tibia. The examiner then noted that the veteran served in the military as a small engine mechanic/repairman in small boats for four years and continued to state:

The jolting and movement from the rough waters placed a great stress in the Veteran's knee joints contributing to the development of osteoarthritis, and eventually the replacement of the left knee. 

In June 2022, the Veteran underwent another VA examination. At this examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with status post left TKA and osteopetrosis impacting both knees. At the examination, the Veteran reported that he had developed left knee pain and denied trauma and that he was diagnosed with osteopetrosis in 2018. He stated that his left knee pain while in service was caused by this disorder and progressively worsened to receive a total knee replacement in 2017. The June 2022 examiner provided a negative nexus opinion both on direct and aggravation bases. The rationale is that osteopetrosis is a hereditary disability, and he did not disclose it at the entrance examination. This rationale was again relied upon for the aggravation opinion. The questions posed by the claim adjudicator to the examiner prior to the examination reflects that his osteopetrosis was confused with osteoporosis. 

The Board finds that the December 2021 letter by the private clinician and the April 2022 VA examiner's opinion are more probative than the January 2019 or the June 2022 VA examiner's opinions. Both the December 2021 letter and April 2022 examiner's opinion are supported by sufficient rationales and facts found in the claims file. In particular, the June 2022 examiner provided a thorough review of the pertinent medical evidence of record for his osteopetrosis and left knee osteoarthritis as well as a medical article in support of the positive nexus opinion. On the other hand, the January 2019 and June 2022 medical opinions did not provide sufficient rationale. The January 2019 examiner's opinion is based on lack of evidence for chronicity of care, and the June 2022 opinion is based on the fact that osteopetrosis is a hereditary condition. The June 2022 examiner and the December 2021 private clinician examined the Veteran's situation did not solely rely on lack of evidence or genetic condition and looked additional evidence such as the Veteran's lay statements. Accordingly, the Board affords more probative weight on the June 2022 and December 2021 opinions than the January 2019 or June 2022 opinions. 

Based on the probative December 2021 and April 2022 opinions, the Board finds that the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's current left knee disability is at least as likely as not related to his service. Both December 2021 and April 2022 opinions essentially state that the activities that the Veteran had during service have caused stress on his knee and contributed to development of osteoarthritis of the left knee in light of his hereditary osteopetrosis. Both examiners considered the Veteran's statement that he had knee pain while in service, which he attributed to osteopetrosis as well as activities for his duty. The Veteran's statement affords probative weight since he is competent to report physical pain and his statement is credible as it is consistent with his complaint noted in a February 1992 VA examination that he had started having pain at both knees, below the patella several years ago, though he could not recall any injury. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). 

For the foregoing reasons, the claim of service connection for status post left total knee arthroplasty is granted on the direct basis. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for right knee osteoarthritis is granted. 

The Veteran's contention for the right knee disability is similar to his claim for the left knee disability. 

A February 1992 x ray showed "fragmentation at anterior tibial apophysis which could reflect old Osgood-Schlatter's disease" and the knee joint was normal width. The February 1992 VA examination reflects the Veteran's report that he had started having pain at both knees below the patella several years ago and he could not recall any injury. 

The Veteran submitted a letter from a private orthopedic surgeon in April 2021, in which the surgeon stated that the Veteran has developed severe osteoarthritis in his right knee and he also has osteopetrosis. The surgeon then provided an opinion that the wear and tear that he put on his knee while in service added to the current pathology of the knee. 

The AOJ never scheduled a VA examination for the right knee nor obtained a medical opinion for it. 

The Board affords probative weight to the April 2021 medical opinion, for it is consistent with the facts found in the claims file and based on a medical principle. The Board also notes that the progression of the right knee disability is quite similar to that of the left knee, which is consistent with the fact that the knee degeneration has occurred in light of his hereditary condition. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's current right knee disability is at least as likely as not related to his service. Therefore, the claim of service connection for status post right total knee arthroplasty is granted on the direct basis. 

4. The April 2022 request to revise or reverse a rating decision on the basis of CUE pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 is dismissed without prejudice to refiling. 

In an April 2022 statement, the Veteran's representative asked to "accept this appeal under a CUE standard." Then, he continued to state that "[p]ursuant to VA rules, a claim for disability filed within one (1) year from discharge is presumed to be service-connected and any ambiguity should be resolved in the Veteran's favor." 

In the second paragraph, the representative summarized the procedural history of the claim of service connection for bilateral Achilles tendon injury and bilateral knee disability since the July 31, 1992, rating decision, by noting that the claim for left knee disability was denied in February 2019 and May 2021 and the claim for service connection for right knee disability was rejected in May 2021 because a proper form was not used. 

Then, in the third paragraph, the representative stated the July 31, 1992, rating decision acknowledged that Veteran had sustained injuries to his legs, feet, ankles, Achilles tendons, and knees prior to entering service; that he had scaring from these injuries and surgeries; and that he was complaining of pain to the same areas. 

In the last paragraph, the representative stated that the Veteran contends that his "military service aggravated and/or accelerated said conditions" and that this conclusion was "reflected in the Veteran's medical evaluation which was conducted by [a non-VA clinic]." 

A previous Regional Office determination that is final and binding will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE. Where evidence establishes such error, the prior decision will be reversed or amended. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (a). However, CUE is a very specific and rare kind of "error." It is the kind of error of fact or law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error. Simply to claim CUE on the basis that previous adjudications improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE. Similarly, neither can broad-brush allegations of "failure to follow the regulations," "failure to give due process," or any other general, non-specific claim of error. Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993).

CUE is established when the following conditions are met: (1) either (a) the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or (b) the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error must be "undebatable," not merely a "disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated[;]" and (3) the commission of the alleged error must have "manifestly changed the outcome" of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time the decision was rendered. Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 185 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992). The error must be the kind that is outcome-determinative, and subsequently developed evidence may not be considered in determining whether an error existed in the prior decision. See Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233, 235-36 (1993); Glover v. West, 185 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1999). A manifest change in outcome of an adjudication means that, absent the alleged CUE, the benefit sought would have been granted at the outset. King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433, 441 (2014). The standard is not whether it is reasonable to conclude that the outcome would have been different. Id. at 442.

Importantly, claimants alleging CUE in a Regional Office decision must describe the alleged error "with some degree of specificity" and explain why, but for the error, the result would have been "manifestly different". Pierce v. Principi, 240 F.3d 1348, 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (quoting Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 44 (1993)); see also Phillips v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 25 (1997) (distinguishing denial of CUE due to pleading deficiency and denial of CUE on merits). A disagreement with how VA evaluated the facts or weighed the evidence is inadequate to raise the claim of clear and unmistakable error. Luallen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 92 (1995).

In the present case, the Board does not find that the Veteran's representative's motion for CUE sufficiently pleads allegations of CUE with the degree of specificity required by the law. It must therefore be dismissed without prejudice to refiling. 

First, the contention that "a claim for disability filed within one (1) year from discharge is presumed to be service-connected and any ambiguity should be resolved in the Veteran's favor" does not have support in law; not all disabilities are subject to presumption. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. Moreover, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application in claims of CUE. Andrews v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 177, 186 (2004). 

Second, the second and third paragraphs do not contain any assertion for CUE. 

Third, the representative's contention of aggravation is followed by a statement that this conclusion is supported by a private evaluation submitted in April 2022, which was not available prior to April 2022 and cannot be considered for a CUE claim in any rating decision decided prior to April 2022. 

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the Veteran's representative's claim of CUE, submitted in April 2022, does not meet the pleading requirements for CUE, and therefore, the CUE motion must be dismissed without prejudice to refiling. 

 

 

Emily Tamlyn

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Y. Taylor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.