Citation Nr: A25032012
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231218-405998
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is dismissed.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than June 20, 2023, for the grant of service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent for a lumbar spine disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for a right shoulder disorder is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In a July 2024 rating decision, the Regional Office awarded service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress and the symptoms and manifestations of that disorder are not separate and distinct from other claimed psychiatric disabilities.

2. The Veteran's claim for service connection for a lumbar spine disorder was last denied in an unappealed January 2016 rating decision.

3. The Veteran's supplemental claim for service connection for a lumbar spine disorder was received on June 20, 2023.

4. The Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is not manifested by limitation of forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

5. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is not manifested by moderate incomplete paralysis.

6. The Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy is not manifested by moderate incomplete paralysis. 

7. The Veteran's right shoulder disorder is not manifested by range of motion of the arm, midway between side and shoulder.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The petition to reopen the claim of service connection for a psychiatric disorder is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for an effective date earlier than June 20, 2023, for the grant of service connection for a lumbar spine disorder have not been met.   38 U.S.C.§ 5110; 38 C.F.R.§ 3.400.  

3. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 20 percent for a lumbar spine disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.  

4. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

5. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

6. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for a right shoulder disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 2005 to August 2006.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In a December 2023, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review lane.  As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issues on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board has not considered evidence that was submitted during the period after the RO issued this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.   

The Board acknowledges that in addition to the current issues on appeal, the Veteran listed the following additional issues in the December 2023 Notice of Disagreement:  entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches; entitlement to increased ratings for a left hip disorder (to include limitation of flexion and extension); increased ratings for a left knee disorder (to include instability) and entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound status.  The Veteran has consistently sought service connection for migraine headaches, increased ratings for disorders for the left knee and left hip and entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound status and these claims have been adjudicated in subsequent rating decisions.  The Veteran has filed appropriate Notice of Disagreements with respect to these claims.  These issues will therefore be addressed in separate Board decisions.    

1. The petition to reopen the claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder is dismissed.

In a July 2024 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress.  Because this issue has already been adjudicated and the benefit sought has been granted, there is no remaining case or controversy pertaining to this claim.  As such, the Veteran's claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder is moot.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

Effective Date

Generally, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The effective date of an original award of direct service connection is the day following separation from active service or date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise, it is the date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  Id. 

2. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than June 20, 2023, for the grant of service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is denied.

The Veteran was last denied service connection for a lumbar spine disorder in a January 2016 rating decision.  She did not appeal or submit any new and material evidence regarding the lumbar spine claim during the appeal period.  Thus, the June 2016 rating decision became final.  

On June 20, 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for service connection for a lumbar spine disorder.  In a September 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for a lumbar spine disorder, effective June 20, 2023.  She has disagreed with the effective date assigned.

A review of the evidence of record does not reveal any attempt to reopen the lumbar spine claim prior to June 20, 2023.  Moreover, the Veteran has not provided any specific evidence or arguments supporting an earlier effective date.  Thus, the assignment of an effective date of June 20, 2023, is the earliest possible date available for the grant of service connection for the lumbar spine.  

As there is no legal basis for the assignment of any earlier effective date, the claim must be denied.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by the applications of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321.

When assessing the severity of a musculoskeletal disability that is rated based on limitation of motion, VA must consider the extent that a veteran may have additional functional impairment above and beyond the limitation of motion objectively demonstrated, such as after repeated usage over time or during times when symptoms are most prevalent ("flare-ups") due to the extent of pain (and painful motion), weakness, premature or excess fatigability, and incoordination. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 204-7 (1995); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59. When feasible, evaluation should consider range of motion while weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, and in passive and active motion.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; see also Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011), Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

3. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent for lumbar spine disorder is denied.

The Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.  Disabilities of the spine are rated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (for Diagnostic Codes 5235 to 5243, unless 5243 is evaluated under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes).  Ratings under the General Rating Formula are made with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease.

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.

Normal ranges of motion for the lumbar spine are 90 degrees flexion, and 30 degrees extension, lateral flexion, and rotation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate V.

For VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching.  Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.  Id. at Note (5).

Any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to bowel or bladder impairment, should be evaluated separately under the appropriate diagnostic code.  Note (1).

On VA spine examination in September 2023, forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine was to 50 degrees.  Extension was to 20 degrees.  Right and left lateral flexion were to 20 degrees, each.  Right and left lateral rotation were to 20 degrees, each.  Pain was noted on examination.  There was evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joints or associated soft tissue of the lumbar spine.  The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions without additional functional loss or range of motion.  The examiner estimated that with repeated use over time, forward flexion would be to 45 degrees.  Extension would be to 15 degrees.  Right and left lateral flexion would be to 15 degrees, each.  Right and left lateral rotation would be to 15 degrees, each. During flare-ups, the examiner estimated that forward flexion would be to 40 degrees.  Extension would be to 10 degrees.  Right and left lateral flexion would be to 10 degrees, each.  Right and left lateral rotation would be to 10 degrees, each.  Guarding resulted in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour.  There was no ankylosis of the lumbar spine.  There were no bowel or bladder problems associated with lumbar spine condition.  There was no IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine.

Based on the above, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent for the lumbar spine is not warranted.  The Veteran demonstrated forward flexion greater than 30 degrees during the September 2023 VA examination.  Further, there was no evidence of ankylosis of the lumbar spine.  

In addition, the Veteran does not have IVDS.  Therefore, a rating higher under the Rating Formula for IVDS is not appropriate.

Moreover, there are no associated neurological abnormalities that would warrant additional separate ratings other than for radiculopathy of the left and right lower extremities for which service connection has already been separately established.  The Veteran has appealed the ratings assigned for the left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, which is discussed below.

In sum, a rating higher than 20 percent for the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is not warranted.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.   

4. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

5. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

The Veteran's left and right lower extremity radiculopathy are each rated as 10 percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8520, regarding incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  A 10 percent disability rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis; a 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis; a 40 percent disability rating is warranted for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve; a 60 percent disability rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, with marked muscular atrophy; and a maximum schedular 80 percent disability rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, where the foot dangles and drops, with no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost.

The term incomplete paralysis with peripheral nerve injuries indicates a degree of loss or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to the varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the ratings should be for mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves.

The words mild, moderate, and severe as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence, to the end that Board decisions are equitable and just.  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

In a September 2023 spine examination report, it was noted that the Veteran had moderate intermittent pain and mild paresthesia and/or dysesthesias of both lower extremities.  The pain was not constant and there was no numbness in either lower extremity.  There were no other signs of radiculopathy. The nerve roots involved were the sciatic nerve. The examiner determined that the right lower radiculopathy was mild.

Based on the above, the Board finds that a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted for left and right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve. Apart from a finding of moderate intermittent pain, the September 2023 VA examiner noted mild symptoms of paresthesia and/or dysesthesias of both lower extremities with no evidence of numbness and/or constant pain.  These findings do not show that the left and right lower extremity radiculopathy has been commensurate with moderate incomplete paralysis or complete paralysis.  Thus, initial ratings higher than 10 percent for left and right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claims.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of these issues.   

6. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for a right shoulder disorder is denied.

The Veteran's right shoulder disorder is assigned a 20 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.  

Limitation of motion at the shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees) warrants a 20 percent rating for both the major (dominant) and minor (non-dominant) extremity.

Limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees) warrants a 30 percent rating for the major extremity and a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity.

Flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from the side warrants a maximum 40 percent rating for the major joint and 30 percent rating for the minor joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

The Veteran is right-handed, and as such, rating criteria for the dominant extremity apply to her right shoulder disorder.

In a September 2023 VA shoulder examination report, right shoulder range of motion was measured as follows: flexion was to 80 degrees; abduction was to 80 degrees; internal rotation was to 45 degrees; and external rotation was to 45 degrees. Pain was noted in all ranges of motion. The examination report noted pain with weight bearing and crepitus bilaterally.  The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions without additional functional loss or range of motion.  With repeated use over time, the examiner estimated a reduction in forward flexion of the right shoulder to 75 degrees.  Abduction would be to 75 degrees.  Internal rotation would be to 40 degrees and external rotation would be to 40 degrees.  With flare-ups, the examiner estimated that a reduction in forward flexion to 70 degrees.  Abduction would be to 70 degrees.  Internal rotation would be to 35 degrees and external rotation would be to 35 degrees.    There was no ankylosis. No shoulder instability or mechanical symptoms were noted. The examination report noted no clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular (AC) joint condition or impairment of the humerus.

Based on the foregoing evidence, there is no evidence that shows limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees) to warrant a higher 30 percent rating for the right shoulder.  The right shoulder at worst, demonstrated flexion to 70 degrees and abduction to 70 degrees.

Further, the record does not establish ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation (Diagnostic Code 5200), impairment of the humerus (Diagnostic Code 5202), or impairment of the clavicle or scapula (Diagnostic Code 5203). Thus, these alternative Diagnostic Codes are not applicable in this appeal.

(Continued on the next page)

?

For the foregoing reasons, a rating higher than 20 percent for the right shoulder disorder is denied.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant."  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other."  Lynch v. McDonough, supra; Ortiz v. Principi, supra.  In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome of this issue.

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Henriquez, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.