Citation Nr: A25032458
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240205-413880
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for arteriosclerosis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle strain, status-post right distal fibular fracture with history of open reduction and internal fixation, is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), an anxiety disorder, depression, bipolar disorder, paranoid reaction, phobias, and stress disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a closed fracture of the distal phalanx of the right 5th finger is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder to include fallen arches, flatfoot, and foot pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding a left ankle disorder. The evidence is not in approximate balance.

2. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding a current diagnosed hypertension. The evidence is not in approximate balance.

3. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding a current diagnosed arteriosclerosis. The evidence is not in approximate balance.

4. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding right ankle strain, status-post right distal fibular fracture with history of open reduction and internal fixation was manifested by marked limitation of right ankle motion (defined as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion). The evidence is not in approximate balance.

5.  The competing lay and medical evidence weighs persuasively against finding that right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was manifested by moderate incomplete paralysis of the superficial peroneal nerve.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypertension are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for arteriosclerosis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle strain, status-post right distal fibular fracture with history of open reduction and internal fixation are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.14, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5270.

5. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.120, 4.123, 4.124a, DC 8522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2011 to April 2015. 

These matters are before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal of a November 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, CFS, IBS, headaches, low back disorder, right 5th finger disorder, bilateral foot disorder, right hip disorder, OSA, bilateral shin splints, and a left wrist disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection is established on a direct basis when there is competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a), (d).

If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder is denied. 

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a left ankle disorder.

The Veteran's service treatment records show the Veteran "rolled his [left] ankle" twice on the same day in September 2013. The first injury occurred while playing football and the second occurred later while walking. The Veteran was diagnosed with a left ankle inversion injury and recommended to use crutches, ice, elevation, and pain medication.  

He submitted a claim for service connection for a left ankle disorder in July 2023. 

On VA examination in October 2023, the Veteran reported no left ankle issues. The examiner found no diagnosed left ankle disorder and no functional impairment related to the left ankle.

The evidence of record weighs persuasively against finding a current diagnosis of a left ankle disorder.

To the extent that the Veteran believes that he has a left ankle disorder, he is not shown to have the relevant training or education to offer a medical opinion diagnosing a left ankle disorder. The diagnosis of a left ankle disorder is medically complex as it requires specialized education and knowledge of complex diagnostic instruments. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). His lay evidence of a diagnosis is not competent. There is thus no competent evidence diagnosing any left ankle disorder.

The requirement of having a current disability is met "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim." See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). The complaints of a left ankle injury in service, as well as any left ankle complaints documented years before the July 2023 claim, are too remote from the current appeal period to support a finding that the Veteran has a current left ankle disability. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's February 2024 argument that the examinations of record are generally inadequate. The Board finds the October 2023 VA examination to be adequate because it was based on an accurate factual picture and provides complete findings for the Board to render a decision. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008). 

As there is no evidence of a left ankle disorder for which service connection may be granted, service connection is not warranted. Brammer v. Brown, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).

Based on the foregoing, the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether service connection for a left ankle disorder is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding any current left ankle disorder. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), Lynch, supra. The claim is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for hypertension.

He submitted a claim for service connection for hypertension in July 2023. 

On VA examination in October 2023, the Veteran reported that elevated blood pressure was found on a routine office visit in 2015. The Veteran stated he had previously been treated with medication but self-discontinued due to side effects and had not had any further treatment since. There were no current symptoms or treatment for the condition. Blood pressure readings at the time of the examination were 110/80.  The examiner found no diagnosed hypertension and concluded that the condition had resolved.

The evidence of record weighs persuasively against finding a current diagnosis of hypertension.

To the extent that the Veteran believes that he has hypertension, he is not shown to have the relevant training or education to offer a medical opinion diagnosing hypertension. The diagnosis of hypertension is medically complex as it requires specialized education and knowledge of complex diagnostic instruments. Jandreau, 492 F.3d 1377, 1377 n.4. His lay evidence of a diagnosis is not competent. There is thus no competent evidence diagnosing any hypertension.

The requirement of having a current disability is met "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim." See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). The report of a diagnosis of hypertension in 2015, as well as any hypertension documented years before the July 2023 claim, are too remote from the current appeal period to support a finding that the Veteran has a current hypertension disability. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's February 2024 argument that the examinations of record are generally inadequate. The Board finds the October 2023 VA examination to be adequate because it was based on an accurate factual picture and provides complete findings for the Board to render a decision. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302. 

As there is no evidence of hypertension for which service connection may be granted, service connection is not warranted. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. 223.

Based on the foregoing, the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether service connection for hypertension is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding any current hypertension disorder. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), Lynch, supra. The claim is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for arteriosclerosis is denied.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for arteriosclerosis.

He submitted a claim for service connection for arteriosclerosis in July 2023. 

A July 2021 VA treatment record documents "a family history of coronary atherosclerosis." However, there are no relevant records showing that the Veteran currently has arteriosclerosis.

Accordingly, the evidence of record weighs persuasively against finding a current diagnosis of arteriosclerosis.

To the extent that the Veteran believes that he has arteriosclerosis, he is not shown to have the relevant training or education to offer a medical opinion diagnosing arteriosclerosis. The diagnosis of arteriosclerosis is medically complex as it requires specialized education and knowledge of complex diagnostic instruments. Jandreau, 492 F.3d 1377, 1377 n.4. His lay evidence of a diagnosis is not competent. There is thus no competent evidence diagnosing any arteriosclerosis.

The Veteran was not provided a VA examination with respect to this service connection claim, but generally contends that an examination is warranted. See February 2024 correspondence. An examination is required where there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or symptoms of disability may be associated with the established in-service event, injury, or disease or with another service-connected disability; but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on which to decide the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2006). Here, the record lacks any evidence of a current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability related to arteriosclerosis. Accordingly, even the low threshold under McLendon was not met and VA's duty to provide a VA examination was not triggered. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159 (c), 3.326.

As there is no evidence of arteriosclerosis for which service connection may be granted, service connection is not warranted. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. 223.

Based on the foregoing, the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether service connection for arteriosclerosis is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding any current arteriosclerosis disorder. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), Lynch, supra. The claim is denied.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of the two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. It is essential that the examination on which ratings are based adequately portrays the anatomical damage, and the functional loss, with respect to these elements. In addition, functional loss may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior of the veteran undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part which becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

The intent of the schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. It is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").

4. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle strain, status-post right distal fibular fracture with history of open reduction and internal fixation, is denied.

The Veteran contends that his right ankle disability is more severely disabling than represented by the currently assigned 10 percent rating.

The Veteran's right ankle disability is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5271.

DC 5271 provides for a 10 percent evaluation for moderate limitation of ankle motion (defined as less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion), and a 20 percent rating is warranted for marked limitation (defined as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion).

The normal range of motion of the ankles is 0 to 20 degrees for dorsiflexion and 0 to 45 degrees for plantar flexion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

On VA examination in October 2023, the Veteran demonstrated right ankle dorsiflexion to 10 degrees and plantar flexion to 45 degrees. The examiner found that range of motion would be unchanged after repeated use and during flare-ups. There was pain on active and passive range of motion which did not result in functional loss. Passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion. There was no ankylosis.

The foregoing evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the right ankle disability was manifested by symptoms approximating marked limitation of motion. As noted above, "marked" limitation of motion is defined as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion for purposes of DC 5271. Here, right ankle range of motion was no less than 10 degrees of dorsiflexion and 45 degrees of plantar flexion. Additionally, there was no finding of ankylosis to support a higher rating under DC 5270. 

All of the Veteran's additional reported symptoms have been considered, to include reports of right ankle pain. The Board is sympathetic to the pain experienced by the Veteran. However, these symptoms do not result in "marked" limitation of motion as defined by DC 5271 and therefore do not approximate the criteria for a higher rating. Mitchell, DeLuca, and §§ 4.40 and 4.45 do not require the assignment of a higher schedular disability rating where the functional limitation due to pain does not result in limitation of motion sufficient to meet the requirements of the next higher disability rating. Thompson, 815 F.3d at 785-86 (holding that §§ 4.40 and 4.45 do not supersede the requirements for a higher disability rating specified in § 4.71a).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran uses medication to treat his right ankle pain. In Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012), the Court held that, when assigning a disability rating, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where those effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria. "Thus, if [the applicable diagnostic code] does not specifically contemplate the effects of medication, the Board is required, pursuant to Jones, to discount the ameliorative effects of medication when evaluating [the disability]. Conversely, if [the applicable diagnostic code] does specifically contemplate the effects of medication, then Jones is inapplicable." McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271 (2016) (en banc). Here, DC 5271 does not contemplate the effects of medication. However, there is no evidence of record that, in the absence of medication, the Veteran's right ankle range of motion would approximate "marked" limitation of motion as defined by DC 5271. Therefore, no higher rating can be assigned on this basis.  

The October 2023 VA examiner specifically indicated that the Veteran used medication to treat right ankle flare-ups but found that range of motion would be unchanged during flare-ups. Since the Veteran used medication to treat flare-ups, the October 2023 examiner's assessment of functional loss during flare-ups is adequate to inform the Board's judgment as to the question of functional impairment in the unmedicated state. Therefore, remand to obtain a medical opinion addressing functional loss in the unmedicated state is not necessary. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (March 12, 2025).

The Board has considered the Veteran's February 2024 argument that the examinations of record are generally inadequate. The Board finds the October 2023 VA examination to be adequate because it was based on an accurate factual picture and provides complete findings for the Board to render a decision. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302. 

Based on the foregoing, the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted at any time during the period on appeal. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding marked limitation of right ankle motion (defined as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion). The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), Lynch, supra. The claim is denied.

5. Entitlement to a compensable rating for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

The Veteran contends that his right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is more severely disabling than represented by the currently assigned noncompensable (0 percent) rating.

Under DC 8522 incomplete paralysis of the musculocutaneous nerve (superficial peroneal) is rated as noncompensable when it is mild and 10 percent disabling when it is moderate, and 20 percent disabling when it is severe. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various DCs are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

According to MERRIAM WEBSTER, "moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension". See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate. "Severe" means "of a great degree". See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

On VA peripheral nerves examination in October 2023, the examiner found  symptoms of numbness just above the right heel of the posterior lower leg. There was mild right lower extremity numbness, but no other neurological symptoms. Lower extremity muscle strength testing and reflex examination were normal. There was decreased sensation in the right foot/toes. The examiner characterized the overall severity of the right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy as mild incomplete paralysis of the superficial peroneal nerve. 

The evidence weighs persuasively against finding that a compensable rating for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is warranted. The only reported right lower extremity neurological symptoms were mild numbness and decreased sensation in the foot and toes. Lower extremity muscle strength and reflexes were normal, and no other symptoms or functional impairment were reported. Overall, these findings more nearly approximate a mild severity of symptoms. For wholly sensory symptoms to warrant a 10 percent rating, the Board would expect a moderate impairment to manifest with additional sensory symptoms such as pain, paresthesias, dysesthesias, and a greater degree of sensory symptoms such as more severe numbness, as opposed to only mild numbness. Overall, the symptoms are of no more than mild severity. The evidence does not more nearly approximate a moderate impairment of the superficial peroneal nerve.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's February 2024 argument that the examinations of record are generally inadequate. The Board finds the October 2023 VA examination to be adequate because it was based on an accurate factual picture and provides complete findings for the Board to render a decision. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302. 

Based on the foregoing, the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower neuropathy is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that right lower extremity radiculopathy was manifested by a moderate incomplete paralysis. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), Lynch, 21 F.4 th 776.

REASONS FOR REMAND

6. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

The Veteran has not been provided a VA examination to consider the nature and etiology of an acquired psychiatric disorder. An examination is required where there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or symptoms of disability may be associated with the established in-service event, injury, or disease or with another service-connected disability; but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on which to decide the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2006). 

The service treatment records show that in September 2013 the Veteran reported that his wife had woken him, 'saying that he had been curled in a fetal position, shaking, and saying that she had hurt him [that night] after they had been "roughhousing."' The Veteran denied a history of such behavior, or of having flashbacks or PTSD. He admitted to seeking off-post anger management counseling several months prior. He reported that prior to seeking counseling he had punched walls in anger. 

In a July 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that during service, he experienced yelling, discriminatory slurs, hazing, physician correctional training, and sleep deprivation and stated he now had flashbacks to being yelled at and hazed. He stated he felt irritable when thinking about the situation, and felt shame associated with in-service hazing. He further reported psychiatric symptoms of depression, panic attacks, anxiety, obsessive behavior, and hypervigilance among several other symptoms.

This Veteran is competent to describe current psychiatric symptoms as well as stressful in-service events. As the Veteran described symptoms of re-experiencing the in-service events, there is an indication that his current symptoms may be related to the in-service events. There is currently insufficient competent medical evidence on which to decide the claim. Accordingly, the McLendon criteria were met at the time of the rating decision on appeal. Failure to obtain a medical examination was a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. Therefore, remand is required to obtain a medical examination to consider the nature and etiology of the claimed acquired psychiatric disorder.

7. Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

In an October 2023 medical opinion, a VA examiner opined against an in-service etiology of tension headaches reasoning, in part, that the Veteran's headaches may be related to his psychiatric symptoms or to sleep disruption. This evidence raises the theory that headaches may be caused or aggravated by the claimed acquired psychiatric disorder and OSA. Accordingly, the pre-decisional duty-to-assist error in the acquired psychiatric disorder and OSA (discussed below) claims extends to the claim for headaches. This issue must be remanded pending the development in connection with the claims for an acquired psychiatric disorder and OSA. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on an appellant's claim for the second issue).

8. Entitlement to service connection for CFS is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

10. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a closed fracture of the distal phalanx of the right 5th finger is remanded.

11. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is remanded.

12. Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder is remanded.

For each of these claimed disorders, the Veteran was provided VA examinations in October 2023. The examiner found no current diagnosis relating to each claim and opined that there was "no pathology to warrant a diagnosis." However, in the "medical history" section of each report, the examiner recorded various symptoms reported by the Veteran. On CFS examination, the Veteran reported increased sleep during the day, poor concentration, poor appetite, and unrestful sleep. On IBS examination, the Veteran reported soft stools once a day with periodic bloating. On right hand examination, the Veteran reported occasional pain treated with medication. On shin splints examination, the Veteran reported anterior leg pain when running. On left wrist examination, the Veteran reported dull pain a few times a week, more frequent in the winter. The examiner's finding of "no pathology to support a diagnosis" appears to ignore the relevant evidence provided within the examiner's own report. As the examiner's findings are based on an inconsistent statement of facts, they are inadequate for adjudication. Failure to obtain adequate medical examinations was a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. Accordingly, remand is required to obtain adequate medical examinations.

13. Entitlement to service connection for OSA is remanded.

14. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder is remanded.

15. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder is remanded.

16. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder is remanded.

On VA examinations in October 2023, the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA, bilateral pes planus, a right hip strain, and a lumbosacral strain. For each of these conditions, the examiner opined against an in-service etiology, in part on the basis that there was "no evidence to show a chronic condition." This finding is inconsistent with the examiner's own diagnosis of the above-listed disorders, as well as the Veteran's reports, recorded in the "medical history" section of each examination, of relevant symptoms which began many years prior. The examiner's finding of "no evidence to show a chronic condition" appears to ignore the relevant evidence provided within the examiner's own report. As the examiner's rationale was based on an inconsistent statement of facts, it is inadequate for adjudication. Failure to obtain adequate medical opinions was a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. Accordingly, remand is required to obtain adequate medical opinions. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder to include PTSD, an anxiety condition, depression, bipolar disorder, paranoid reaction, phobias, and stress disorder. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) What DSM-5 compliant psychiatric diagnoses have been present at any time since July 1, 2023?

(b.) For each such acquired psychiatric disorder, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service injury, event or disease, to include the reported stressful events in service?

An explanation of the medical reasoning for the opinion must be provided.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any CFS and disorders manifested by chronic fatigue and related symptoms. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) What CFS and disorders manifested by chronic fatigue and related symptoms have been present at any time since July 1, 2023?

If the examiner finds chronic fatigue or related symptoms are present, but finds no corresponding diagnosis, the examiner must explain why this is the case, to include whether the symptoms are attributable to a different disorder. 

(b.) For any disorders manifested by chronic fatigue and related symptoms, is it due to:

i.	an undiagnosed illness, or

ii.	a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology, or

iii.	a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or

iv.	a disease with a clear and specific etiology?

(c.) If his complaints relate to either (iii) a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or (iv) a disease with a clear and specific etiology, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the synergistic, combined effects of toxic exposure risk activity in Southwest Asia? Please consider the total potential exposure through all military deployments.

An explanation of the medical reasoning for all opinions must be provided. Please be aware that lay evidence does not lack credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any IBS and disorders manifested by gastrointestinal symptoms. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) What IBS and disorders manifested by gastrointestinal symptoms have been present at any time since July 1, 2023?

If the examiner finds gastrointestinal symptoms are present, but finds no corresponding diagnosis, the examiner must explain why this is the case, to include whether the symptoms are attributable to a different disorder. 

(b.) For any disorder manifested by gastrointestinal symptoms, is it due to:

i.	an undiagnosed illness, or

ii.	a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology, or

iii.	a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or

iv.	a disease with a clear and specific etiology?

(c.) If his complaints relate to either (iii) a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or (iv) a disease with a clear and specific etiology, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the synergistic, combined effects of toxic exposure risk activity in Southwest Asia? Please consider the total potential exposure through all military deployments.

An explanation of the medical reasoning for all opinions must be provided. Please be aware that lay evidence does not lack credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any residuals of a closed fracture of the distal phalanx of the right 5th finger, bilateral shin splints, and left wrist disorder. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) What residuals of a closed fracture of the distal phalanx of the right 5th finger, bilateral shin splints, and left wrist disorder have been present at any time since July 1, 2023?

If the examiner finds right hand, bilateral lower extremity, or left wrist symptoms are present, but finds no corresponding diagnosis, the examiner must explain why this is the case, to include whether the symptoms are attributable to a different disorder. 

(b.) For any such residuals of a closed fracture of the distal phalanx of the right 5th finger, bilateral shin splints, and left wrist disorder is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service injury, event or disease?

An explanation of the medical reasoning for all opinions must be provided. Please be aware that lay evidence does not lack credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.

5. Request a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of OSA. An in-person examination is not necessary unless the examiner determines it is required. Based on a thorough review of the claims file, including the Veteran's lay evidence, the examiner should answer the following questions:

	(a.) Is OSA at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service injury, event or disease, to include reports of difficulty sleeping in service?

(b.) Is OSA at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the synergistic, combined effects of toxic exposure risk activity in Southwest Asia? Please consider the total potential exposure through all military deployments.

An explanation of the medical reasoning for all opinions must be provided. Please be aware that lay evidence does not lack credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.

6. Request a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of bilateral foot disorder, a right hip disorder, and a low back disorder. An in-person examination is not necessary unless the examiner determines it is required. Based on a thorough review of the claims file, including the Veteran's lay evidence, the examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) For each bilateral foot, right hip, or low back disorder diagnosed since July 1, 2023, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service injury, event or disease?

An explanation of the medical reasoning for all opinions must be provided. Please be aware that lay evidence does not lack credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bametzreider, Paul J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.