Citation Nr: A25032122
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240210-416119
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for alcohol abuse is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The claim for service connection for an alcohol use disorder must be denied as a matter of law.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an alcohol use disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.301, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1993 to January 1996.

This appeal comes before the Board from January 4, 2024, and January 17, 2024, rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  In a February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

Therefore, regarding the issues of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus and alcohol abuse, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 4, 2024, AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Regarding the issues of entitlement to service connection for low back, right shoulder, and left shoulder disabilities, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 17, 2024, AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Regarding the issue of service connection for alcohol abuse, if the Veteran wants VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify that evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for tinnitus, low back, right shoulder, and left shoulder disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for alcohol abuse

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be established for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  As a general matter, service connection for a disability requires evidence of:  (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in service, and; (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and an event, injury, or disease during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

VA compensation shall not be paid if the claimed disability or death was the result of the person's own willful misconduct or abuse of alcohol or drugs.  38 U.S.C. §§ 105, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(n), 3.301(c).  With respect to alcohol and drug abuse, Section 8052 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-508, § 8052, 104 Stat. 1388, 1388-351, prohibits, effective for claims filed after October 31, 1990, payment of compensation for a disability that is a result of an appellant's own alcohol or drug abuse.  Moreover, § 8052 also amended the statute to provide that, with respect to claims filed after October 31, 1990, an injury or disease incurred during active service will not be deemed to have been incurred in the line of duty if the injury or disease was a result of the person's own willful misconduct, including abuse of alcohol or drugs.  VAOPGPREC 2-97.

However, a Veteran could receive compensation for an alcohol or drug abuse disability that is due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disability, or as a symptom of, a veteran's service-connected disability.  The statute precludes compensation only for primary alcohol or drug abuse disabilities, and secondary disabilities, such as cirrhosis of the liver, that result from primary alcohol or drug abuse.  Primary means an alcohol abuse disability arising during service from voluntary and willful drinking to excess.  Allen v. Principi, 237 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

The Board finds that the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for alcohol use disorder must be denied.  The Veteran filed the claim in December 2023 and the law clearly states that service connection may not be established on a direct basis for a disease or injury that results from a claimant's abuse of alcohol or drugs for claims filed after October 31, 1990.  Alcohol dependence is deemed by statute to be the result of willful misconduct and cannot itself be service connected.  38 U.S.C. §§ 105(a), 1110.  Therefore, the Board finds that there is lack of entitlement under the law for direct service connection for alcohol abuse.  The Veteran currently has no service-connected disabilities, so there is no valid claim for secondary service connection for alcohol use disorder.  Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for alcohol abuse disorder is not warranted.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

In a December 2023 VA audiology examination report, the Veteran reported experiencing intermittent bilateral noise in the ears, described as a ringing sensation, for up to two minutes three times per week.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a tinnitus disability, because the Veteran's description of symptoms did not meet the definition of tinnitus created by Dauman and Tyler in 1992, as cited in the Tinnitus Handbook.  The VA examiner did not provide any explanation as to what the cited definition entailed or why the Veteran's reports of ringing in the ears did not meet that definition.  Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002); McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243 (discussing the Board's duty to assess the probative value of a medical text in the context of service connection for hearing loss).  The Board finds that the examiner's examination findings incomplete.  Not providing a complete and adequate examination is a pre-decisional error.  Remand is necessary to provide an additional examination.   

2. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

In January 2024 VA medical opinions, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's disabilities were not related to service due to the lack of notations in the treatment records on file indicating treatment for the disabilities.  The Board notes that, in so doing, the examiner did not note the Veteran's lay reports of disability symptoms.  Not providing an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional error.  Remand is necessary to schedule an additional examination.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to ascertain the nature and etiology of any tinnitus.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report.  In reviewing the record, the examiner should note the service medical records, the post-service treatment records, and the lay evidence.  The examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements regarding any diagnosed disability, and symptoms during and since service.  An interview of the Veteran regarding hearing loss history, a hearing loss examination, and all tests and studies required to respond to the following questions should be performed.  After a review of the evidence, an interview with the Veteran, and an examination, the examiner should provide the following:

(a.) Diagnose any tinnitus disability found at the examination or during the pendency of the appeal, since December 2023.  In so doing, the examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to relate symptoms that are observable to a lay person, such as ringing in the ears.  If the examiner finds that the Veteran's symptoms do not meet the definition of tinnitus, the examiner must state the actual definition for the disability and why the Veteran's symptoms do not meet that definition.

(b.) For any tinnitus disability diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal, the examiner must opine whether it is as likely as not that tinnitus is related to service or any incident of service.  In so doing, the examiner should note that any opinion based solely on the lack of notations regarding tinnitus in the service medical records without reference to other evidence, to include the Veteran's lay statements, may be considered inadequate.

(c.) If tinnitus is diagnosed, the examiner should opine whether is it as likely as not that tinnitus (1) began during the Veteran's period of active service from July 1993 to January 1996, (2) manifested within one year after the January 1996 separation from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to ascertain the natures and etiology of any current low back and right and left shoulder disabilities.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report.  In reviewing the record, the examiner should note the service medical records, the post-service treatment records, and the lay evidence.  The examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements regarding any diagnosed disability, and symptoms during and since service.  An interview of the Veteran regarding a medical history, an orthopedic examination, and all tests and studies required to respond to the following questions should be performed.  After a review of the evidence, an interview with the Veteran, and an examination, the examiner should provide the following:

(a.) Diagnose any low back, right shoulder and left shoulder disabilities found at the examination or during the pendency of the appeal, since December 2023, to include spondylolisthesis of the thoracolumbar spine and bilateral shoulder strain.  If the examiner finds that any previously diagnosed disabilities are no longer present or disagrees with any prior diagnoses, the examiner should note those diagnoses and offer clinical reasons for that finding.

(b.) For any low back disability diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal, the examiner must opine whether it is as likely as not that any low back disability is related to service or any incident of service.  In so doing, the examiner should note that any opinion based solely on the lack of notations regarding a low back disability in the treatment records without reference to other evidence, to include the Veteran's lay statements, may be considered inadequate.

(c.) If an arthritic disability of the thoracolumbar spine is diagnosed, the examiner should opine whether is it as likely as not that a low back arthritis disability (1) began during the Veteran's period of active service from July 1993 to January 1996, (2) manifested within one year after the January 1996 separation from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.

(d.) For any disability of either shoulder diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal, the examiner must opine whether it is as likely as not that any right or left shoulder disability is related to service or any incident of service.  In so doing, the examiner should note that any opinion based solely on the lack of notations regarding a shoulder disability in the treatment records without reference to other evidence, to include the Veteran's lay statements, may be considered inadequate.

(e.) If an arthritic disability of either shoulder is diagnosed, the examiner should opine whether is it at least as likely as not that any shoulder arthritis disability (1) began during the Veteran's period of active service from July 1993 to January 1996, (2) manifested within one year after the January 1996 separation from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gillett, Todd M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.