Citation Nr: A25032119
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240919-475190
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for chronic headaches, including migraines, is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty in the U.S. Navy from January 1987 to July 1991, with subsequent periods of service in the National Guard and the U.S. Navy Reserve (USNR). She retired from the USNR on August 1, 2007.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 decision of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) that denied service connection for migraine headaches, left knee osteoarthritis, and right knee osteoarthritis. 

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2023 rating decision. In March 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior September 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 decision.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for chronic headaches, including migraines, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that she started experiencing chronic headaches during active duty, while stationed in Naples, Italy from 1987 to 1989, which continued since service. She reports that her headaches are due to wearing headphones and being around loud equipment, or exposure to toxic chemicals aboard ship, to include asbestos and burning security documents. See her June 2023 supplemental claim and statements, her November 2023 request for HLR, and her September 2024 notice of disagreement. Alternatively, she asserts that her chronic headaches are secondary to service-connected tinnitus. 

The Board notes that in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ stated that the Veteran's chronic headaches existed prior to service because the Veteran reported a history of severe headaches in the February 1986 entrance report of medical history. However, a history of pre-service existence of conditions recorded at the time of examination does not constitute a notation of such conditions. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b)(1). The Veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition with regard to headaches at the time of her entry into active duty, because a headache disorder was not noted on her February 1986 entrance medical examination report. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). Moreover, in the February 1986 report of medical history, the reviewing examiner noted that the Veteran's report of a severe headache was due to sinus headache, and she reported that she had sinusitis once in a while.

VA and private medical records reflect that the Veteran has been diagnosed with migraine headaches. See October 2022 and September 2023 VA examinations, and private medical records from B.M.P., MD. Private medical records from Dr. P. dated in August 2012 and August 2013 reflect a diagnosis of tension headaches. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received September 15, 2022.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for chronic headaches, to include migraines, is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained VA examinations and medical opinions in May 2022, October 2022, and September 2023, prior to the September 2023 rating decision. However, the examiners did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's chronic headaches, to include migraines, were aggravated by service-connected tinnitus. Moreover, the opinions do not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's chronic headaches had their onset in service, are related to service, or are proximately due to service-connected tinnitus.

2. Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

3. Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that she has left and right knee disabilities due to physical training during active duty and Reserve service, and that she had bilateral knee pain since service. See her June 2023 supplemental claim and statements, her November 2023 request for HLR, and her September 2024 notice of disagreement.

Private medical records from J.D., MD, and B.M.P, MD dated from February 2007 to January 2008 reflect treatment for complaints of bilateral knee pain. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received August 18, 2022. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) studies of the knees dated in April 2007 show chondromalacia patellae. In April 2007, Dr. D. noted that the Veteran had bilateral pes planus with overpronation when walking, and two physical therapists suggested that the Veteran's bilateral chondromalacia patellae and knee pain was related to bilateral pes planus. VA medical records dated in April and May 2023 reflect a diagnosis of osteoarthritis of the bilateral knees. 

The issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right knee disabilities are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The AOJ did not obtain a VA examination prior to the rating decision on appeal regarding whether the current left or right knee disabilities are related to a period of active service. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the Veteran's chronic headaches, to include migraines. The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. 

For diagnosed migraine and tension headaches (see October 2022 and September 2023 VA examinations, and private medical records from B.M.P., MD (see Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received September 15, 2022), please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that such disorder:

(a)	had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. In addressing this question, please assume as true the Veteran's reports that she had recurrent chronic headaches during and since service and provide a discussion of whether a nexus between chronic headaches, to include migraines, and service is "medically plausible" based on the same. Otherwise, the opinion will be rendered inadequate.

(b)	was caused by service-connected tinnitus; or 

(c)	got worse due to service-connected tinnitus.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions, citing to specific evidence of record and medical principles, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for her left and right knee disabilities. The examiner must review the claims file.

For diagnosed osteoarthritis of the bilateral knees (see VA medical records dated in April and May 2023), and diagnosed bilateral chondromalacia patellae (see Private medical records from J.D., MD, and B.M.P, MD dated from February 2007 to January 2008 (Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received August 18, 2022)), please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that such disorder:

(a)	had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. In addressing this question, please assume as true the Veteran's reports that she had bilateral knee pain during physical training on active duty and during periods of reserve service, and provide a discussion of whether a nexus between the current left and right knee disabilities (bilateral knee osteoarthritis and chondromalacia patellae) and service is "medically plausible" based on the same. Otherwise, the opinion will be rendered inadequate.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions, citing to specific evidence of record and medical principles, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.L. Wasser, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.