Citation Nr: A25032376
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-462243
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension (high blood pressure) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine condition to include arthritis, degenerative disc disease, pain, and herniated disc is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence weighs against finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of hypertension or had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for hypertension have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1988 to October 1989.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in April 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for right and left hip condition and lumbar spine condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. 

§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension (high blood pressure).

The Veteran is seeking service connection for hypertension.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38?U.S.C. §?1131; 38?C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38?C.F.R. §?3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). 

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Presumptive service connection on the basis of exposure to certain herbicide agents is warranted where a veteran sustained exposure to such herbicide agents during active military, naval, or air service, and subsequently manifested a specific disease, including hypertension, to a degree of 10 percent within a specified period. See 38 U.S.C. § 1116 (a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 (a)(6), 3.309(e). 

The Board notes that the medical evidence of record does not contain any evidence that the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypertension or that he has experienced symptoms of hypertension.  A VA examination was not provided for hypertension.  The Board notes that the rating schedule includes a definition of hypertension that is instructive for evaluating whether the record reflects a diagnosis of hypertension that meeting the criteria of a current disability. The definition is contained in 38 C.F.R. § 4.104 as a Note (1) after DC 7101. This definition notes that hypertension means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm, or greater, and isolated systolic hypertension means that the systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160mm. or greater with a diastolic blood pressure of less than 90mm. The record does not reflect blood pressure readings that meet this criteria or otherwise are reflective of a current diagnosed disability.

VA must obtain an examination in service connection claims when (1) there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) there is evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease; (3) there is an indication that the current disability may be associated with the in-service event (or to an already service-connected disability); but (4) there is a lack of sufficient evidence to decide the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

VA has not afforded the Veteran an examination specifically in connection with the appealed issue of service connection for hypertension.  In this case, there is not competent evidence of a disability or any symptoms of a disability.  While the Board acknowledges the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, evidence of a disability such as hypertension must still be of record, and in this case, there is no such evidence.  An examination is not required in every appeal, and even considering the low threshold for this duty to attach, in light of the evidence at the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Board finds the AOJ did not commit a pre-decisional error in not obtaining an examination.  Therefore, remand is not appropriate.

In sum, the Board finds that the evidence does not support an award of service connection for hypertension.  The evidence weighs against this claim, and the claim for service connection for hypertension is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.   

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine condition to include arthritis, degenerative disc disease, pain, and herniated disc.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for a back condition.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024 in which he was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain.  Additionally, in the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had a diagnosis of a disability, specifically, lumbosacral strain.  The February 20204 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event or illness.  Additionally, the examiner noted "there are no medical service treatment records in the e-file."  

A three-page VA medical record from February 2024 provides radiology results, with the following impressions: atherosclerosis, scoliosis, and generative changes at L3-L4 without acute findings.  

Under the modernized review system, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. 

§ 20.802(a). 

Review of the February 2024 VA examiner's opinion relied on by the AOJ reflects that it was inadequate for several reasons.  The examiner stated there are no STRs in the e-file.  This is inaccurate.  The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are contained in the evidence of record within the document titled "military personnel record".  Importantly, included in the STRs is an in-service record noting the Veteran was seen for back pain, albeit no additional details are provided.  Additionally, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's relevant lay statements when providing the opinion, including those provided to VA in November 2023 on a VA Form 21-4138, which detail the asserted in-service injury and onset.  While the VA examiner may reject the Veteran's lay statements, the examiner must explain why they have done so for an opinion to be adequate.  See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  

Additionally, the AOJ has a duty to assist in obtaining evidence in support of a claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  Prior to the AOJ decision on appeal, the Veteran submitted a lay statement that the AOJ should have followed up on by seeking authorization to obtain the non-VA medication referenced by the Veteran. This represented a pre-decisional error.

Given the aforementioned evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision, the Board finds the failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion and failure to attempt to secure VA and private treatment records constitute pre-decisional duty to assist errors, and therefore, remand is required to correct such.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition. 

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for a right and left hip condition.

In November 2023, the Veteran provided lay statements on a VA Form, 21-4138 regarding the asserted hip condition.  He provided specific contentions regarding in-service injuries and onset.

VA has not afforded the Veteran an examination specifically in connection with the appealed issue of service connection for left and right hip condition.  Although the Board is cognizant that an examination is not required in every appeal, considering the low threshold for this duty to attach and in light of the evidence and the Veteran's contentions of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Board finds that this standard was met on the evidence of record. Also, as with the back, the Veteran submitted a statement prior to the rating decision that raised the duty to seek authorization to obtain private medical records.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. With any needed authorization from the Veteran, seek private medical records of the Veteran's back and hip treatment.

2. After completing directives #1, afford the Veteran a VA examination with an appropriate medical professional to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back and hip disabilities.  The record must be made available to and reviewed by the medical professional. The examiner should interview the Veteran.

For any diagnosed back and hip disabilities, the examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the disability is attributable to service.

The examiner is reminded that the absence of documented complaints, diagnoses, or treatment in service cannot be the sole basis of a negative nexus opinion.

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and must state whether there is additional evidence that would permit the necessary opinion to be made.

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Scherba, Heather L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.