Citation Nr: A25032332
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210809-177220
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss is warranted.    

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for tinnitus is warranted and this claim is granted. 

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for residuals of a deltoid sprain of the left foot is warranted and this claim is granted.   

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for lumbosacral strain is warranted and this claim is granted.   

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for residuals of a fracture of the right index finger is warranted and this claim is denied. 

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for residuals of a left shoulder disability is warranted and this claim is denied. 

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for residuals of a right shoulder disability is warranted and this claim is denied

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Evidence received with respect to the petitions to readjudicate the claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus and residuals of a fracture of the right index finger and supplemental claims for service connection for residuals of a deltoid sprain of the left foot, lumbosacral strain, and left and right shoulder disabilities is new and relevant as it is evidence not previously before an adjudicator that tends to prove or disprove a matter pertaining to establishing service connection for these disabilities. 

2. There is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to whether the Veteran tinnitus, a deltoid sprain of the left foot, and lumbosacral strain were incurred in service. 

3. The evidence for consideration is persuasively against a conclusion that the Veteran has a current disability due to a fracture of the right index finger or left and right shoulder disabilities that was incurred in service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. New and relevant evidence has been received with respect to the claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, residuals of a deltoid sprain of the left foot, lumbosacral strain, a fracture of the right index finger and left and right shoulder disabilities warranting readjudication of these claims.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. 

2. Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for tinnitus, a deltoid sprain of the left foot, and lumbosacral strain are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  

3. The criteria for service connection for residuals of a fracture to the right index finger and left and right shoulder disabilities are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.   

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1976 to March 1979.  

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by way of an August 2021 notice of disagreement (VA Form 10182) with respect to a July 2021 rating decision.  The Veteran in his VA Form 10182 selected the Hearing Lane under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Under this review option, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2021 rating decision which gave rise to this appeal and that received within 90 days of the scheduled hearing.  In this case, a hearing was held before the undersigned in February 2025 and a transcript from the hearing is of record.  Pursuant to discussion at this hearing, the Veteran withdrew a VA Form 10182 filed earlier in June 2021 that was duplicative of the VA Form 10182 filed in July 2021 to the extent that this form also included disagreement with respect to claims for service connection for a deltoid sprain of the left foot, lumbosacral strain, and left and right shoulder disabilities.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence in connection with any Supplemental Claim submitted is deemed new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on such a Supplemental Claim that considers the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

?

I. Legal Criteria 

When there is an approximate balance in the evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990), the U.S.  Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that an appellant need only demonstrate that there is an "approximate balance of positive and negative evidence" in order to prevail.  See also Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application.  Id. 

Service connection will be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge from service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Where a Veteran manifests certain chronic diseases, including organic diseases of the nervous system, to a degree of 10 percent within one year from the date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1137 ; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 3.307, 3.309.  The Court has held that tinnitus is to be considered an organic disease of the nervous system for purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015).

Alternatively, service connection may be established under 38 C.F.R. § § 3.303 (b) by (a) evidence of (i) the existence of a chronic disease in service or during an applicable presumption period under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 and (ii) present manifestations of the same chronic disease, or (b) when a chronic disease is not present during service, evidence of continuity of symptomatology.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit clarified that the law providing for awards of service connection on the basis of continuity of symptomatology is limited to "chronic" diseases listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), such as organic diseases of the nervous system.

A claimant who disagrees with a prior VA decision may file a supplemental claim on a form prescribed by the Secretary any time after the AOJ (Agency of Original Jurisdiction) issues notice of a decision.  If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the AOJ will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record.  If new and relevant evidence is not presented or secured, the AOJ will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

In determining whether new and relevant evidence is presented or secured, VA will consider any VA treatment records reasonably identified by the claimant and any evidence received by VA after VA issued notice of a decision on the claim and while the evidentiary record was closed.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

New evidence is evidence not previously part of the record before agency adjudicators.  Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim.  Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  New and relevant evidence received before VA issues its decision on a supplemental claim will be considered as having been filed in connection with the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(2).

The evidentiary record for a supplemental claim includes all evidence received by VA before VA issues notice of a decision on the supplemental claim.  For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(b).  Upon receipt of a substantially complete supplemental claim, VA's duty to assist in the gathering of evidence is triggered and includes any such assistance that may help secure new and relevant evidence to complete the supplemental claim application.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(c).

?

II. Analysis

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus was originally denied in a January 2009 Legacy System rating decision.  This decision became final, as the Veteran did not perfect an appeal to this decision, nor was any new and material evidence received (the standard for reopening at the time of this decision) within a year of this decision.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 20.200, 20.201, 20.302, 20.1103.  An October 2013 Legacy System rating decision found that new and material evidence had not been presented to reopen the claims for service connection and tinnitus and also denied a claim for service connection for residuals of a fracture to the right index finger.  This decision also became final, as the Veteran did not perfect an appeal to this decision, nor was any new and material evidence received (also the standard for reopening at the time of this decision) within a year of this decision.  Id.  The October 2013 rating decision is the most recent rating decision denying the claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and residuals of a fracture to the right index finger on any basis. 

Thereafter, a March 2021 rating decision promulgated under the AMA denied service connection for a deltoid sprain of the left foot, lumbosacral strain, and left and right shoulder disabilities.  The Veteran filed a supplemental claim for service connection for these disabilities in May 2021, and also at that time filed claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and residuals of a fracture to the right index finger, which may also be viewed as petitions to readjudicate the claims for service connection for these disabilities denied in the Legacy System as set forth above. 

In short, the Veteran's testimony to the undersigned with respect to the claims for service connection on appeal is new as it was not part of the record at the time of the decisions addressing these claims listed above, and is also relevant, as it provides details than tend to prove or disprove a matter at issue; namely, whether the Veteran has bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, residuals of a deltoid sprain of the left foot, lumbosacral strain, a fracture of the right index finger or a left or right shoulder disability due to service.  With new and relevant evidence having been submitted, the formerly denied claims for these disabilities must now be readjudicated based on consideration of all of the evidence of record. 

First with respect to tinnitus, while a VA examination conducted in January 2009 resulted in the conclusion that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely a result of acoustic trauma during military service, this opinion conceded that the Veteran did experience acoustic trauma in service.  As such and in short, given the testimony of the Veteran to the undersigned also detailing acoustic trauma during service and his competent and presumed, as it was under oath, credible testimony asserting continuity of symptoms of tinnitus from service to the present time, the Board concludes that there is an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus was incurred in service.  Therefore, and after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for tinnitus may be granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, Lynch, supra.

With respect to a left foot and lumbosacral strain, the service treatment reports (STRs) reflect the Veteran sustaining both-as he testified to at the hearing before the undersigned-during service while playing basketball.  There are conflicting medical opinions of record as to whether the Veteran has a current disability due sprain of the left foot and lumbosacral spine, with positive opinions rendered in this regard in January 2021 and a negative opinion rendered with respect to the left foot in February and May 2021 and a negative opinion with respect to the lumbar spine in May 2021.  In short, these conflicting opinions-when considered in conjunction with the corroboration of the Veteran's testimony in the STRs of left foot and lumbar spine strains incurred as a result of playing basketball-places the positive and negative evidence in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran sustained left foot or lumbosacral strains in service.  Therefore, and after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for a deltoid sprain of the left foot and lumbosacral strain may be granted.  Id. 

With respect to a fracture of the right index finger, while the STRs reflect swelling in the index finger of the right hand due to a contusion in May 1978, the remaining STRs, to include the reports from the separation examination, are silent for any residual disability in the index finger of the right hand.  The STRs, to include the reports from the separation examination, are silent for a disability in either hip. 

The post service clinical evidence, which is voluminous and otherwise reflects treatment for several disabilities, is silent for a disability of the right index finger or either hip.  See eg. January 2021 computer generated problem list contained within VA outpatient treatment reports received in January 2021 that does not reflect a disability of the right index finger or either hip.  Moreover, in response to questioning from the undersigned at the February 2025 hearing, the Veteran reported that he had not seen a doctor for treatment of his right index finger in the 1980s or 1990s, and the Veteran's attorney at the hearing indicated that he had not seen any evidence in the record reflecting a current left or right shoulder disability that would trigger the duty to assist the Veteran with a VA examination addressing the claim for service connection for such disability.  

To the extent the assertions submitted by the Veteran or on his behalf are advanced in an attempt to establish that the Veteran has a right index finger or a left or right hip disability due to service, such complex medical matters are within the province of trained medical professionals such as those who have rendered the opinions above.  See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-38 (1994).  As the neither the Veteran nor his attorney are shown to have the appropriate training and expertise, they are not competent to render a persuasive opinion as to such matters.

While the Veteran is competent to describe any lay observable symptoms associated with a fracture of the right index finger or right of left hip disability, the undersigned finds the silent separation examination for these conditions and the lack of any objective clinical evidence during the evidentiary windows for consideration of a current disability of the right index finger or left or right hip that may be related to service to be more probative than any lay assertions made in connection with the claims for service connection for these disabilities, and that these facts weigh against a finding of continuity of relevant symptoms associated with any of these disabilities, even if contentions of such continuity are presumed to have been made implicitly by the Veteran or his attorney in this course of his 

?

appeal.  Finally, as there is no objective evidence of record indicating that the Veteran has a current disability of the right index finger or left or right hip that may be related to service, VA examinations or opinions to address the claims for service connection for these disabilities are not necessary to fulfill the duty to assist.  

In light of all of the above, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the claims for service connection for a fracture of the right index finger or a right or left hip disability.  As such, these claims must be denied.  Id. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

As indicated, a VA clinician who afforded the Veteran a VA audiological examination in January 2009 conceded that the Veteran experienced acoustic trauma in service, and such will also be presumed for the purposes of this adjudication.  While bilateral hearing loss as defined by regulation was not shown at this examination, reports from visits to a VA audiology clinic thereafter, to include in December 2013, January 2014, and April 2016, reflect the presence of bilateral hearing loss but not the full audiometric findings required to determine if the Veteran has hearing loss disability in either ear as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  As such and given the competent and credible sworn testimony by the Veteran of continuing problems with hearing since service, the AOJ will be directed to afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine if he currently has hearing loss disability in either ear as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 and whether any such disability is due to the presumed in-service acoustic trauma.  

For the reasons set forth above, this case is REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran a VA audiometric examination to determine if he has hearing loss disability in either ear as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  For any such hearing loss disability shown, the examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that it is due to service, to include his presumed acoustic trauma therein.  

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered.  

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ahlberg, Andrew

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.