Citation Nr: A25032319
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240213-416469
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted effective September 1, 2022. 

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

During the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD has been manifested by total occupational and social impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating of 100 percent for PTSD are met effective September 1, 2022. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from November 2004 through November 2008. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in February 2024, electing the Direct Review docket in the modernized review system.

As the Veteran has selected the direct review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the RO at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the RO decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the RO decision on appeal, the Board will not consider it. The Veteran is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

The evidence of record reasonably raises a claim of entitlement to TDIU as part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for a higher disability rating for his service-connected PTSD. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The record indicates that the Veteran has reported difficulty working with people and customers due to verbal altercations. Furthermore, in VA examinations afforded to the Veteran for other service-connected disabilities, he has indicated he is unable to work because of his service-connected disabilities. The Board finds that he has reasonably raised a claim for a TDIU pursuant to Rice. 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of facts and conclusions of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted effective September 1, 2022.

The Veteran contends his PTSD symptoms are more severe than contemplated by the current, assigned 70 percent disability rating. 

His claim stems from an August 2023 Intent to File a Claim which was followed by a September 2023, VA Form 21-526EZ claim seeking an increased rating wherein the Veteran contends he should be assigned a higher disability rating for PTSD. He is currently rated 70 percent disabled under DC 9411 throughout the entire appeal period. The Board finds no basis in which to award a higher rating or separate ratings for the period on appeal, and for reasons outlined below, the appeal is denied. See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2). 

Relevantly, in an August 2014 rating decision, VA granted entitlement to an initial 30 percent disability rating decision for PTSD. The decision became final. VA received the Veteran's October 2020 Intent to File a Claim and subsequent February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ seeking an increased evaluation of his PTSD. The Veteran's disability evaluation was increased from 30 percent to 50 percent in an August 2021 rating decision. The Veteran did not appeal this rating decision within one year of the rating decision. As such, it became a final decision. The Veteran next filed a VA Form 21-526EZ in October 2022, requesting an increased rating. In a January 2023 rating decision, the RO increased the Veteran's rating for PTSD to 70 percent. The Veteran filed an August 2023 Intent to File a Claim, followed by a VA Form 21-526EZ September 2023, requesting an increased rating. In the January 4, 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO denied the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for PTSD. 

While the Board is cognizant the Veteran filed his August 2023 Intent to File a Claim and subsequent September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ within one year of the January 2023 rating decision, there has not been continuous pursuit of this claim. If a claimant files a new increased rating claim on VA Form 21-526EZ, as is the case here, this does not establish continuous pursuit of a claim. This is because the newly filed VA Form 21-526EZ is a request for a higher rating based on a change or worsening in severity, as opposed to a request for a review of a prior decision. Accordingly, the period on appeal herein stems from August 2023, the date of VA's receipt of the Veteran's Intent to File a Claim as VA received the corresponding VA Form 21-526EZ within a year thereof, or up to one year prior to VA's receipt of the Veteran's increased rating claim, to the extent an increase in severity is factually ascertainable. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent at any point since the filing of his claim in September 2023, to include the one year look back period.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent effective September 1, 2022. 

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Factual Background

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, September 2022 VA treatment records show the Veteran contacted his providers requesting to reschedule an appointment because his life depended on it. A subsequent mental health no-show note indicated the Veteran was not flagged as a high risk for suicide, was not within 30 days of discharge from inpatient medical/surgical hospitalization where he had been treated for a mental health condition and was not within 30 days of discharge from inpatient mental health hospitalization. When the provider reached the Veteran, he stated that his "life depends on it" statement was in reference to feeling overwhelmed in the context of psychosocial stressors including his truck. He stated that it did not represent suicidal ideation (SI) and he denied current SI. In a subsequent September 2022 mental health telephone encounter, the Veteran was reported to be cooperative but anxious. He reported chronic, intermittent SI in the context of substance use. He felt that he could maintain safety at the current time, but he was not sure about later. The following day, a provider contacted the Veteran and offered him a same-day appointment. The Veteran stated he could not come. The Veteran was calm and cooperative, but hesitant when answering suicide screening questions. He denied having suicidal intent or a plan and stated he could keep himself safe. The Veteran was assessed as being at intermediate acute risk, and intermediate chronic risk for suicide, and was reported to be help seeking. 

An October 2022 mental health screening note showed the Veteran was not experiencing thoughts of harm to self or others. The Veteran's psychomotor activity was observed to be normal, his appearance appropriate, behavior appropriate to the situation, good eye contact, alert, oriented to person, place, time and situation. His speech was observed to be a normal rate, tone and volume, he had an appropriate affect, euthymic mood, logical and goal directed thought processes, no abnormal thought content, was not suicidal or homicidal, was not experiencing hallucinations or delusions, his memory and cognition were grossly intact, and his judgment and insight were good. 

A subsequent October 2022 mental health telephone encounter note reported the Veteran was calm and organized, but reported sleep disturbance on nights he did not use substances, as well as intermittent "hallucinations." The provider noted that he endorsed chronic, intermittent SI without intent or a plan. He did not have current SI/HI. 

Three days later, an October 2022 primary care new patient note indicated the Veteran had SI a few days prior. Outside treatment records from October 2022 indicate the Veteran suffered an injury and sought a work letter. The clinician recommended administrative or desk duty for three months, and that he could return to work in 11 days. 

In an October 2022 mental health prescriber note, the Veteran indicated he was no longer employed and that despite his desire to resume work, he didn't feel like he could. He also stated he did not feel like working. The Veteran was down and anxious and dealing with sleep disturbance. He had difficulty initiating sleep, stayed in bed until late morning, and endorsed difficulty with focus. He stated he felt hopeless and had episodes of thinking about staying in his garage with his car running but had no intent or overt plan. The Veteran was dressed in casual attire, with fair grooming and hygiene, seemed calm, cooperative, organized, but restless and fidgety. The Veteran's speech was at a normal rate and tone, he communicated clearly, had no current SI/HI, was not suffering from hallucinations or delusions, his thought processes were mostly linear and organized, associations were intact, recent and remote memory were intact, and was fully oriented. 

The Veteran was afforded an October 2022 VA review PTSD examination. The examiner noted the Veteran was also diagnosed with alcohol use disorder, and substance use disorder. The examiner noted the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran was reported to have contact with his mother and had one brother and one sister. He was separated with three children, two of which lived locally. The examiner noted that the Veteran was on unpaid leave and had last worked in late September. He worked construction for a water company and had suffered physical injuries from his job. The Veteran reported that his budget was OK, that he spent to feel good and had some debt. He indicated that his hygiene was poor, and fair. He stated he overate and gained weight, was forgetful, had trouble concentrating and would zone out. He stated that he tried to write things down and make notes, but did not set reminders, misplaced his keys and phone, and got angry while driving and drinking. He reported he avoided crowds, unexpected loud noises made him jumpy, he had intrusive memories and was hypervigilant. He reported having two friends. Occupationally, he had called in sick, left early, gone in late, yelled at customers, had verbal altercations with co-workers, his boss, and customers. He had to be reminded to complete tasks, was less efficient and productive, and had been written up for his attitude and behavior. The examiner indicated the Veteran experienced symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The examiner noted, however, that the Veteran was casually but appropriately dressed and groomed. He exhibited a depressed mood and was anxious and tearful. 

A December 2022 mental health treatment note indicates the Veteran was not working due to recent shoulder surgery. He stated his job was not guaranteed when he got back. He reported dealing with financial stress and was depressed. He stated he was paranoid, avoided going out and thought his neighbors did not like him. He endorsed intermittent, passive SI. 

February 2023 mental health treatment notes show the Veteran was still not working. He was trying to motivate himself to go to the gym. He reported that two of his friends had died. He had also had a verbal altercation at a bar that did not become physical. The Veteran did not endorse any SI, and stated he wanted to see his daughter grow up. Additional February 2023 notes indicate the Veteran made inquiries to his VA care team about obtaining a Department of Transportation Physical. 

The Veteran sent a secure message to his care team in March 2023 stating that he felt like he needed help, and that he did not think he was going to last much longer. During a subsequent encounter, the Veteran stated he was not suicidal when he sent the note but had been drinking. He was oriented and denied current SI/HI. 

In a May 2023 secure message to his care team, the Veteran indicated that he had been recently let go from his job of 10 years, effective early April. He stated he had not been doing well and was drinking and abusing substances, as well as having a hard time sleeping. 

July 2023 mental health treatment notes show the Veteran was not working and recovering from shoulder surgery. He stated that his friends had been supportive. He denied SI and stated he had them in the past but thought that he was "good now." He stated his most recent SI was in March or April. He cited that he had an improved support system with a friend. The Veteran's mental status exam showed he was appropriately dressed with fair grooming and hygiene, was calm, cooperative, and organized, had speech at a normal rate and tone, did not indicate he was suffering from hallucinations or delusions, was fully oriented in all spheres, exhibited judgment intact in some areas but not in others (substance abuse), and his recent and remote memory was intact. 

The Veteran, during a July 2023 comprehensive suicide risk evaluation indicated that he endorsed SI intermittently, and that he had thoughts of killing himself when he drank too much. The Veteran reported that had made a suicide attempt in April 2023 when he tried to hang himself when he was inebriated. The Veteran interrupted the attempt. He stated he felt really emotional, was using alcohol and not thinking clearly. He reported feeling hopeless since he had so many bad things happen to him. 

During a subsequent July 2023 mental health encounter, the Veteran denied thoughts of suicide when he was asked explicitly. He was oriented, his speech rate, volume and tone were normal. His thought process was linear and goal-directed, exhibited no apparent distress, and his judgement and insight were within normal limits. 

During a July 2023 mental health outpatient encounter, the Veteran indicated he had been let go from work in April 2023. He stated he was having difficulty without the structure that work provided. He indicated that he had been taking Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) courses and would be graduating. He reported having a girlfriend, and someone taking care of him that did not use substances. He endorsed intermittent SI and had thoughts of killing himself when he drank too much. He stated that he was not taking medication because he was thinking about an overdose, which he denied at the time of the encounter. He stated he took more oxycontin than he should have on his birthday. The mental status examination was normal, with the exception of noted limited judgement with substance abuse. 

An August 2023 suicide risk behavior note indicates that the Veteran tried to hang himself twice with a cable, but did not try a third time because he had been thinking about his daughter. 

September 2023 community care notes indicate the Veteran presented to a medical facility with a chief complaint of major depressive disorder, single episode, mild. 

During an October 2023 mental health encounter, the Veteran stated he got a few face tattoos and relapsed with substance abuse. He indicated his mood was down, he was experiencing sleep disturbance, and he did not know his current medication regimen. He stated he was 50-50 on not wanting to live but denied current SI. However, he stated that one day he would commit suicide. However, he denied preparatory or suicidal behavior. A mental status examination showed the Veteran's grooming and hygiene appeared to be fair, his behavior was vague with minimal elaboration, and he appeared calm with drowsy eyes that were closed at times. The Veteran's speech was at a normal rate, rhythm and tone, but a 5-10 second latency of reply was observed. His thought processes were linear and organized, his recent and remote memory was intact, he was fully oriented, able to follow conversation, and his judgment seemed intact in some areas but not others. 

The Veteran was afforded a November 2023 review PTSD examination. The examiner noted the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The examiner reported that the Veteran had been arrested for threatening a roommate with a knife in September 2023. He had been using cocaine, alcohol, and marijuana and did not recall many details from that day. The examiner endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The examiner reported that the Veteran was depressed, and his affect was congruent to his mood. He was polite and cooperative. He appeared to answer all questions in a forthright manner and was oriented. His recent and remote memory were intact, and he appeared to be a good historian. His thought process and content were unremarkable. His speech was unremarkable. 

During a November 2023 mental health encounter, the provider noted the Veteran had been previously hospitalized due to concern for SI. The Veteran had spontaneously traveled out of state and gotten multiple new tattoos on his face and hands and had been donating food and clothing to people to help them. The Veteran endorsed not being able to slow his thoughts and that, despite a sleep deficit, he was less tired than expected. The Veteran was not observed to have any grandiosity. The Veteran reported chronic, intermittent SI and stated that he wished someone would kill him but denied current SI. He reported holding an unloaded firearm up to his head three to four times since is prior visit. The Veteran's appearance and hygiene seemed fair, the Veteran was cooperative but often vague, his speech was at a normal rate and tone, but he was verbose, his affect was brighter than normal given the content of the appointment, his thought processes were linear and organized, recent and remote member was intact, he was fully oriented, and his judgement seemed intact. The Veteran's patient record was flagged in November 2023 because the Veteran remained in a period of high risk for suicide and would remain in the period until February 2024. 

During a December 2023 suicide prevention telehealth intake assessment, the Veteran reported living in a home with three roommates, and that he had three children, two with his current wife and one from his prior relationship. Two lived right down the street from him. He reported his daughter was his reason for living. The provider noted that the Veteran had been hospitalized in September 2023. The Veteran reported two suicide attempts in September 2023, one in August 2023, one in June 2023, and one in April 2023. The Veteran stated his SI was driven by feeling depressed all the time, having anxiety, and being unable to sleep. Drinking alcohol, using substances were also factors. The provider assessed the Veteran has been at intermediate, acute risk for suicide, and high chronic risk. The Veteran was oriented to person, place, time and situation, his grooming and hygiene were within normal limits, he spoke at an average rate and volume, his thoughts were logical and goal-directed, and he denied SI/HI at the time. During a subsequent December 2023 encounter with a social worker, the Veteran reported engaging in suicide-related behavior. He stated that he pointed a gun at his head and emptied the magazine over his hat.

Analysis 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating, effective September 1, 2022.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  

The manifestations reflected in the record are those ordinarily associated with a "total" 100 percent impairment, such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran indicated that he suffered from hallucinations, persistent suicidal ideations, and was a danger to others, as the record indicates he got into a verbal altercation and pulled a knife on a roommate. 

The record also shows that, at times the Veteran has reported difficulty with personal hygiene and grooming, as well as difficulty with memory, such as forgetting his medication regiment. Throughout the period on appeal, he indicated at least intermittent unemployment or difficulty working, with loss of motivation. Moreover, the Veteran has demonstrated that he has difficulty forming and maintaining relationships.

The record reflects that the Veteran has struggled with SI and attempted suicide multiple times during the period on appeal. The persuasive weight of the evidence emphasizes manifestations as suicidal ideation with attempts, near-continuous panic or depression, impaired impulse control, neglect of personal appearance or hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships causing total occupational and social impairment.

Accordingly, the persuasive weight of the evidence more nearly approximates a 100 percent rating effective September 1, 2022, for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Remand is necessary to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. 

At the outset, the Board notes that although the Veteran is awarded a 100 percent rating for service-connected PTSD from September 1, 2022, herein, entitlement to a TDIU is not moot because the Veteran is not in receipt of SMC(s) throughout the entire period on review. SMC(s) is payable if (1) a Veteran has a service-connected disability rated as total and has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more or if (2) by reason of such veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is permanently housebound. See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (i). Under the first criterion, if it is found that one service-connected disability is sufficient to establish entitlement to a TDIU, SMC(s) is available if the remaining service-connected disabilities combine to 60 percent or more. Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 293 (2008).

Here, the Board finds the issue of entitlement to TDIU has been reasonably raised by the record in the available VA treatment records and statements to examiners. Since TDIU has been reasonably raised, the Board infers a TDIU claim from the record, and, as such, takes jurisdiction over the issue. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453 (2009). 

In particular, the Veteran reported that he had been let go from his job in May 2023 treatment records and as of December 2023 he was still unemployed. Even prior to May 2023, there are some indications of unemployment or at least intermittent unemployment. VA outpatient treatment records and examinations indicate that the Veteran was having difficulty with work, however, it is unclear whether he lost his job due to a service-connected disability or disabilities.

As TDIU was reasonably raised in the record prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Board remands this matter to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Specifically, on remand, the Regional Office must develop the TDIU claim, to include requesting that the Veteran submit a completed formal application for a TDIU (VA Form 21-8940), as information pertaining to the Veteran's education, employment history, and earnings during the relevant claim period would aid in the resolution of the claim. 

While the Board is remanding this issue for further development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders. The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Undertake all notice and evidentiary development needed to resolve the issue of entitlement to a TDIU. This should include sending the Veteran a letter advising the Veteran of the information and evidence needed to award a TDIU and informing the Veteran that they must complete a VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, in order to provide the information needed to substantiate the claim for a TDIU, which should include education, employment history, and earnings, especially for the period on appeal (September 1, 2022, to the present).

2. After any additional development as may become indicated has been accomplished, adjudicate the TDIU claim. 

 

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Slowik, Saul J., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.