Citation Nr: A25032100
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453727
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right thumb disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has been awarded service connection for interstitial lung disease associated with burn pit exposure. 

2. The Veteran's symptoms associated with his asthma are already encompassed by the award of service connection for interstitial lung disease. The persuasive evidence weighs against finding that the Veteran has any additional symptoms or disability that has not already been awarded service connection. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for asthma have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1990 to February 1993 with additional periods of reserve service from 1993 to 1995 and from 1998 to 1999.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for asthma and a right thumb disability. In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, in which he elected the Direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another rating decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for a right thumb disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As this case is being decided under VA's modernized appeal system, pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (known as the AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. The relevant favorable findings identified in the September 2023 decision were that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) in service and was exposed to burn pits, fine particulate matter, and other toxins. Additionally, the Veteran has been diagnosed with right thumb tenosynovitis and the Veteran's service treatment records show he was treated for a right thumb injury while in service. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

On his July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran expressed disagreement with additional issued adjudicated in a May 2023 rating decision, specifically service connection claims for idiopathic inflammatory myopathy, interstitial lung disease, and mixed connective tissue disease. In a July 2024 correspondence, the Board notified the Veteran that the VA Form 10182 was untimely as to these issues and the appeal for these specific claims was not accepted/docketed. Thus, these issues are not currently on appeal.

Asthma

The Veteran has requested service connection for asthma. He contends that his asthma is related to his service, including due to his exposure to smoke from burn pits while in service. 

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred coincident with or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§1110, 1131;38 C.F.R. §3.303(a). Service connection requires evidence satisfying three criteria: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

In September 2023, the Veteran attended a VA examination to assess the etiology of his asthma. The examiner did not find a current diagnosis of asthma and was not able to safely perform a pulmonary function test due to the Veteran's blood pressure reading. The Veteran reported symptoms of coughing at night and during exercise. The examiner did not provide an opinion because the Veteran had no current diagnosis of asthma. 

The Veteran's VA and private treatment records are also silent for a diagnosis of asthma. The Veteran's private treatment records from May 2018 to August 2019 show reports of a dry cough, however, these reports were made in the course of treatment for his service-connected interstitial lung disease. 

The Board finds that the Veteran does not currently have asthma, nor has he ever been diagnosed with asthma at any time during the pendency of the claim, or at any time prior to the filing of the claim. See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

While the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of asthma, he is, however, service connected for interstitial lung disease due to burn pit exposure. The symptom the Veteran asserts is associated with his asthma is coughing, specifically at night or upon exertion. These are precisely the symptoms which are compensated in the evaluation assigned for interstitial lung disease. There is no evidence indicating that any additional symptomatology exists that was not contemplated by this diagnosis. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?259, 261-62 (1994) (VA may not assign multiple ratings for duplicative or overlapping symptomatology.).

This symptomatology is consistent with the Veteran's own statements, which have discussed the same symptomatology as that described above. See Layno v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?465, 469 (1994). These findings are also consistent with the other medical evidence of record, and the symptoms which have been listed by competent medical professionals as being caused by interstitial lung disease. There is no additional symptomatology outside of these diagnoses remaining for which service connection can be granted. See 38?C.F.R. §?4.14 ("The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided."). 

In sum, the approximate balance of the evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have and has not had during or prior to the course of the appeal, a current diagnosis of asthma. The evidence shows that the symptoms asserted by the Veteran with regard to this claim encompass the same symptomatology that is already associated with his service-connected interstitial lung disease.

The Board therefore finds that the approximate balance of the evidence is against the claim, and it is denied. In reaching the conclusion above, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the approximate balance of the evidence is against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Right Thumb Disability

The Veteran has also requested service connection for a right thumb disability. 

The AOJ's favorable findings included in the September 2023 rating decision on appeal establish that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a right thumb disability and there was a qualifying in service event or injury as the Veteran's service treatment records contain numerous complaints of a right thumb injury. Therefore, the only remaining element is a nexus between the in service event or injury and the Veteran's disability. 

In September 2023, the Veteran attended a VA examination to assess the etiology of his right thumb tenosynovitis. He reported pain in his right thumb and difficulty gripping objects when in pain. The examiner recognized the Veteran's July 2023 diagnosis of right thumb tenosynovitis and found the Veteran had a decreased range of motion in the Veteran's right thumb. However, overall, the examiner found the Veteran's right thumb disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in service event or injury because there are no records showing the right thumb injury became "an ongoing problem that impacted him." 

The Board finds this opinion inadequate because a lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an "absolute bar" to the service connection claim and cannot be used as a rationale in explaining why the current disability is not related to service. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Additionally, the examiner failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements that he has experienced pain in his thumb since he injured it in service in 1999. Therefore, this opinion is given little probative value, and the Board remands this issue so a new medical opinion can be obtained. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to address the nature and etiology of any right thumb disabilities. The examiner is to be provided access to the Veteran's entire claims file and must specify in the report that these records have been reviewed.

After reviewing all of the medical evidence, the examiner should address:

(a.) What are the Veteran's current diagnoses of the right thumb?

(b.)  Is it as likely as not that any right thumb disability had its onset during or is related to any disease or injury in service? Please discuss the Veteran's 1990 in service thumb injury and elicit information from the Veteran regarding what symptoms he experienced at that time.

The examiner is to consider the Veteran's statement that he has experienced right thumb pain since fracturing his thumb in service. 

Continued on the next page

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered. If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must provide an explanation for this finding. If it is found that the Veteran's lay assertions are not credible, the examiner must explain why.

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Black

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.