Citation Nr: A25032920
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-441355
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for service connection for central sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from May 2003 to November 2003, June 2004 to November 2005. The Veteran's awards include a Combat Action Badge, Iraq Campaign Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and Overseas Service Ribbon. The Board thanks the Veteran for his service.

On August 23, 2017, the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) went into effect. This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review on or after February 19, 2019. As this case is an appeal of a March 2024 rating decision, this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

However, when, as here, there are pre-decisional, duty-to-assist, errors it is permissible for the Board to have them corrected before deciding the claim on appeal.

In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) electing direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for service connection for central sleep apnea is remanded.

After review, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion is required.

The Veteran's central sleep apnea was service connected in an October 2023 rating decision and assigned an effective date of August 10, 2022. The effective date was assigned based on the date the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

The Veteran's representative argues that an earlier effective date should have been considered. In particular, the representative notes that he submitted an argument in May 2022 arguing that central sleep apnea was related to the Veteran's posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

The Board agrees that the AOJ should have considered this argument and should have obtained a medical opinion in order to determine whether an earlier effective date was warranted. The Board notes that while the PACT Act precludes its application prior to August 10, 2022, other non-PACT Act theories may provide an earlier effective date. In particular, the representative's earlier claim for secondary service connection is a valid argument. Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain additional medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Return the claims file to a VA examiner of appropriate expertise in order to determine the etiology of the Veteran's central sleep apnea. It is at the VA examiner's discretion if a new in-person examination is warranted. The VA examiner must:

(a.) Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the respective disorders are caused by service-connected disease or injury, specifically the Veteran's PTSD.

(b.) Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the respective disorders are aggravated by service-connected disease or injury, specifically the Veteran's PTSD.

If service-connected disease or injury aggravates the central sleep apnea, the examiner should identify the percentage of disability which is attributable to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(c.) The VA examiner must discuss the Veteran's lay statements when providing an opinion, including the Veteran's statement relayed in the May 2022 briefing that he was told by his doctor that his central sleep apnea was related to his PTSD. A complete rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided in a report.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jonah Nelson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.