Citation Nr: A25032854
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250210-517342
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability, to include as secondary to a service connected disability, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosed headache disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

2. The evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability was shown as chronic in service or manifested to a compensable degree within the applicable presumptive period; continuity of symptomatology is not established, and the disability is not otherwise etiologically related to an in-service event, injury, or disease. 

3. The evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's cervical spine disability was shown as chronic in service or manifested to a compensable degree within the applicable presumptive period; continuity of symptomatology is not established, and the disability is not otherwise etiologically related to an in-service event, injury, or disease.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current right knee disability began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current left knee disability began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a headache disability, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310. 

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307. 3.309.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307. 3.309.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1959 to February 1961.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2024 and May 2024 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 and May 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board acknowledges that 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) provides that an appellant may modify a NOD and change Board dockets by submitting a new NOD within one year of notification of the decision on appeal or within 60 days of the date that the Board received the original NOD, whichever is later. The Board notes that even though the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) has not elapsed, the Veteran's representative expressly waived the right to switch dockets and requested that the Veteran's appeal be decided as soon as possible. See VA Form 10182 (NOD), February 2025; see also Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363, U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024. Accordingly, the Board will proceed with its review.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Establishing service connection generally requires: (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); see also Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

Certain chronic diseases, to include arthritis, will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

When a chronic disease is not present during service, service connection may be established under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) by evidence of continuity of symptomatology. Continuity of symptomatology may be established if a claimant can demonstrate (1) that a condition was "noted" during service; (2) evidence of post-service continuity of the same symptomatology; and (3) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of a nexus between the present disability and the post-service symptomatology. Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 495-97 (1997); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

The Veteran bears the evidentiary burden to establish all elements of a service connection claim, including the nexus requirement. Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim of the veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability, to include as secondary to a service connected disability, is denied.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a headache disability, contending that his headaches are secondarily related to his service-connected nasal deformity and tinnitus disabilities. See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), February 2024. 

Based on the evidence of record and for the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted. 

Regarding the first element of service connection on a direct or secondary basis, a current disability, the medical evidence does not reflect a current diagnosed headache condition. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and post-service treatment records proximate to the claim are silent for complaints of, treatment for, or a diagnosis related to a headache condition. 

The Veteran's filing of a claim for service connection for headaches does not itself provide competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability necessary for satisfying the first element of service connection on a direct or secondary basis. There is no lay or medical evidence of record that demonstrates the Veteran has a disability that is current, persistent, or recurrent in nature. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention regarding the existence of headaches; however, there is no competent evidence diagnosing a disability of this claimed condition. The Board is cognizant of the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie which stated that, where pain causes functional impairment, a disability for VA compensation purposes exists, even if there is no underlying diagnosis. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). In sum, pain alone resulting in functional impairment is in fact a disability and should not be summarily discounted as a bar to benefits based on a finding of no current diagnosis. However, in this case, there is no evidence of any symptoms that result in any functional impairment. Thus, the Board finds that this case is distinguished from Saunders.

The Board also acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this claim, but finds no such examination was required because the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has a current disability or any persistent or recurrent symptoms associated with a disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see also Staley v. Hunter, 2025 U.S. Vet. App. Claims LEXIS 126 (January 31, 2025).  

Under McLendon and Staley, VA is obligated to provide an examination when the record contains (1) competent evidence of a current disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability), (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file to decide the claim. For the reasons stated above, the Board finds that there is no evidence of a current disability that may be related to service. Additionally, there is no evidence of persistent or recurrent symptoms indicative of an underlying headache disability. As such, the Board finds a VA medical examination is not necessary to decide the claimed condition.

The Board notes that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (holding that interpretation of sections 1110 and 1131 of the statute as requiring the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes cannot be considered arbitrary). Evidence must show that the Veteran currently has the disability for which benefits are being claimed. Here, however, the evidence does not establish that the Veteran currently has a diagnosed headache disability or experiences the functional equivalent thereof. In the absence of a current disability, the analysis ends, and the claim for service connection for headaches cannot be granted. See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

Finally, the Veteran was found to have been participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during his service (exposure to diesel fuels, oils, and lubricants). See April 2024 VA Memorandum. However, the TERA examination requirement pursuant to the PACT Act, was not triggered here because there is no evidence of a current disability, which is the minimum requirement needed to afford the Veteran with such examination. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

In light of the above, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for entitlement to service connection for a headache disability, to include on a secondary basis, and the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application. The claim therefore must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is denied.

The Veteran contends that his lumbar spine and cervical spine disabilities are related to his active-duty service. 

For the following reasons, the Board finds that service connection for a lumbar spine and/or cervical spine disability is not warranted on either a direct or presumptive basis. 

The Board will first address whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection on a direct basis. 

The first element of direct service connection is not in dispute. In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran has current diagnoses of (1) lumbar spine degenerative disk disease and status post lumbar laminectomy and partial discectomy; and (2) cervical spine degenerative disc disease with degenerative arthritis. The Board is bound by these two favorable findings which are consistent with the medical evidence of record See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the first element of service connection, namely a current disability, has been satisfied.

As to the second element of direct service connection, an in-service incurrence, the Veteran provided several statements in support of his claims.

In July 2023, the Veteran reported, in relevant part, that: he suffers from back and neck pain; these health difficulties are military related; the Veteran's assigned duties required him to carry both light and heavy calibration equipment; he now has spinal stenosis and back problems; he has sprained his back many times; he has to be careful lifting things; and his back and neck problems exist to this date. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, July 2023.

In February 2024, the Veteran reported, in relevant part, that he was constantly squatting while in service and it would wear down his back and neck; he was assigned to the warehouse immediately after getting to his unit and had problems with his back and neck right away; and those issues have become worse over the years. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, February 2024.

During a VA examination in August 2023 the Veteran reported that his neck condition onset in 1960 when he was "drawn into a brawl" and that when the condition began the symptoms were "none." See Neck Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), August 2023. During a VA examination in April 2024, the Veteran reported that he was beat up by an abusive sergeant and sustained a nasal bone fracture and after separation he had neck and back problems and pain. See Back Conditions DBQ, April 2024. 

The Board has thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's STRs and finds that they are silent for any treatment, diagnosis, or complaints of symptoms associated with a lumbar or cervical spine condition. See STR - Medical. 

The Veteran's STRs document that the Veteran sustained a nasal injury in February 1960 as a result of a fight with another soldier. The Veteran did not report any type of injury to his back or neck as a result of this incident, and contemporaneous treatment records do not note any injuries aside from the Veteran's nasal injury. See STR - Medical.  

In the September 1960 separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran indicated that his nose was damaged in a fight and that "my health is fine expect for this incident." The Veteran did not report any issues related to his back or neck when asked if he ever had any illnesses or injuries other than those already noted. The Veteran signed this document, wherein he attested that the information he provided in this form was "true and complete to the best of my knowledge." See Report of Medical History, December 1960. 

The Board finds this report of medical history at service separation to be highly probative as it was provided contemporaneously with the Veteran's service and because the Veteran had no apparent incentive to misstate his medical history on the form. See Curry v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 59, 68 (1994) (contemporaneous evidence has greater probative value than history as reported by the claimant).

The concurrent Report of Medical Examination shows a normal clinical evaluation for the Veteran's back and neck, with no abnormalities noted. See Report of Medical Examination, December 1960.

Post-service treatment records do not document any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to the Veteran's cervical spine until April 1989. A physician's note reflects that the Veteran was admitted to the hospital on April 9, 1989, after stepping on a bottle covered by snow causing the Veteran to fall. The Veteran reported several upper body injuries to include neck stiffness and soreness in his neck. Neck pain and restricted range of motion was noted upon examination. The prognosis in 1990 was that the Veteran would likely have recurring episodes of pain due to aggravating factors such as activity and weather changes. See Medical Treatment Record, Non-Government Facility. March 1990.  

Post-service treatment records do not document complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to the Veteran's lumbar spine until March 1990. A neurological evaluation note dated March 21, 1990, reflects that the Veteran sought treatment for his low back. The Veteran reported that he works for a liquor company; the job requires constant lifting of cases of liquor; while performing this activity during the prior month, left side low back pain and lower extremity pain onset. Notably, the Veteran denied any prior history of back or lower extremity pain. See Medical Treatment Record, Non-Government Facility, March 21, 1990. 

Follow-on treatment notes reflect diagnostic impressions of left paracentral disc protrusion at the L5-S1 level, bulging of the L4-5 disc, and stenosis. The Veteran was admitted to the hospital for back surgery and underwent a left L5 laminotomy and disk excision at L5-S1. See Medical Treatment Record, Non-Government Facility, March 28-29, 1990.

A treatment note dated May 21, 1990, reflects that the Veteran returned to his treating physician two months after back surgery and reported continuing stiffness in the low back area as well as some aching. See Medical Treatment Record, Non-Government Facility, May 21, 1990.

A treatment note dated September 14, 1990, reflects that the Veteran had continued aching and stiffness in his low lumbar area and persistent numbness in the left lower extremity; the Veteran was willing to proceed with physical therapy but wished to be certain this would be covered by workman's compensation before scheduling; and that the Veteran questioned the 5 percent impairment rating that he had been assigned. See Medical Treatment Record, Non-Government Facility. September 14, 1990.  

Upon review of the lay and medical evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's reports of in-service back and neck injuries are contradicted by the medical evidence of record. Specifically, STRs and separation medical reports do not document any reports, complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to the Veteran's back or neck at any time, to include the February 1960 incident in which the Veteran sustained a nasal injury. Additionally, post-service treatment records document neck and back injuries in 1989 and 1990, respectively; however, these injuries are completely unrelated to the Veteran's military service. The record is devoid of credible evidence to substantiate an in-service incurrence for a current lumbar spine or cervical spine disability. As such, the Board finds that the second element of direct service connection, an in-service incurrence, has not been established. 

Turning to the third element of direct service connection, a medical nexus (i.e., link), VA examiners provided negative nexus opinions. 

In May 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbar spine condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the VA examiner documented the Veteran's extensive medical history, to include his 1990 back injury and subsequent surgery. The VA examiner explained that there were no notes discussing lumbar pain or injury during the Veteran's service from February 1959 to February 1961; the Veteran had a clear and unmistakable injury related to work in 1990, as discussed in his medical records; the Veteran had continued symptoms after physical therapy failed and surgery to correct the injury; the Veteran's injury is due to his work in 1990; and there is no nexus to service. See Medical Opinion DBQ, May 2024. 

The VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's claim cervical spine condition was  less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the VA examiner documented the Veteran's medical history and explained that the Veteran's enlistment examination, STRs, separation examination, and post-military private and VA records show no findings related to the claimed condition; records reviewed indicate the following risk factors outside of military service: multiple car accidents of significance; and there is no nexus to service. See Medical Opinion DBQ, May 2024. 

The VA examiner has medical expertise and training, had sufficient facts and data on which to base the medical opinions, and supported the medical opinions with sufficient rationale. As such, the Board finds the examiner's medical opinions to be competent, credible, and entitled to probative value. Notably, there are no medical opinions to the contrary of record. 

The Board notes that a TERA examination under 38 U.S.C. § 1168 was not requested or required because the Veteran contends that his lumber spine and cervical spine disabilities are related to physical traumas during service; the Secretary has determined that physical trauma is a condition that has no positive association with toxic exposure. Thus, a TERA examination and medical opinion are not required in connection with the Veteran's claims for service connection for a lumbar spine or cervical spine disability.  

To the extent that the Veteran attributes his lumbar and cervical spine disabilities to service, the Board finds that he is competent to report on his symptoms and that of which he has personal knowledge. However, the Veteran is not competent to provide an opinion as to the etiology of his disabilities because such a question is not answerable by the application of knowledge within the realm of a lay person. See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469-70; Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran is not competent to relate his lumbar or cervical spine disabilities to his service, or to any incident therein.

The Board acknowledges the medical literature submitted by the Veteran in February 2024 titled "Risk factors for musculoskeletal injuries in the military: a qualitative systematic review of the literature from the past two decades and a new prioritizing injury model." See Correspondence, February 2024. While the article is informative, it does not address the specific facts and circumstances related to Veteran's lumbar and cervical spine disabilities, and therefore does not satisfy the medical nexus element specific to the Veteran's claims.  

Without a positive nexus opinion or any competent evidence linking the Veteran's disabilities to service, the third element of direct service connection, a nexus, has also not been established. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a lumbar spine disability and/or a cervical spine disability on a direct basis is not warranted.

As the Veteran's lumbar and cervical arthritis is a chronic disease under § 3.309(a), the Board has also considered whether presumptive service connection or service connection based on continuity of symptomatology is warranted. However, the medical evidence of record indicates that the Veteran did not have arthritis within one year after discharge from service. Thus, service connection for a chronic disease on a presumptive basis is not warranted. Moreover, to the extent that the Veteran asserts that he experienced back and neck symptoms continuously since discharge from service, the Board does not find these statements credible as they are inconsistent with the overall evidence of record. Therefore, service connection based on continuity of symptomatology is not warranted. 

Once again, the Board is aware of the lay statements provided by the Veteran. While he is competent to report symptoms he is not competent to determine whether these symptoms were early manifestations of his currently diagnosed lumbar and cervical spine disabilities. He does not have the requisite medical training to make such an assessment. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Veteran's statements regarding etiology hold no probative value.

In sum, the Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current lumbar and cervical spine disabilities, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that his disabilities began during service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. Furthermore, these conditions were not shown as chronic in service and did not manifest to a compensable degree during the first post-service year.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claims. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is denied. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

The Veteran contends that his right and left knee disabilities (hereinafter referred to as a "bilateral knee disability") are related to his active-duty service. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

The first element of service connection, a current disability, is not in dispute. In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral knee strain. The Board is bound by this favorable finding which is consistent with the medical evidence of record. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the first element of service connection has been satisfied.

As to the second element of direct service connection, an in-service incurrence, the Veteran provided several statements in support of his claims.

In July 2023, the Veteran reported, in relevant part, that his assigned duties required him to carry both light and heavy calibration equipment; he stretched his knee ligaments to the maximum which caused weak ligaments in both knees; and his knee problems exist to this date. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, July 2023.

In February 2024, the Veteran reported, in relevant part, that he was constantly squatting while in service and it would wear down his knees; he was assigned to the warehouse immediately after getting to his unit and starting having problems with his knees right away; those issues worsened for him over the years; and now he has issues moving around and requires a cane for everyday use. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, February 2024.

The Board has thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's STRs and finds that they are silent for any treatment, diagnosis, or complaints of symptoms associated with a knee condition. See STR - Medical. 

In the September 1960 separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran noted that his nose was damaged in a fight and that "my health is fine expect for this incident." Notably, the Veteran marked "no" for trick or locked knee and he did not report any issues related to his knees when asked if he ever had any illnesses or injuries other than those already noted. The Veteran signed this document, wherein he attested that the information he provided in this form was "true and complete to the best of my knowledge." See Report of Medical History, December 1960. 

The Board finds this report of medical history at service separation to be highly probative as it was provided contemporaneously with the Veteran's service and because the Veteran had no apparent incentive to misstate his medical history on the form. See Curry v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 59, 68 (1994) (contemporaneous evidence has greater probative value than history as reported by the claimant).

The concurrent Report of Medical Examination shows a normal clinical evaluation for the Veteran's lower extremities with no abnormalities noted. See Report of Medical Examination, December 1960.

The Veteran was treated for numerous medical conditions in the years following his separation from service. However, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a knee condition. The earliest evidence, post separation, indicating a knee condition is the Veteran's July 2023 statement in support of his claim.  

The Board finds that the Veteran's reports of an in-service knee injury is contradicted by the medical evidence of record and that the record is devoid of credible evidence to substantiate an in-service incurrence for a current knee disability. Hence, the second element for this service-connection claim has not been met. However, even assuming arguendo the in-service element was satisfied, the third element of service connection, a medical nexus, is not.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2024. The VA examiner noted the onset of the Veteran's knee condition as reported by the Veteran in his February 2024 statement in support of his claim. The VA examiner rendered a diagnosis of bilateral knee strain with a diagnosis date of April 2024. The VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, determining that the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner documented the Veteran's medical history and explained that the Veteran's STRs do not show knee pain and/or injury; the Veteran's separation examination showed no findings related to the claimed condition; the Veteran's post-military private/VA treatment records do not mention a knee condition; recent VA records lists various conditions but no knee conditions; and the Veteran's current knee pain is more likely than not unrelated to his military service. See Medical Opinion DBQ, May 2024. 

The VA examiner has medical expertise and training, had sufficient facts and data on which to base the medical opinion, and supported the medical opinions with sufficient rationale. As such, the Board finds the examiner's medical opinion to be competent, credible, and entitled to probative value. Notably, there are no medical opinions to the contrary of record. 

The Board notes that a TERA examination under 38 U.S.C. § 1168 was not requested or required because the Veteran contends that his bilateral knee disability is related to physical trauma during service; the Secretary has determined that physical trauma is a condition that has no positive association with toxic exposure. Thus, a TERA examination and medical opinion are not required in connection with the Veteran's claim for service connection for bilateral knee disability.  

To the extent that the Veteran attributes his diagnosed bilateral knee strain to service, the Board finds that he is competent to report on his symptoms and that of which he has personal knowledge. However, the Veteran is not competent to provide an opinion as to the etiology of his disability because such a question is not answerable by the application of knowledge within the realm of a lay person. See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469-70; Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran is not competent to relate his bilateral knee strain to his service, or to any incident therein.

The Board once again acknowledges the medical literature submitted by the Veteran in February 2024 titled "Risk factors for musculoskeletal injuries in the military: a qualitative systematic review of the literature from the past two decades and a new prioritizing injury model." While the article is informative, it does not address the specific facts and circumstances related to Veteran's bilateral knee disability, and therefore do not satisfy the medical nexus element specific to the Veteran's claims.  

Without a positive nexus opinion or any competent evidence linking the Veteran's disabilities to service, the third element of direct service connection, a nexus, has also not been established. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a bilateral knee disability is not warranted. 

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough. 

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. S. Rubin, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.