Citation Nr: A25032573
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240517-441604
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

The severance of service connection for insomnia disorder was improper; the appeal is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The grant of service connection for insomnia disorder in a June 2023 rating decision was not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The severance of service connection for insomnia disorder was improper; the criteria for restoration of service connection have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1977 to August 1981.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The severance of service connection for insomnia disorder was improper; restoration of service connection for insomnia disorder is granted. 

The Veteran generally asserts the severance of service connection for his insomnia disorder was improper.  

The AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for insomnia disorder on a secondary basis in a June 2023 rating decision. 

In a November 2023 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to sever service connection for insomnia, asserting that insomnia is not related to tinnitus and is a symptom of another underlying disability and not a disability itself.  

In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ severed service connection insomnia disorder, effective June 1, 2024, with notice sent to the Veteran the same month.

Previously granted benefits will be severed only where evidence establishes that the award of service connection was clear and unmistakable error (CUE). The burden of proof being on the Government. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

When severance is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

A change in diagnosis may be accepted as a basis for severance action if the examining physician or physicians or other proper medical authority certifies that, in the light of all accumulated evidence, the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. This certification must be accompanied by a summary of the facts, findings, and reasons supporting the conclusion. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

To establish that a grant of benefits was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App.242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a).

In most respects, the CUE standard under § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. Id. However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under sections 5109A or 7111. Id.

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. at 62 (internal quotations omitted).

The initial question for the Board is whether the AOJ followed the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) for severing service connection. The Board finds that it did.

The AOJ issued the proposed severance in November 2023 rating decision. The Veteran was sent a notification in the same month at his latest address of record of this contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore and was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that benefits should be maintained. The notice letter also informed the Veteran that he had the opportunity for a predetermination hearing if such a request for a hearing was received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i). The Veteran did not request a hearing.

The AOJ issued the March 2024 rating decision, which severed service connection for insomnia disorder, effective June 1, 2024. Notification of this rating decision, plus his appeal rights, was sent to the Veteran in the same month. Therefore, all due process requirements were met in the severance action. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (d).

Having met the due process requirements, the remaining question before the Board is whether the grant of service connection for insomnia disorder was CUE. 

For the following reasons, the Board finds there was not CUE in the grant of service connection for insomnia disorder.

Generally, to prevail on a claim of service connection on the merits, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) medical evidence or other competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. See Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999). A Veteran can also receive compensation via secondary service connection.  Establishing secondary service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which secondary service connection is sought); (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

In June 2023, VA granted service connection based on a May 2023 positive medical opinion that the Veteran's insomnia was at least as likely as not secondary to his service-connected tinnitus. A November 2023 rating decision proposed to sever service connection based on an August 2023 examiner stating the Veteran did not have insomnia in service, that onset of insomnia was in 2018 and caused by tinnitus, almost four decades after separation from service. However, severance of service connection requires establishing that the alleged error was undebatable.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran received a VA examination in January 2023. The examiner, a psychologist, diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified insomnia disorder and provided a negative opinion, concluding that although the tinnitus likely contributes to the Veteran's overall difficulty with sleep, the tinnitus is not the primary cause of the insomnia. The examiner further stated that a major factor primarily contributing to the insomnia was the Veteran's poor treated sleep apnea. 

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in April 2023. The clinician concluded that the Veteran's insomnia disorder was at least as likely as not secondary to his service-connected tinnitus. The clinician supported her conclusion with accompanying medical literature noting a comorbidity between insomnia and tinnitus and that the Veteran reported he began to suffer from insomnia with the onset of his tinnitus symptoms. 

The Veteran offered lay testimony in a VA Form 21-4138 from April 2023 where he reported CPAP usage was now in compliance, but he still experienced insomnia and sleep deprivation due to his service-connected tinnitus.  

The Veteran received another VA examination from a different examiner in May 2023. That examiner, who also was a psychologist, diagnosed the Veteran with insomnia disorder and provided a positive opinion, concluding the Veteran's insomnia disorder is at least as likely as not related to his service-connected tinnitus. The examiner noted the Veteran's improved compliance with his CPAP machine for sleep apnea, which did not improve his insomnia due to tinnitus. 

[The Board notes the Veteran has also submitted a claim for service connection for sleep apnea. Furthermore, the August 2023 addendum opinion noted in the November 2023 rating decision proposing severance was specifically addressing a claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, rather than insomnia disorder. If the AOJ feels that there is an overlap between insomnia disorder and sleep apnea, the appropriate procedure for addressing any questions regarding overlapping symptomatology is found in the laws and regulations governing pyramiding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.] 

Notably, this is not a claim of service connection to be evaluated as to whether the claim should be granted based upon a finding of an approximate balance of positive evidence; nor denied because the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. In this matter, the standard to be employed is whether there is "clear and unmistakable evidence" of an error.  

In this case, there is competent medical evidence that the Veteran has a current disability of insomnia disorder. The January 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's signs and symptoms met the DSM-5 criteria for an unspecified insomnia disorder; the later examiner agreed with that assessment. Both examiners are psychologists and competent to diagnose mental health disorders; their assessments are probative. There also is competent medical evidence that the Veteran's insomnia disorder is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus. The clinicians who provided those opinions did so based on their review of the record, evaluation of the Veteran, and their clinical expertise. Hence, the opinions are probative.   

After review of the evidence, it cannot be said that the evidence clearly and unmistakably demonstrates that the Veteran's insomnia disorder was not related to his service-connected tinnitus. Therefore, the burden of proof required for severance of service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (d) is not met.

The Board cannot conclude that the grant of service connection for insomnia disorder was the kind of error that, when called to the attention of reviewers, compels the conclusion to which reasonable minds could not differ and that the results would be manifestly different but for the error. See Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43 (1993). In the context of a severance case, a disagreement as to how to weigh the facts is legally insufficient to establish that the award of service connection was clearly erroneous. Although the AOJ found that the Veteran's insomnia was a symptom and not an underlying disability and it is not related to service, there is also evidence that the Veteran has been diagnosed with an insomnia disorder and it is related to his service-connected tinnitus. Therefore, the Board finds that the grant of service connection was not clearly erroneous.

As such, the Board finds that the record does not support that the grant of service connection for insomnia disorder was clearly and unmistakably erroneous. Accordingly, the severance of service connection was improper, and restoration of service connection for insomnia disorder is granted.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Javed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.