Citation Nr: A25032647
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452018
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper thigh scar, status post benign tumor excision is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 1987 to December 2008.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2024 rating decision issued by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the June 27, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim seeking a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left upper thigh scar, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). Under the modernized review system, the Board has jurisdictional authority to remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional regulatory or statutory duty to assist error if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The issue of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper thigh scar, status post benign tumor excision

The Veteran contends that his left upper thigh scar warrants a disability rating in excess of 10 percent.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2024. The Board notes that this examination was for skin diseases and not scars, and the focus of the examination was on the nature of the Veteran's left upper thigh lipoma. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran recently underwent a left upper thigh lipoma removal and, as a result, she was unable to assess the Veteran's left upper thigh scar due to the surgical wound dressings.

Based on the foregoing, the Board is unable to make a fully informed decision regarding the nature and severity of the Veteran's service-connected left upper thigh scar. A new examination focusing on the Veteran's left upper thigh scar (not the lipoma) should have been scheduled by the AOJ after the Veteran's left upper thigh surgical site had healed, and the failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As such, remand for a new VA examination is required. 

The Board notes that the August 2024 Appellate Brief included a new theory of entitlement that was not of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ rating decision on appeal. As such, the AOJ's failure to address this theory is not a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  However, as the Board is remanding the claim for further development, this new theory of entitlement will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.

In remanding, the Board does not, at this time, make any determinations regarding the competency or credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of his service-connected left upper thigh scar. The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bellack, D., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.