Citation Nr: A25032676
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230904-373829
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for residual disability from a head injury is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine (back) disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a foot disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the United States Navy from May 2015 to October 2021.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

The modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1).  As this rating decision was issued in July 2023, it constitutes an initial decision.  

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Generally, with respect to cases such as this one, the Board is only able to consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301; and any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal is unable to be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In April 2023, VA examinations were scheduled for depression, hearing loss, tinnitus, right shoulder, back, right hip, right knee, and foot pain.  These examinations were cancelled as the Veteran failed to report.  In June 2023, the Veteran called to reschedule his VA examinations and noted that there was a problem with his contact information.  In fact, it appears that he moved from Connecticut to Virginia.  

In June 2023, VA examinations were rescheduled; they also included a head injury and headaches.  These examinations were cancelled as the Veteran was unavailable.  That same month, VA examinations were scheduled for depression, hearing loss, right shoulder, back, right hip, right knee, and foot pain. These examinations were cancelled as the Veteran failed to report.  

The Veteran's Contact History indicated that contact by telephone was attempted twice on June 29, 2023; by email and text on July 3 and 4, 2023; and by letter on July 5, 2023.  The Board notes that the telephone number, email address, and mailing address used by VA are the preferred contact information confirmed by the Veteran on his 10182 received in September 2023.

With respect to telephone contacts, there is no indication that actual contact was made; and there is no indication that any message was left on voicemail which included date, time, and location of examinations.  With respect to email contacts, there is no indication that such email was seen by the Veteran or that emails included date, time, and location of examinations.  With respect to regular mail, the Appointment Confirmation notice indicates that scheduled appointment notification was sent to the Veteran on July 1, 2023, and included date and time; however, a location of where to report for such examination is lacking.

As it appears that the Veteran may not have received the information necessary to report for scheduled VA examinations, the Board finds that one last effort to provide him with such VA examinations should be attempted.

The Board wishes to stress to the Veteran that the duty to assist is not always a one-way street.  If he wishes help, the Veteran cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining the putative evidence.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 192 (1991).  While VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in the development of a claim, that duty is not limitless.  In the normal course of events, it is the burden of the Veteran to appear for VA examinations.  If he does not do so, there is no burden on the VA to "turn up heaven and earth" to find him.  Hyson v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 262 (1993).  

The Board notes that no VA examination was scheduled for the Veteran's claim for service connection for a right ankle disability.  The Veteran reported in his application for compensation that his right ankle instability was caused in service by him rolling his ankle and that such continued even with high ankle support.  The July 2023 rating decision noted that the Veteran's service treatment records were negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right ankle condition while in service.  VA treatment records indicate that in July 2022, prior to his filing his claim for compensation, the Veteran reported chronic pain in his ankle for five years.  As such, the Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on this issue because no VA examiner has opined whether the Veteran's ankle pain had its onset during service.            

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Inform the Veteran of his responsibility to report for his scheduled examinations and to cooperate in the development of his claims, and that failure to report for a VA examination, without good cause, may have adverse consequences on his claims.  

2. Reschedule the Veteran for his VA examinations with regard to his claims for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, residual disability from a head injury, a headache disability, hearing loss, tinnitus, a right shoulder disability, a thoracolumbar spine disability, a right hip disability, a right knee disability, and a foot disability.  The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion below.

For each disorder found, the examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is such disorder at least as likely as not related to service?  

Provide a rationale to support the opinion.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for a right ankle disability.  The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion below.

For each right ankle disorder found, the examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is such disorder at least as likely as not related to service?  

Provide a rationale to support the opinion.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

4. If the Veteran does not report for his rescheduled examinations, thoroughly document all attempts to schedule the Veteran for the examinations, to include a copy of the notice letter at his last known address and whether any notice was returned as undeliverable.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Olson, Patricia

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.