Citation Nr: A25032981
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-461417
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis is granted.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for headaches, unspecified, prior to May 21, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation of 50 percent, but not higher, for headaches, unspecified, from May 21, 2023, is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (previously evaluated together with fibromyalgia) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia (also claimed as muscle aches) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diverticulitis had onset during service. 

2. For the period prior to May 21, 2023, the headaches did not manifest in characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. 

3. For the period from May 21, 2023, the Veteran experienced headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a currently diagnosed chronic fatigue syndrome at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim, or that the chronic fatigue syndrome began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease. 

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a currently diagnosed fibromyalgia at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim, or that fibromyalgia began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for headaches, unspecified, prior to May 21, 2023, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.10, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation of 50 percent, but not higher, for headaches, unspecified, from May 21, 2023, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.10, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (previously evaluated together with fibromyalgia) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia (also claimed as muscle aches) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army from February 1999 to June 2006. 

In November 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome/muscle aches/fibromyalgia.

In July 2023, the AOJ continued its 10 percent evaluation for headaches, unspecified.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a request for higher-level review for the claims of increased rating for headaches, unspecified, and of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome. 

In March 2024, the AOJ continued its 10 percent evaluation for headaches, unspecified. Also, the AOJ denied service connection for fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome. 

In March 2024, the AOJ continued its previous denial of service connection for diverticulitis.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 AOJ decision on appeal for the claims related to chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia; the July 2023 AOJ decision on appeal for the claim related to headaches, unspecified; and the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal for the claim of diverticulitis. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis is granted. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that the physician reaches. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007). In order for a medical opinion to be given weight, it must be: (1) based upon sufficient facts or data; (2) the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; and (3) the expert witness has applied the principles and methods reliable to the facts of the case. Nieves-Rodríguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008). Other factors that may be considered in assessing the probative value of a medical opinion include a physician's access to the claims file or pertinent evidence, the thoroughness and detail of the opinion, the accuracy of the factual premise underlying the opinion, the scope of examination, the rationale for the opinion offered, the degree of certainty provided, and the qualifications and expertise of the examiner. Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000). Also, in terms of adequacy, failure to discuss both aspects of causation and aggravation in an opinion addressing secondary service connection renders the medical opinion inadequate. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). A report of a medical examination administered by a private physician that is provided by a claimant in support of a claim for benefits may be accepted without a requirement for confirmation by an examination by a physician employed by the Veterans Health Administration if the report is sufficiently complete to be adequate for the purpose of adjudicating such claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5125.

In circumstances when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). More precisely, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is in "approximate balance", which can be interpreted as evidence that is "nearly equal". Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

As a procedural starting point for this claim, in November 2021, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim for intestinal issues to include as Gulf War presumptive. 

In March 2022, the Veteran underwent an intestinal conditions VA examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis for diverticulitis. During the examination, the Veteran reported that onset was in 2004 when he had an episode of bad abdominal pain. The Veteran stated that at that time, he was undergoing the military weight loss program and was losing weight but began having abdominal issues.

In March 2022, the Veteran underwent an intestinal surgery VA examination. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had resection of the large intestine due to diverticulitis/ruptured diverticula.

In April 2022, the VA examiner issued an opinion regarding the Veteran's intestinal issues. The VA examiner mentioned that the Veteran's intestinal issues, to include as Gulf War presumptive, is a disease with clear and specific etiology and diagnosis. The VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the intestinal issues, to include as Gulf War presumptive is related to the exposure event experienced in Southwest Asia or to an exposure event while in service. Also, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran has a diagnosis of diverticulosis which is a structural condition "that occurs when small pouches, or sacs, form and push outward through weak spots in the wall of your colon" as well as annual episodes of diverticulitis. Moreover, the VA examiner highlighted that diverticulosis/diverticulitis is not on the presumptive list for Gulf War. Lastly, the VA examiner determined that a nexus has not been established.

In June 2022, the AOJ in its rating decision denied service connection for diverticulitis.

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for diverticulitis.

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a July 2022 private medical opinion for the Veteran's diagnosed diverticulitis. The private examiner noted that the Veteran's post-deployment health assessment show chronic diarrhea, frequent indigestion, and muscle aches. The private examiner indicated that the exact pathological mechanisms by which diverticula occur in the colon are unknown. However, the private examiner remarked that a medical study demonstrated that Gulf War veterans exhibited a higher frequency level of many gastrointestinal symptoms, to include diverticulosis, than the general population. The private examiner highlighted that the Veteran reported several gastrointestinal issues following deployments to Iraq and it has been conceded that he was exposed to several environmental hazards. The private examiner determined that this, combined with his relatively young age at which the Veteran developed diverticula, indicates that risk factors such as weight gain, alcohol usage, intestinal issues, and exposures all contributed to the development and onset of diverticula and diverticulitis. Therefore, the private examiner opined that the Veteran's diverticulitis was at least as likely as not caused by his in-service symptoms and exposures.

In November 2022, the AOJ in its rating decision indicated that the claim for service connection for diverticulitis remained denied because the evidence submitted is not new and relevant.

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a request for higher level review for the issue of service connection for diverticulitis.

In February 2023, the AOJ in its rating decision identified a duty to assist error during the higher level review for diverticulitis. The issue was returned in order to obtain a medical opinion.

In April 2023, the Veteran underwent an intestinal conditions VA examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis for diverticulosis with acute diverticulitis.

In May 2023, the Veteran underwent an intestinal surgery VA examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis for resection of the large intestine and had surgery because of diverticulitis complications.

In January 2024, a VA examiner issued an opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed diverticulitis. The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition of diverticulitis is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected PTSD and/or weight gain allegedly caused by his inability to exercise or because of the medications used to treat PTSD. The VA examiner explained that diverticulosis is caused by a combination of factors and is more common in people when they get older, eat a nonvegetarian diet, or have genetic susceptibility. Also, the VA examiner commented that diverticulitis and diverticulosis are not associated with physical limitations such as physical exercise. The VA examiner remarked that the Veteran's treatment plan includes exercise throughout his treatment records making the intermediate step of developing obesity unlikely related to the Veteran's history of diverticulosis and diverticulitis in 2012.

In March 2024, the AOJ in its rating decision continued its previous denial of service connection for diverticulitis. The AOJ indicated that the evidence continues to show that this condition was not incurred in or aggravated by military service, or his service connected PTSD. As favorable findings, the AOJ noted that the Veteran performed service in Iraq from January 2004 to January 2005 and from January 2006 to April 2006. Also, the AOJ highlighted that the Veteran has been service connected for PTSD. Moreover, the AOJ remarked that the Veteran was exposed to burn pits or other toxins during military service. In addition, the AOJ attested that the Veteran has been diagnosed with diverticulitis.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 101812 Notice of Disagreement.

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis is warranted. First, it is important to discuss there are three medical opinions with contrasting conclusions, one positive and two negative in terms of the Veteran's service connection claim. Also, all three medical opinions have different rationales, particularly, as to whether the Veteran's diagnosed diverticulitis was related to service or to a service connected disability. The April 2022 VA medical opinion determined that the Veteran's diverticulitis is less likely than not related to an exposure event in Southwest Asia or to an exposure while in service. Furthermore, the January 2024 VA medical opinion concluded that the Veteran's diverticulitis is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected PTSD and/or weight gain allegedly caused by his inability to exercise because of the medications used to treat PTSD. However, this January 2024 opinion is inadequate for VA purposes. Even though the opinion did discuss and conclude that the Veteran's diverticulitis is less likely as not proximately due to or the result of his service connected PTSD, the VA examiner did not discuss whether the Veteran's service connected PTSD could be aggravating the Veteran's diagnosed diverticulitis. Thus, the failure to discuss both aspects of causation and aggravation in an opinion addressing secondary service connection render the January 2024 VA medical opinion. See, El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra.

On the other hand, it is important to highlight that in the August 2022 private medical opinion, the examiner noted the Veteran's post-deployment health assessment which shows chronic diarrhea, frequent indigestion, and muscle aches. A review of the Veteran's service treatment records clearly show that the November 2005 post-deployment assessment indicates that the Veteran had diarrhea during deployment. In addition, an April 2006 post-deployment assessment highlights that the Veteran had diarrhea during and after deployment and frequent indigestion during deployment. The private examiner cited that Gulf War veterans, such as the Veteran, have exhibited a higher frequency level of many gastrointestinal symptoms, to include diverticulosis, than the general population. Therefore, the private examiner opined that the Veteran's diverticulitis was at least as likely as not caused by his in-service symptoms and exposures. The Board finds this medical opinion to be highly persuasive and is based on a review of the record, applied reliable principles, and is supported by a reasonable rationale. 

Given the foregoing and taking into consideration the discrepancy between the various medical opinions, the Board adheres to the rule that the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance. See Lynch v. McDonough, supra. Thus, the Board finds that the claim must be granted and that all doubt can be resolved in the Veteran's favor to find that it is at least likely as not that the Veteran's diverticulitis had onset during service. 

2. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for headaches, unspecified, prior to May 21, 2023, is denied.

3. Entitlement to an evaluation of 50 percent, but not higher, for headaches, unspecified, from May 21, 2023, is granted. 

The Veteran's headaches, unspecified, is currently assigned a 10 percent evaluation pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. Headaches are rated pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100, for migraine. Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months. A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months. A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under DC 8100.

The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30?Vet. App.?245, 252 (2018). This renders 38?C.F.R. §§?4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Id.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation. Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases. The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, supra at 253. The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless. Id. The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted). Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability." Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Pierce v. Principi, 18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46 (2004).

In Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67 (2020), the CAVC held that DC 8100 contemplates all migraine symptoms.  Therefore, to evaluate migraines under DC 8100, VA must consider all symptoms experienced due to migraine attacks and then rate the symptoms based on the frequency, duration, and economic impact of those attacks.

As a procedural starting point for this claim, in November 2021, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim for service connection for headaches. 

In March 2022, the Veteran underwent a headaches VA examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis for acute intermittent tension headaches. During the examination, the Veteran reported having pain in frontal lobe with eye pain which lasts hours until he goes to sleep. The VA examiner assessed that the Veteran does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain.

In June 2022, the AOJ deferred its decision on entitlement to compensation for headache.

In November 2022, the AOJ in its rating decision denied service connection for headaches. 

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for service connection for headaches.

In March 2023, a February 3, 2023, headaches VA examination was associated to the claims file. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis for headache, unspecified. During the examination, the Veteran reported daily dull headaches that would get more severe. The Veteran described these severe headaches as sharp and stabbing which could last a few hours. Also, the VA examiner determined that he would get prostrating attacks once every two months on average. Moreover, the VA examiner indicated that the headache pain affected concentration and focus and could impair productivity. In addition, the Veteran remarked that he would miss work once every other month because of his headaches.

In March 2023, a February 14, 2023, traumatic brain injury VA examination was associated to the claims file. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches affect his performance and sometimes misses work as a delivery person.

In April 2023, the AOJ in its rating decision granted service connection for headache, unspecified with an evaluation of 10 percent effective November 18, 2021.

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for increased rating for headaches.

In May 2023, the Veteran underwent a private headaches VA examination. The private examiner noted a diagnosis for tension headaches. The private examiner highlighted that the Veteran experiences constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain and dull pain that increases to throbbing. Also, the private examiner assessed that the Veteran has prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain more frequently than once per month. Furthermore, the private examiner determined that the Veteran has very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine headache pain. In addition, the private examiner stated that the Veteran's headache condition impacts his ability to work because he has risked termination from his job due to frequent call out due to his disability. Moreover, the private examiner remarked that the frequency and severity of the Veteran's headaches have caused severe economic inadaptability. The private examiner commented that even while taking medication, the Veteran's headache condition is of such severity as to interfere with his employment significantly and place him at risk of termination.

In July 2023, the AOJ in its rating decision continued its 10 percent evaluation for headaches, unspecified.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a request for higher-level review for the claim of increased rating for headaches. The Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran is entitled to a 50 percent evaluation for headaches because the May 2023 private examination showed that the Veteran suffers from frequent and prostrating headaches that are indicative of severe economic inadaptability.

In March 2024, the AOJ in its rating decision continued its 10 percent evaluation for headaches, unspecified.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 101812 Notice of Disagreement.

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that for the period prior to May 21, 2023, an evaluation in excess of 10 precent for headaches, unspecified, is not warranted. As it will be discussed later, on May 21, 2023, the medical evidence first makes the clear showing that the Veteran has had very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. The March 2022 VA medical examination indicates that the Veteran did not exhibit characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain. In addition, the February 2023 VA examination notes that the Veteran had prostrating attacks once every two months on average. The Board acknowledges that the Veteran consistently has had symptoms in relation to his headaches. However, for the period prior to May 21, 2023, the medical and lay evidence has not demonstrated that characteristic prostrating attacks averaging in 2 months over the last several months. Furthermore, there is no evidence that the Veteran's headaches result in very frequently completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, which would entail an evaluation of 50 percent. 

In regard to the period from May 21, 2023, the Board finds that the Veteran has had headaches with very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, therefore corresponding to the criteria for a 50 percent evaluation under Diagnostic Code 8100. As mentioned before, the May 2023 private medical examination shows that the Veteran has prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain more frequently than once per month. Furthermore, the private examiner assessed that the Veteran has very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine headache pain. Also, the private examiner noted that the Veteran experienced symptoms such as nausea, sensitivity to light, and dizziness. 

Equally, it is important to highlight that the private examiner deemed that the frequency and severity of the Veteran's headaches have caused severe economic inadaptability. In this regard, the private examiner assessed that the Veteran's headaches have had a significant impact in his employment, even reaching the stage of a possible termination. The Board finds that the overall picture of the Veteran's headaches from May 21, 2023, clearly shows that the Veteran's very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks are productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

Given the foregoing, an evaluation in excess of 10 percent prior to May 21, 2023, for headaches is denied. Moreover, an evaluation of 50 percent, but not higher, for the period from May 21, 2023, is granted. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (previously evaluated together with fibromyalgia) is denied.

5. Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia (also claimed as muscle aches) is denied. 

Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim. Id. In terms of a current or present disability, this requirement is satisfied when the Veteran has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). This means that if a current disability existed at time of the filing of the claim or at any time during the pendency of the claim but resolved prior to VA adjudicating the claim, service connection may still be warranted if the additional elements are satisfied. Id. at 321.

As a procedural starting point for these claims, in November 2021, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim for service connection for muscle aches (chronic fatigue/fibromyalgia) to include as Gulf War presumptive.

In March 2022, the Veteran underwent a chronic fatigue syndrome VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis for chronic fatigue syndrome. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's symptomatology does not meet the criteria for chronic fatigue syndrome. During the examination, the Veteran reported generalized fatigue which will last for up to three days. Also, the Veteran indicated that he was diagnosed with severe sleep apnea and mentioned that his fatigue has improved since using an APAP machine.

In March 2022, the Veteran underwent a fibromyalgia VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of fibromyalgia. During the examination, the Veteran reported that he has random symptoms of painful legs and "burning skin". Also, the Veteran remarked that he took an anti-inflammatory medication with no effect. Moreover, the Veteran indicated that this happens four to six times annually and he has to rest for several hours before experiencing relief.

In April 2022, the VA examiner indicated that for the claim of fibromyalgia, the four standard Gulf War disability patterns are not applicable for this case. Also, the VA examiner stated that the diagnostic criteria for fibromyalgia have not been met. The VA examiner explained that the Veteran had not been evaluated for fibromyalgia and the record is silent for complaints of fibromyalgia.

In April 2022, the VA examiner issued an opinion regarding the claim of chronic fatigue syndrome. The VA examiner mentioned that the Veteran's claimed chronic fatigue syndrome is a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology. Thus, the VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the chronic fatigue syndrome is related to a specific exposure event during service in Southwest Asia. Also, the VA examiner reiterated that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis for chronic fatigue syndrome because he does not meet the criteria for the disease.

In June 2022, the AOJ in its rating decision deferred its decision on entitlement to compensation for chronic fatigue syndrome. In addition, the AOJ deferred its decision on entitlement to compensation for muscle aches/fibromyalgia.

In November 2022, the AOJ in its rating decision denied service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome/muscle aches/fibromyalgia.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a request for higher-level review for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome.

In March 2024, the AOJ in its rating decision denied service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (previously evaluated together with fibromyalgia). The AOJ indicated that the evidence does not show a current diagnosed disability and thus, entitlement to service connection based on exposure to an environmental hazard is not established because the evidence does not show a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. As favorable findings, the AOJ noted that the Veteran performed service in Iraq from January 2004 to January 2005. Also, the AOJ highlighted that the Veteran was exposed to environmental hazards such as burn pits and other toxins, including fine particulate matter. 

The AOJ in its rating decision denied service connection for fibromyalgia (also claimed as muscle aches). The AOJ indicated that the evidence does not show a current diagnosed disability and thus, entitlement to service connection based on exposure to an environmental hazard is not established because the evidence does not show a diagnosis of fibromyalgia. As favorable findings, the AOJ noted that the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service as post deployment health assessments date November 1, 2005, and April 14, 2006, indicated complaints of muscle aches. Also, the AOJ cited that the Veteran performed service in Iraq from January 2004 to January 2005. Moreover, the AOJ highlighted that the Veteran was exposed to environmental hazards such as burn pits and other toxins, including fine particulate matter.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. 

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia is not warranted. A current disability is a crucial element for any service connection claim. The Veteran's medical records are absent for any clear diagnosis related to chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. The March 2022 VA examination considered the Veteran's lay statements regarding any symptomatology related to the claimed conditions. However, the VA examiner unequivocally concluded that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis for either condition. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay assertions regarding his current symptomatology that he claims are related to chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. However, the Board finds while the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, in order to determine whether there is a clear diagnosis for a disability, that cannot be based on lay observation alone. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Instead, such a determination must be made by a medical professional with appropriate expertise. Id.  In this regard, the Board finds the objective findings contained in the VA examination report to be more probative.  Given the foregoing, the claims of entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia are denied.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Colon, Ivan M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.