Citation Nr: A25032551
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-450202
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than October 5, 2023, for the award of service connection for tinnitus is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is denied.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is denied.

7. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity nerve disability, to include as secondary to a service connected disability, is denied.

8. Entitlement to service connection for headache is denied.

9. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

10. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to October 5, 2023, the Veteran did not submit an informal claim, a formal claim or a written intent to file a claim for service connection for tinnitus.

2. The Veteran does not have either a left ear or right ear hearing loss disability that qualifies as a disability for VA compensation purposes.

3. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current cervical spine disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity, that had its onset during active duty service or is otherwise related to active duty service.

4. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current left knee disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity, that had its onset during active duty service or is otherwise related to active duty service.

5. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current right knee disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity, that had its onset during active duty service or is otherwise related to active duty service.

6. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current right ankle disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity, that had its onset during active duty service or is otherwise related to active duty service.

7. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current left upper extremity nerve disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity.

8. A headaches disability, to include tension headaches, did not have its onset in service and is not otherwise related to service.

9. GERD did not have its onset in service and is not otherwise related to service.

10. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current IBS disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date prior to October 5, 2023, for the award of service connection for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.155, 3.400.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.385.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disability, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for headaches have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

9. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

10. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for IBS have not been met.38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2015 to April 2018.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The RO granted the award of service connection for tinnitus, effective October 5, 2023, and denied the remaining service-connection claims as listed above. Additionally, the AOJ made favorable findings that are discussed further herein by which the Board is bound.

In June 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the March 2024 decision to the Board by submitting VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), and requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In a direct review docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision here. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than October 5, 2023, for the award of service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for tinnitus.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the RO granted the award of service connection for tinnitus, effective October 5, 2023, based on the day VA received his claim.

The record is clear in showing that the Veteran first filed a claim for VA compensation benefits that included service connection for tinnitus in a VA 21-526EZ, Veteran's Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (Fully Developed Claim), that was received by VA on October 5, 2023. There is no prior claim, formal or informal, seeking VA compensation benefits that was received by VA.

The Board has thoroughly and sympathetically reviewed the evidence of record and finds that an effective date earlier than October 5, 2023, for the award of service connection for the listed disabilities and increased rating is not warranted because the Veteran did not file an informal claim, a formal claim, or expressed, in writing, an intent to file a claim for entitlement to service connection for the disabilities prior to October 5, 2023.

The effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. Applying the relevant law to the present case, the earliest possible effective date for the award of service connection for tinnitus could be October 5, 2023. This is the effective date that was assigned by the rating decision.

Thus, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a basis on which an earlier effective date may be assigned for the award of service connection for tinnitus and the proper effective date is October 5, 2023. Accordingly, the claim for entitlement an effective date earlier than October 5, 2023, is denied because the AOJ has already assigned the earliest possible effective date provided by law. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155(a), 3.400.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Additionally, where a veteran served 90 days or more of active service, and certain chronic diseases, such as sensorineural hearing loss as an organic disease of the nervous system, become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability that was incurred in or otherwise caused by service.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service with his military occupational specialty (MOS) of security forces that is of moderate probability for noise exposure. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The question in this case is whether the Veteran has a current bilateral hearing loss disability for VA purposes that is related to his in-service hazardous noise exposure. The Board finds the weight of the evidence is against the claim, which is explained below.

For VA compensation purposes, impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a current hearing loss disability in either the left ear or right ear. See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1333 (1997) (holding that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007) (holding that the requirement that there be a current disability is satisfied when the disability is shown at the time of the claim or during the pendency of the claim, even though the disability subsequently resolves).

The Veteran underwent a VA audiological examination in January 2024, at which time audiometric testing did not show a diagnosis of either left or right ear hearing loss that qualifies as a disability for VA compensation purposes. In this regard, the relevant auditory thresholds at 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz were 10, 5, 5, 5, and 5 decibels, respectively for the right ear, and 10, 10, 10, 5, and 10 decibels, respectively for the left ear. Speech recognition testing revealed scores of 100 percent, bilaterally.

The examiner indicated that the Veteran had normal hearing in both the right and left ears. She found that there was not a permanent positive threshold shift (worse than reference threshold) greater than normal measurement variability at any frequency between 500 and 6000 Hz for either ear. She also opined that the Veteran's hearing loss for the right and left ear are not at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by or a result of an event in military service. She explained that on examination, the Veteran's hearing was within normal limits and therefore is less likely than not that there is hearing loss due to military exposure or acoustic trauma.

In a separate opinion in January 2024, the examiner also explained that a review of the service medical records revealed the Veteran to have normal hearing sensitivity at enlistment. Audiogram on examination also showed normal hearing, with no significant threshold shifts as compared to enlistment. She added, the audiogram is the objective standard for noise injury, and because the Veteran's hearing is normal today with no significant threshold shifts having occurred during active duty service, there is no evidence that the Veteran's military noise exposure caused a permanent noise injury affecting hearing sensitivity. Therefore, if the Veteran develops hearing loss, it is deemed less likely as not (less than 50/50 probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

There are no audiological records that document a bilateral hearing loss disability for VA compensation purposes. Although the Veteran is competent to report subjective symptoms of decreased hearing, the diagnosis of hearing loss that qualifies as a disability for VA compensation purposes is medically complex and requires knowledge and expertise in conducting and interpreting audiometric testing to determine. Thus, the opinion of the Veteran regarding the diagnosis of a current hearing loss disability in the left and right ears is not competent medical evidence. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Moreover, the January 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran had normal hearing for adjudication purposes of the bilateral ears even after considering the Veteran's symptoms hearing loss of having to ask people to repeat themselves.

Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service-connected benefits to cases where there is a current disability. In this case, there is no competent evidence of record showing that the Veteran has either a left ear or right ear hearing loss disability for VA compensation purposes under 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 during the course of the claim. Therefore, there is no basis upon which service connection can be awarded, and the claim for service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability is denied.

The Board notes that that VA has conceded that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) with a December 2023 VA TERA memorandum showing that there is evidence of noise, lead, and vibration exposure given his MOS. Under 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1), it provides that the Secretary of VA shall provide a veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion "if a veteran submits to the Secretary a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability [] with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during" service. As explained in detail above, the Board does not find that the Veteran has presented evidence of a hearing loss disability, and thus, a TERA examination and medical opinion is not warranted. Nonetheless, the January 2024 VA examiner provided the opinion that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. She provided the rationale similar to above that because the Veteran's hearing was normal on her examination with no significant threshold shifts having occurred during active duty service, there is no evidence that the Veteran's military noise exposure caused a permanent noise injury affecting hearing sensitivity.

As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claim is denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for cervical spine, left knee, right knee, and right ankle disabilities that he alleges were incurred in or otherwise caused by service.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that participation in a toxic risk activity is conceded with toxic exposure that had been verified based on his service record military occupational and environmental health exposure data. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The questions in this case are whether the Veteran has current disabilities of the cervical spine, left knee, right knee, and right ankle that are related to an event in service.

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has current disabilities of the cervical spine, left knee, right knee, and right ankle during the appeal period. Therefore, service connection for the respective disabilities is not warranted. The reasons follow.

As to the cervical spine, in an October 2023 statement, the Veteran claimed to have cervical spine disabilities to include arthritis, pain, herniated disc, and a cervical strain. He asserted that during service he injured his neck sleeping in uncomfortable positions on bunk beds in basic training putting strain on his neck. He stated that the pain in his neck was of pulling and aching and had muscle spasms and that his doctor advised him he had an abnormal curvature in his back. He reported that his neck pain impacted his daily movements and activities, with movements like looking up and down, turning to the left and right and bending sideways exacerbate his pain and had flare-ups.

As to the right ankle, in an October 2023 statement, the Veteran contended that he injured his right ankle during physical training exercise, playing sports, to include basketball, and a fall. He indicated that he did not go to medical because he was told he would be held back and would not graduate on time. The Veteran reported that he continued to have swelling, weakness, muscle fatigue, cracking, and popping in his right ankle. He stated the pain in his ankle became worse with high-impact activity, prolonged standing, prolonged sitting, running/jogging, or sleeping in bed his legs and ankle would go numb and hurt if he needed to get up immediately. The Veteran added that he had to avoid or limit certain activities including paying with his children, pets, long car rides, sitting through a movie, and sports because of ankle pain.

There are no diagnosed cervical spine, left knee, right knee, or right ankle disabilities during the appeal period or proximate thereto in the available records. The Board is mindful of the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), in which the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that where pain alone results in functional impairment that affects earning capacity, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability. The Veteran has not contended that he has experienced pain or functional impairment affecting his earning capacity related to left and right knee symptoms, and the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has had functional impairments.

Further, to the extent that the Veteran claims there is functional impairment of the cervical spine and right ankle in the October 2023 statements, the Board finds there is also no in-service event or a nexus between the current disability and service. As to evidence of an in-service event, in dental medical history questionnaires in July 2016, July 2017, and January 2018, the Veteran did not circle any conditions, including a history of "swollen ankles;" and "arthritis;" and answered "no" when asked if he had any diseases or conditions not mentioned above. In a September 2016 service treatment record, a review of systems was negative for the neck, including no neck pain and no swollen glands in the neck and for musculoskeletal, there was no back pain and no limb swelling. Physical findings of the neck revealed the appearance of the neck was normal with no tenderness.

The Veteran asserted that he did not seek medical treatment in service because he did not want to delay graduation; however, the Board does not find this credible. Specifically, in a February 2018 service treatment record of an examination for separation, the Veteran would not have the risk of being put on light duty or ousted at the time, and he was already being involuntarily administratively separated due to mental health issues. He denied any complaints or concerns that he would like to address at the time. Physical findings included a normal examination of "foot;" "spine and other musculoskeletal;" "upper extremities;" and "lower extremities." When asked about medical history, the Veteran answered, "no," to if he had a history of "arthritis, rheumatism, or bursitis;" "recurrent back pain or any back problem;" "numbness or tinging;" "loss of finger or toe;" "foot trouble;" "impaired use of arms, legs, hands, or feet;" "swollen or painful joint(s);" "knee trouble;" "any knee or foot injury including arthroscopy or the use of a scope to any bone or joint;" "any need to use corrective devices such as prosthetic devices, knee brace(s), back support(s), lifts or orthotics, etc.;" "bone, joint, or other deformity;" "plate(s), screw(s), rod(s) or pin(s) in any bone;" and "broken bone(s)." The Veteran answered "yes" when asked if he was "currently in good health" and denied a history of any illness or injury other than those already noted. 

A medical professional found that the Veteran's neck was normal during service in September 2016 and the Veteran completed the dental health questionnaires and report of medical history at separation, discussed above, contemporaneously with his service, which the Board finds makes the documents highly probative and accurate as to what the Veteran experienced and did not experience in service. The Board finds no reason to question the accuracy of what the Veteran documented within the dental health questionnaires and report of medical history at separation. This is affirmative evidence against an in-service cervical spine, left knee, right knee, or right ankle diseases or injuries. Thus, to the extent that the Veteran alleged an in-service disease or injury related to the respective claimed cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle disabilities, the Board finds such allegation is not credible. The weight of the evidence is persuasively against a finding of a disease or injury involving the claimed disabilities during service, and the in-service disease or injury element is not met for the cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle claims.

The Veteran has asserted that his cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle disabilities are related to service; however, he has not offered probative and competent evidence establishing a nexus between chronic kidney disease and service. Lay evidence may be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. However, "VA must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to." A diagnosis of cervical spine, knee, and ankle disabilities require specialized training for determinations as to diagnosis and causation, and is therefore, not susceptible to lay opinions on etiology. Therefore, the Board finds that the lay assertions proffered by the Veteran lack probative value.

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with the claims for service connection for cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle disabilities. VA must provide a medical examination or opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). As laid out above, the Board finds as fact that there are no diagnosed disabilities of the cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle disabilities and in the alternative, the record does not show an indication that the disability may be associated with the Veteran's service. For a VA examination to be warranted, all the criteria have to be met, and at least one criteria is not met.

Moreover, as noted above, VA has conceded that the Veteran participated in a TERA, and the Board has considered whether he is entitled to TERA examinations and medical opinions in connection with these claims. As these claims are based on physical trauma, TERA examinations and medical opinions are not required in connection with the Veteran's claims for service connection for cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle disabilities. 

Absent competent, credible, and probative evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's service and the respective disabilities; the Board finds that his cervical spine, bilateral knee, and right ankle disabilities were not incurred in service and are not otherwise related to active service. The Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against the claims of service connection for cervical spine, left knee, right knee, and right ankle disabilities, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claims are denied. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776; 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

?

7. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity nerve disability.

The Veteran indicated that he is claiming that his left upper extremity nerve disability as secondary to a cervical spine disability. See October 2023 statement.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that participation in a TERA is conceded with toxic exposure that had been verified based on his service record military occupational and environmental health exposure data. The Board is bound by this favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The question in this case is whether the Veteran has a current left upper extremity nerve disability related to an event in service, to include TERA, or secondary to a service-connected disability.

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current left upper extremity nerve disability. Therefore, service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disability is not warranted. The reasons follow.

In an October 2023 statement, the Veteran asserted that he continuously experienced numbness, shooting pain, a pins-and-needles sensation, and aching that runs down his fingers that began after he developed his neck disability. He reported flare-ups and symptoms that make things like lying still without regularly adjusting position, doing household chores, yardwork, sports, and changing a light bulb mor difficult. He reported loss of movement on his left side of his shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand.

In February 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for peripheral nerves conditions. The examiner noted the Veteran's assertions in section II medical history, similar to those in the above October 2020 statement and found that the Veteran did not have any symptoms attributable to any peripheral nerve conditions and no diagnosis was provided. She indicated that the Veteran's peripheral nerve condition and/or peripheral neuropathy did not impact his ability to work and made specific remarks that there was no objective evidence to support a chronic left upper extremity nerve condition. Further, there are no available post-service medical records which document a diagnosis or complaints or symptoms indictive of a left upper extremity nerve disability.

The Board is mindful of the holding in Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356, in which the Federal Circuit explained that where pain alone results in functional impairment that affects earning capacity, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability. While the Veteran had made assertions, including in the October 2023 statement, related to left upper extremity nerve symptoms, and the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has had functional impairments. The Board finds the most probative evidence of record is the February 2024 VA examination report where the examiner found no functional impairment and no objective evidence to support a chronic left upper extremity nerve condition.

There is no diagnosed left upper extremity nerve disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, as mentioned above. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had a left upper extremity nerve disability at any time during the period on appeal, to include symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity.

Nonetheless, the Veteran's claim for service connection for a cervical spine disability, has been denied herein, which means that the claimed left upper extremity nerve disability cannot be granted on a secondary basis as cervical spine disability, is not a service-connected disability. Moreover, a VA examiner considered the claimed left upper extremity nerve disability in relation to a TERA in service. The examiner stated that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. She explained that a February 2018 progress note showed no numbness or tingling, no painful shoulder, elbow or wrist, and no recurrent back pain or any back problem. She indicated that all relevant medical records were reviewed along with the examination report used to formulate the medical opinion and there was no diagnosis thus no opinion is warranted.

As the record does not reflect a current left upper extremity nerve disability, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted. The Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements for determining whether service connection is warranted is necessary. See Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309, 314 (1993) ("A determination of service connection requires a finding of the existence of a current disability and a determination of a relationship between that disability and an injury or a disease incurred in service."); see also Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection).

As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection for a left upper extremity nerve disability, to include as secondary to a service connected disability, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claim is denied. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

8. Entitlement to service connection for headaches.

9. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease

10. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome.

The Veteran seeks service connection for headache, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), which he asserts was incurred in or otherwise related to service, to include participation in a TERA.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with disabilities of headaches and GERD. Further, participation in a TERA is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The questions in this case are whether the Veteran has current headache, GERD, or IBS disabilities related to an event in service, to include TERA, or secondary to a service-connected disability.

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current IBS disability and a nexus between the Veteran's current disabilities of headaches and GERD and service. Therefore, service connection for the respective disabilities is not warranted. The reasons follow.

First as to IBS, in February 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for intestinal conditions. The examiner noted the Veteran's assertions in section II medical history, including his report of stomach problems and when in service, the Veteran had to eat MREs or meals ready to eat and would feel glassy and bloating. The examiner indicated that the Veteran reported no diagnosis of IBS. The examiner found that the Veteran did not have at the time or had ever been diagnosed with an intestinal condition. She indicated that the Veteran's intestinal condition did not impact his ability to work and made specific remarks that there was no objective evidence of IBS. Further, there are no available post-service medical records which document a diagnosis or complaints or symptoms indictive of IBS. 

The Board is mindful of the holding in Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356, in which the Federal Circuit explained that where pain alone results in functional impairment that affects earning capacity, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability. While the Veteran had made assertions, including during the February 2024 examination that he had stomach problems, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has had functional impairments. The Board finds the most probative evidence of record is the February 2024 VA examination report where the examiner found no functional impairment and no objective evidence of IBS.

The examiner also provided the TERA opinion that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. She noted the February 2018 progress note that showed no stomach, liver, intestinal trouble, or ulcer, no gall bladder trouble, and no frequent indigestion or heartburn. The examiner indicated all relevant medical records were reviewed along with the examination used to formulate the medical opinion and there was no diagnosis therefore no opinion was warranted.

There is no diagnosed intestinal disability during the appeal period or proximate thereto, as mentioned above. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had an intestinal disability or IBS at any time during the period on appeal, to include symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity. As the record does not reflect a current IBS disability, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements for determining whether service connection is warranted is necessary. See Watson, 4 Vet. App. 314.

As to headaches and GERD and evidence of in-service events, in dental medical history questionnaires in July 2016, July 2017, and January 2018, the Veteran did not circle any conditions, including a history of "frequent chest pains" and "unexplained weight loss;" and answered "no" when asked if he had any diseases or conditions not mentioned above. In a September 2016 service treatment record, a review of systems was negative for the head, including headache, no facial pain, and no sinus pain; and for gastrointestinal, appetite was not decreased, no heartburn, no nausea, no vomiting, no abdominal pain, no diarrhea, and no constipation. Physical findings of the head revealed the no evidence of a head injury and head normocephalic.

In a February 2018 service treatment record of an examination for separation, the Veteran would not have the risk of being put on light duty or ousted at the time, and he was already being involuntarily administratively separated due to mental health issues. He denied any complaints or concerns that he would like to address at the time. Physical findings included a normal examination of "head, face neck, and scalp;" and "abdomen and viscera." When asked about medical history, the Veteran answered, "no," to if he had a history of "frequent indigestion or heartburn;" "stomach, liver, intestinal trouble, or ulcer;" "dizziness or fainting spells;" "recent unexplained gain or loss of weight;" "a head injury, memory loss or amnesia;" "seizures, convulsions, epilepsy or fits;" and "a period of unconsciousness or concussion)."The Veteran answered "yes" when asked if he was "currently in good health" and denied a history of any illness or injury other than those already noted. 

In service treatment records including the September 2016 review of systems, various dental health questionnaires and report of medical history at separation, discussed above, completed contemporaneously with his service, the Veteran denied symptoms related to headaches and GERD. The Board finds that these documents highly probative and accurate as to what the Veteran experienced and did not experience in service as they were completed contemporaneously with service. The Board finds no reason to question the accuracy of what the Veteran documented within the service treatment record, dental health questionnaires and report of medical history at separation. This is affirmative evidence against an in-service headaches or GERD symptoms, diseases or injuries. Thus, to the extent that the Veteran alleged an in-service disease or injury related to the respective claimed headaches or GERD disabilities, the Board finds such allegation is not credible. The weight of the evidence is persuasively against a finding of a disease or injury involving the claimed disabilities during service, and the in-service disease or injury element is not met for the headaches and GERD claims.

Additionally, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a nexus between the current disabilities and service. The Veteran was afforded VA examinations for each of his claimed headaches and GERD disabilities in February 2024. She provided the opinions that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

As to headaches, the examiner referenced the February 2018 progress note that showed no frequent or severe headaches. She explained that all relevant medical records were reviewed along with the examination used to formulate the medical opinion. The examiner indicated that the service treatment records were silent for complaints of headaches and post service records were silent until her examination in February 2024 that diagnosed tension headaches. She indicated that there is no medical literature to support tension headaches are caused due to toxic exposure and no nexus has been established.

As to GERD, the examiner referenced the February 2018 progress note that showed no stomach, liver, intestinal trouble, or ulcer, no gall bladder trouble, and no frequent indigestion or heartburn. She explained that all relevant medical records were reviewed along with the examination used to formulate the medical opinion. The examiner indicated that the service treatment records were silent for complaints of GERD and post service records were silent until her examination in February 2024 that diagnosed GERD. She indicated that there is no medical literature to support tension headaches are caused due to toxic exposure and no nexus has been established.

The Veteran has asserted that his headaches and GERD disabilities are related to service; however, he has not offered probative and competent evidence establishing a nexus between chronic kidney disease and service. Lay evidence may be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. However, "VA must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to." A diagnosis of headaches and GERD disabilities require specialized training for determinations as to diagnosis and causation, and is therefore, not susceptible to lay opinions on etiology. Therefore, the Board finds that the lay assertions proffered by the Veteran lack probative value.

The Board finds of most probative value the VA medical opinions. The examination report and opinions provide competent and probative evidence that weigh against the Veteran's claims because the examiner reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, performed a physical examination, and provided medical opinions supported by well-reasoned rationale, which was based upon the facts of the case and medical principles and considered the Veteran's contentions, including TERA. Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-106 (2012). The Veteran has not otherwise provided competent medical evidence that the respective headaches and GERD disabilities are related to or incurred in service.

Absent competent, credible, and probative evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's service and the respective disabilities; the Board finds that his headaches, IBS, and GERD disabilities were not incurred in service and are not otherwise related to active service, to include a TERA. The Veteran has not submitted credible evidence that provides a positive nexus regarding the onset, etiology, or relationship of the respective disabilities to military service. The most probative evidence on medical etiology is against his claims. Accordingly, service connection for the headaches, IBS, and GERD disabilities is not warranted.

For all the reasons laid out above, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against the claims of service connection for headaches, IBS, and GERD disabilities, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claims are denied. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776; 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Cheng, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.