Citation Nr: A25032646
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-426094
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy is granted.  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy prior to June 28, 2024, is granted.  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy is denied.  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to June 28, 2024, is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for a dental disability, to include missing teeth, and to include for purposes of outpatient treatment, is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for right thumb sprain is denied.  

REMANDED

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) prior to June 28, 2024, is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis is remanded.  

Entitlement to a schedular total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to November 9, 2022, is remanded.  

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1.  The evidence under review is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, in establishing the Veteran's left lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy more closely approximated moderately severe signs and symptoms during the rating period under review.  

2.  The evidence under review is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, in establishing the Veteran's right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy more closely approximated moderately severe signs and symptoms during the rating period under review prior to June 28, 2024.  

3.  The evidence under review persuasively weighs against establishing the Veteran's left or right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy more closely approximated severe incomplete paralysis, or complete paralysis, at any time during the rating period under review.  

4.  The evidence under review persuasively weighs against establishing the Veteran had a dental disability for purposes of service connection compensation or outpatient treatment.     

5.  The evidence under review persuasively weighs against establishing the Veteran had functional impairment of earning capacity attributable to a right thumb condition near the time this claim was filed or at any time during its pendency.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  For the rating period under review, the criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for left lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.10, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520.   

2.  For the rating period under review, the criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy prior to June 28, 2024, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.10, 4.124a, DC 8520.   

3.  For the rating period under review, the criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.6, 4.10, 4.124a, DC 8526.  

4.  For the rating period under review, the criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to June 28, 2024, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.6, 4.10, 4.124a, DC 8526.  

5.  The criteria for service connection for a dental disability, to include missing teeth, and to include for purposes of outpatient treatment, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1712; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.381, 4.150, 17.161.  

6.  The criteria for service connection for a right thumb sprain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Army during Peacetime and the Gulf War Era, from June 1990 to November 1992, followed by service in the Army National Guard until June 1994.  He did not have service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.    

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The appeal has been developed under VA's Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system of review.  

The Veteran perfected this appeal by timely submitting a March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the RO's April 2022 Rating Decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review regarding an increased rating for lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with IVDS and service connection for sleep apnea, missing teeth, and tinnitus, the April 2022 Rating Decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review regarding service connection for bilateral hearing loss, the June 2022 Rating Decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review regarding service connection for cervical spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis, and the December 2022 Rating Decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review regarding increased ratings for bilateral lower extremity sciatic and femoral nerve radiculopathy and service connection for right thumb sprain.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the Rating Decisions regarding their respective issues, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the increased rating claim for the lumbar spine and service connection claims for sleep apnea, bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and the cervical spine, as well as entitlement to a schedular TDIU prior to November 9, 2022, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Ratings Schedule) which is based upon average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Each service-connected disability is rated on the basis of specific criteria identified by DCs.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  

Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  

A Veteran may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Thus, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based upon the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  

Further, the Board must determine whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or if there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence (i.e., relative equipoise) regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim in which case it must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; see Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy is granted.  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy prior to June 28, 2024, is granted.  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy is denied.  

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to June 28, 2024, is denied.  

On October 28, 2021, the Veteran submitted an original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) regarding his lumbar spine disability (addressed in Remand section below).  Thereafter, an April 2022 Rating Decision granted increased ratings of 20 percent for each left and right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy, as well as service connection for left and right femoral nerve radiculopathy rated at 20 percent each.  On November 9, 2022, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 21-526EZ again seeking increased ratings for his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy disabilities.  Thereafter, a December 2022 Rating Decision decreased his assigned ratings to 10 percent for each left and right sciatic and femoral nerve radiculopathy effective December 5, 2022.  

However, after the Veteran requested higher-level review of both the April 2022 and December 2022 Rating Decisions, the March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal restored the 20 percent ratings for each lower extremity sciatic and femoral nerve radiculopathy effective December 5, 2022, but denied ratings any higher.  The Board observes that, during the pendency of this appeal, an October 2024 Rating Decision granted the Veteran a 40 percent rating for right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy and a 30 percent rating for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy, both effective June 28, 2024, and these issues on appeal have been recharacterized accordingly.       

The Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is rated under DC 8520 for impairment of his sciatic nerves and DC 8526 for impairment of his anterior crural (femoral) nerves.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.    

Under DC 8520, in pertinent part, a 20 percent rating is assigned for moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  A 40 percent rating is assigned for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  A 60 percent rating is assigned for severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, with marked muscular atrophy.  A maximum 80 percent rating is assigned for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, where the foot dangles and drops, no active movement is possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost.  Id.  

Under DC 8526, in pertinent part, a 20 percent rating is assigned for moderate incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for severe incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve.  A maximum 40 percent rating is assigned for complete paralysis of the femoral nerve with paralysis of quadriceps extensor muscles.  Id.  

VA's Adjudication Procedural Manual (M21-1) provides helpful guidance in evaluating the lower extremity nerve branches and when separate evaluations may be assigned.  It states that the sciatic nerve, the external popliteal (common peroneal) nerve, the musculocutaneous (superficial peroneal) nerve, the anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, the internal popliteal (tibial) nerve, and the posterior tibial nerve are part of the sciatic nerve group which affect the same functions in the leg and, therefore, may not be separately rated without violating the rule against pyramiding.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  Similarly, the anterior crural nerve and internal saphenous nerve are part of the femoral nerve group and may not be rated separately, but ratings for each nerve branch group (sciatic, femoral, obturator, external cutaneous nerve of the thigh, and ilio-inguinal nerve) may be assigned as symptoms are separate and distinct between nerve branch groups.  Id., see M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.e-f.  Although the M21-1 is not binding, the Board finds its guidance on nerve branch groups to be an appropriate framework for this Veteran's appeal as such involves multiple nerve branches and symptomology.  See Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 263 (2018).  

Diseases affecting the nerves are rated on the basis of the degree of paralysis, neuritis, or neuralgia under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating, is to be rated on the scale provided by injury of the nerve involved, with a maximum equal to severe incomplete paralysis.  The maximum rating assignable for neuritis not characterized by organic changes will be that for moderate, or with sciatic nerve involvement, for moderately severe incomplete paralysis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.123.  Neuralgia characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain of typical distribution so as to identify the nerve is to be rated on the same scale, with a maximum equal to moderate incomplete paralysis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124.  The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  Id. 

When a regulation includes ambiguous or subjective terms, the Board must define such terms.  See Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 255 (2018).  According to the M21-1, a moderate level of incomplete paralysis involves symptoms that will likely be described by Veterans and medically graded as significantly disabling and is the maximum evaluation for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment.  M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c.  In such cases, a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected by sensory symptoms.  Signs and symptoms combinations that may fall into the moderate category include combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate.  Id.  

For moderately severe incomplete paralysis, the M21-1 states that this is only applicable to the sciatic nerve branch and is reflective of motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished reflexes at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability is expected.  Atrophy may also be present.  Id.  

For severe incomplete paralysis, the M21-1 provides that motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability is expected to be shown.  Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases and marked muscular atrophy would be expected for the sciatic nerve.  It also notes that even though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than the representative findings for complete paralysis of the nerve (in reference to the descriptions of complete paralysis in the applicable DCs), the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs and symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.  Id.  

Turning to the evidence under review, VA medical records (VAMRs) reflect that the Veteran was seen for complaints and treatment of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy symptoms and he was noted on multiple occasions to have difficulty walking.  In June 2018, his reflexes were assessed as normal (2+) and, in October 2018, his bilateral lower extremity muscle strength was assessed as diminished (4/5).  In September 2019, deep tendon reflexes were noted to be "absent."  

A September 2018 VA examination of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability assessed diminished (4/5) muscle strength in left hip flexion, left knee extension, left ankle plantar flexion, left ankle dorsiflexion, and left great toe extension, but normal (5/5) muscle strength in the right lower extremity.  Reflexes of the left knee and ankle were reported as hypoactive (1+), but right lower extremity reflexes were normal (2+).  Sensation to light touch testing was assessed as normal in the left lower extremity, but decreased in the right upper thigh, right thigh/knee, right lower leg/ankle, and right foot/toes.  The examination reported no left lower extremity radiculopathy symptoms, and mild right lower extremity constant pain (may be excruciating at times), intermittent pain (usually dull), paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.     

A December 2019 VA examination of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability assessed normal muscle strength, reflexes, and sensation to light touch testing bilaterally.  The examination reported no lower extremity radiculopathy symptoms.  According to the examination report, "radiculopathy improved after L4-L5 [transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion] 10/2019."  

Private (i.e., non-VA) medical records from LCMC Health dated November 2020 noted the Veteran had bilateral lower extremity decreased strength, endurance, and mobility, as well as impaired balance.  No lower extremity motor response/strength or sensory impairment was assessed.   

A March 2021 VA examination diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sciatica.  At the time, the Veteran endorsed "numbness, tingling, constant pain, sometimes excruciating, all bilaterally," and treatment with medications and regular use of bilateral ankle-foot orthoses (AFOs).  The examination assessed severe bilateral lower extremity constant pain, moderate bilateral lower extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and severe bilateral lower extremity numbness.  Bilateral muscle strength and reflexes were assessed as normal.  Decreased sensation to light touch was assessed for the bilateral lower leg/ankle and foot/toes, with no trophic changes, and an abnormal gait was reported (i.e., "shuffles w/ a walker during this exam") due to his lumbar spine.  According to the examination report, the Veteran had "moderate" incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic, external popliteal (common peroneal), musculocutaneous (superficial peroneal), anterior tibial (deep peroneal), internal popliteal (tibial), and posterior tibial nerves.  Further, he reportedly "was medically discharged" from his job of 10 years due to being "unable to perform" as a result of his peripheral nerve conditions.         

Another VA examination conducted in May 2021 (report received June 2021) diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  At the time, the Veteran endorsed bilateral lower extremity pain and numbness, worse on the right, tingling, and muscle spasms, and treatment with "braces, walking stick, [and] spinal fusion."  The examination assessed mild bilateral lower extremity intermittent pain, mild left lower extremity and moderate right lower extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild left lower extremity and moderate right lower extremity numbness.  Bilateral muscle strength was assessed as normal and bilateral knee and ankle reflexes were assessed as hypoactive (1+).  Decreased sensation to light touch was assessed for the bilateral thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes, with no trophic changes, and a normal gait.  According to the examination report, the Veteran had mild incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic, external popliteal (common peroneal), anterior tibial (deep peroneal), and posterior tibial nerves.  Further, he reportedly constantly used a cane to ambulate due to his radiculopathy, and his inability to "walk, sit or stand for a long time" and his need to "get up and move to wake feet up" impacted his ability to work.  

A February 2022 VA examination of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability assessed diminished (4/5) bilateral hip, knee, and ankle muscle strength, as well as hypoactive (1+) bilateral knee and ankle reflexes and decreased sensation to light touch in the bilateral upper anterior thigh, thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes.  According to the examination report, the Veteran had severe bilateral lower extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness, moderate bilateral lower extremity intermittent pain (usually dull), and mild bilateral lower extremity constant pain (may be excruciating at times).    

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in December 2022 that diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy involving the femoral and sciatic nerves.  At the time, the Veteran endorsed "pain down the right lower extremity" and treatment with Ibuprofen, Flexeril, and Lidocaine patches.  The examination assessed mild right lower extremity constant pain (may be excruciating at times) and numbness.  Bilateral muscle strength was assessed as normal, as were reflexes (2+), and sensation was normal.  According to the examination report, the Veteran had mild incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic and anterior crural (femoral) nerves.  Further, he reportedly regularly used a walker and prostheses on both feet because "they drag."  No impact on his ability to work was reported, and the examination noted "no objective evidence" of his feet dragging.  

Regarding the Veteran's increased ratings claims for bilateral sciatic nerve radiculopathy under DC 8520, the Board finds the evidence under review is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, in showing that his signs and symptoms more closely approximated moderately severe throughout the rating period under review so as to warrant 40 percent ratings for each lower extremity.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a; M21-1.  For example, VAMRs dated June 2018 assessed diminished bilateral muscle strength (4/5), and the September 2018 VA examination assessed diminished left lower extremity muscle strength (4/5) and left knee and ankle reflexes (1+), as well as decreased right lower extremity sensation to light touch testing.  VAMRS dated September 2019 assessed "absent" DTRs, and the May 2021 VA examination assessed hypoactive (1+) reflexes in both knees and ankles and decreased sensation to light touch for the bilateral thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes.  Likewise, the February 2022 VA examination assessed diminished bilateral muscle strength (4/5) and reflexes (1+).  Thus, the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity involvement appears to be more than just wholly sensory in nature.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  

Moreover, although muscle atrophy is not reported, a high level of limitation is shown.  As discussed previously, VAMRs reported difficulty walking/standing, and the March 2021 VA examination noted that he "was medically discharged" from his job of 10 years due to being "unable to perform" as a result of his peripheral nerve conditions.  Also, the May 2021 VA examination noted he constantly used a cane to ambulate, and that his inability to "walk, sit or stand for a long time" and his need to "get up and move to wake feet up" impacted his ability to work.   

However, the Board finds the evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing the Veteran's left or right sciatic nerve radiculopathy manifested in signs or symptoms more closely approximating severe incomplete paralysis to warrant a 60 percent rating under DC 8520 at any time during the rating period under review.  Id.  No medical examination or treatment records have assessed severe incomplete paralysis, and such evidence does not reflect muscle atrophy, trophic changes, or motor impairment, to include at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation.  

Further, the Board finds the evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing the Veteran's left or right sciatic nerve radiculopathy manifested in signs or symptoms more closely approximating complete paralysis to warrant an 80 percent rating under DC 8520 at any time during the rating period under review.  Id.  Although VAMRs dated October 2018 indicate the Veteran ambulated with ankle-foot orthoses (AFOs), and he reported during the December 2022 VA examination that he used AFOs for both feet because "they drag," he was not wearing them at the time and the report noted there was "no objective evidence of feet drag on exam."  Evidence does not assess complete paralysis of either sciatic nerve, nor reflects that there is no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee(s) or flexion of knee(s) weakened or (very rarely) lost.  

Regarding the Veteran's increased ratings claims for bilateral femoral (anterior crural) nerves under DC 8526, the Board finds the evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing that either femoral nerve radiculopathy manifested in signs or symptoms more closely approximating severe incomplete paralysis to warrant a 30 percent rating at any time during the rating period under review.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  No medical examination or treatment records have assessed severe incomplete paralysis, and such evidence does not reflect muscle atrophy, trophic changes, or motor impairment, to include at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation.  

Likewise, the Board finds the evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing the Veteran's left or right femoral nerve radiculopathy manifested in signs or symptoms more closely approximating complete paralysis to warrant a 40 percent rating under DC 8526 at any time during the rating period under review.  Id.  Evidence does not assess complete paralysis of either femoral nerve or reflects paralysis of the quadriceps extensor muscles.    

Based upon the foregoing, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the evidence under review establishes his left and right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy each more closely approximated moderately severe signs and symptoms under DC 8520 throughout the rating period under review.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  However, as the Board finds such evidence persuasively weighs against establishing his left or right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy more closely approximated severe incomplete paralysis, or complete paralysis, under DC 8526 at any time during the rating period under review, there is no reasonable doubt to be resolved and the claims for ratings in excess of 20 percent for the left femoral nerve and, for the right femoral nerve prior to June 28, 2024 (when it was previously increased to 30 percent), must be denied.  See Lynch, 999 F.3d 1391.  As such, entitlement to increased ratings of 40 percent must be granted throughout the rating period under review for the left sciatic nerve, and for the right sciatic nerve prior to June 28, 2024 (when it was previously increased to 40 percent).  

Service Connection

Generally, service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  In certain cases, competent lay evidence may demonstrate the presence of any of these elements.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  Service connection may be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

Certain specifically enumerated "chronic" diseases will be presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within the first year following separation from active duty.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  The presumption for chronic diseases relaxes the evidentiary requirements for establishing entitlement to service connection.  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2012) ("[t]he clear purpose of [§ 3.303(b)] is to relax the requirements of § 3.303(a) for establishing service connection for certain chronic diseases" and only applies to the chronic diseases set forth in § 3.309(a)).  If the evidence is not sufficient to show the disease was chronic at the time of service, then the claim may be established with evidence of a continuity of symptoms after service, which is a distinct and lesser evidentiary burden than the nexus element of the three-part test under Shedden.  Id.; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

VA is to give "due consideration" to "all pertinent medical and lay evidence" in evaluating a claim for disability benefits.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  Thus, there is no categorical rule that medical evidence is required when the determinative issue is either the existence of a current disability or a nexus to service.  See Davidson, 581 F.3d at 1316.  The Board should make explicit findings regarding the competency and, if necessary, credibility of the lay evidence of record.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 257-262 (2020).

Again, the Board must determine whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or if there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim in which case it must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch, 999 F.3d 1391.

Entitlement to service connection for a dental disability, to include missing teeth, and to include for purposes of outpatient treatment, is denied.  

The Veteran contends service connection is warranted for damaged teeth which he attributes to wisdom teeth being removed.  The March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal determined there was no link between his "missing teeth" and active service, and missing teeth "is not considered an actually disabling condition."  

The Veteran denied having severe tooth or gum trouble in a November 1989 Report of Medical History.  A November 1989 Report of Medical Examination assessed him with "acceptable" dental health upon entry into active service.  In June 1992, the Veteran was seen for painful teeth and treated by removal of "impacted 3rd molars x4," teeth #1, 16, 17, and 32.  The Veteran denied having severe tooth or gum trouble in a November 1992 Report of Medical History, and a November 1992 Report of Medical Examination again assessed him with acceptable dental health upon active service separation.  

VAMRs dated October 2004 noted no problems with the Veteran's teeth, and he was assessed to have "good dentition" in December 2004.  However, in March 2005, he was assessed with a "broken tooth."  In January 2006, he endorsed "dental pain due to tooth falling out" and underwent a lower left tooth (#19) extraction that involved a distal cavity.  Later that month, the Veteran had two more teeth extracted and was assessed with an infected socket.  In November 2006, he was noted to have "swollen jaws" and a diet change was recommended (e.g., "no added salt," "soft") along with monitoring meals, labs, blood pressure, and weight.  The Veteran's jaw was reported to be improving in December 2006.  A March 2009 oral/dental screening noted a "few teeth missing," but no pain, swelling, drainage, oral lesion, or suspicious growth.  In January 2018, the Veteran presented complaining of an abscessed right upper tooth for the past two days.  VAMRs dated October 2021 noted that he "has lost multiple teeth in recent years."  

Dental disabilities which may be awarded compensable disability ratings are set forth under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.  These disabilities include chronic osteomyelitis or osteoradionecrosis of the maxilla or mandible, loss of the mandible, nonunion or malunion of the mandible, limited temporomandibular motion, loss of the ramus, loss of the condyloid or coronoid processes, loss of the hard palate, loss of teeth due to the loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible and where the lost masticatory surface cannot be restored by suitable prosthesis, when the bone loss is a result of trauma or disease but not the result of periodontal disease.  38 C.F.R. § 4.150, DCs 9900-9916.  

In the present matter, for purposes of entitlement to an award of compensable dental and oral conditions as set forth under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, the evidence under review does not demonstrate that the Veteran has chronic osteomyelitis or osteoradionecrosis of the maxilla or mandible, loss of the mandible, nonunion or malunion of the mandible, limited temporomandibular motion, loss of the ramus, loss of the condyloid or coronoid processes, loss of the hard palate, loss of teeth due to the loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible and where the lost masticatory surface cannot be restored by suitable prosthesis, when the bone loss is a result of trauma or disease but not the result of periodontal disease.  38 C.F.R. § 4.150, DCs 9900-9916.

Treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal disease are not compensable disabilities and will be considered service connected solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for outpatient dental treatment.  38 U.S.C. § 1712; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.381, 4.150; see Mays v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 302, 306 (1993) (holding that a claim for service connection for a dental condition may also be considered a claim for VA outpatient dental treatment).  

Service connection for the purpose of outpatient dental treatment may be granted for a dental condition of any tooth and/or periodontal tissue shown by the evidence to have been incurred in or aggravated by service so long as the Veteran falls under one of a number of specific classifications.  38 C.F.R. § 3.381(a).  The threshold determination of basic eligibility for dental treatment under 38 C.F.R. § 17.161 is based upon meeting the criteria for any of the ten classes.  For Class II(a), those having a disability adjudicated as resulting from service trauma may be authorized any treatment indicated as reasonably necessary for the correction of such condition or disability.  38 C.F.R. § 17.161(c).  For VA purposes, "service trauma" involves external, sudden-force injury, such as a combat wound to the teeth and jaw; it does not include the intended effects of treatment provided during military service.  See VAOPGCPREC 5-97 (1997); Nielson v. Shinseki, 607 F.3d 802 (Fed. Cir. 2010).   

The Board finds the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit's decision in Nielson is controlling here and precludes granting the Veteran's service connection claim for a dental disability, to include missing teeth, for purposes of outpatient treatment.  607 F.3d 802.  No evidence reflects that he sustained "service trauma," specifically, trauma incurred as a result of sudden-force injury or combat wounds.  Id.  In Nielson, the Court also held that, for purposes of establishing service connection for a dental disability for outpatient treatment purposes, "other service trauma" is limited to "injuries sustained during the performance of military duties."  Id., at 808.  No evidence indicates the Veteran's impacted teeth extractions during active service constituted injuries sustained during the performance of military duties.  Thus, his in-service tooth extractions are excluded from the definition of "other service trauma" and cannot support granting service connection for a dental disability, to include missing teeth, for purposes of VA outpatient treatment.  

Based upon the evidence under review, while it is undisputed the Veteran had multiple teeth extracted during active service, such evidence does not reflect the teeth extractions occurred as a result of sudden-force injury or combat wounds, or constituted injuries sustained during the performance of military duties.  He otherwise does not qualify for basic eligibility for dental treatment under any of the other classes of treatment found in the governing laws and regulations.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.381, 17.161.  Further, he has offered no competent evidence showing a link between the tooth extractions during active service and the subsequent tooth extractions beginning in January 2006, over 13 years after active service discharge.   

Although the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms and events he personally witnessed or took part in, he is not competent to opine as to the etiology of his claimed dental disability.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Such a finding requires specialized medical knowledge and diagnostic testing that is beyond lay capacity.  While the Veteran appears to contend that he suffered trauma from dental treatment during active service, neither the SMRs nor other medical evidence under review reflects such.  

The Board observes the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination and a medical opinion was not secured in connection with this matter.  However, as the evidence under review does not provide an indication that he has a current dental disability, or symptoms, that may be associated with active service, an examination and medical opinion were not warranted.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).       

In conclusion, the Board finds the evidence under review persuasively weighs against showing that service connection for a dental disability is warranted, including for outpatient treatment purposes.  As the evidence is persuasively against the claim, there is no reasonable doubt to be resolved, and the claim must be denied.  See Lynch, 999 F.3d 1391.  

Entitlement to service connection for right thumb sprain is denied.  

The Veteran contends service connection is warranted for a right thumb sprain which he attributes to "combat training" during active service.  The March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal determined there was no present right thumb disability.  

Service medical records (SMRs) dated January 1990 reflect the Veteran presented complaining of right thumb pain which was assessed as a "probable strain."  In August 1990, he returned complaining of spraining his right thumb three weeks prior which was assessed as a "grade II" thumb strain.  The Veteran was seen again in January 1991 endorsing pain over the proximal phalange of right thumb.  He did not indicate ever having a right thumb/hand condition in a November 1992 Report of Medical History, and a November 1992 Report of Medical Examination for the purpose of active service separation did not assess such condition.    

VAMRs dated October 2010 include a detailed motor examination.  The Veteran was assessed with normal (5/5) muscle strength in the right hand fingers and thumb.  Subsequent VAMRs do not report complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right thumb condition. 

A VA examination conducted in December 2022 reported the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis associated with the claimed condition.  The Veteran described spraining his right thumb during basic training "around 1990" and it being casted for two weeks.  He endorsed right thumb pain that had stayed the same since onset, with no treatment.  According to the examination report, the Veteran denied experiencing flare-ups of the hand, fingers, or thumb.  Initial range of motion (ROM) measurements were assessed as normal in both active and passive motion, and there was no objective evidence of pain (including in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing), localized tenderness or pain on palpation, or a gap between the thumb pad and fingers.  Observed repetitive use ROM and findings were the same as for initial ROM.  The examination estimated no additional functional loss after repeated use over time.  Muscle strength was assessed as normal (5/5) with no atrophy.  According to the examination report, the Veteran's right thumb did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks.  As there was "no objective findings to warrant a diagnosis," the examiner offered a negative nexus opinion.  

The Board assigns probative weight to the VA examination report and opinion in this matter.  That is, they are based upon a personal examination of the Veteran and the examiner's competency by way of education, training, and experience in offering medical diagnoses and opinions, and the examination report and opinion are not controverted by the other evidence under review.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1); see McCray, 31 Vet. App. at 257.   

The presence of a current disability is the cornerstone of any service connection claim.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  "Current" means near the time a claim is filed or at any time during its pendency.  See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).  "Disability" refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

In the present matter, other than the Veteran's report during the VA examination of experiencing right thumb pain, the evidence under review is silent as to any pertinent signs or symptoms or, significantly, impairment of earning capacity attributable to a right thumb condition near the time the claim was filed or at any time during its pendency.  Notably, the Veteran did not offer lay evidence from himself or others on his behalf that addressed considerations such as the nature and severity of pertinent signs or symptoms or functional impairment related to a right thumb condition.  Except as otherwise provided by law, a Veteran has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(a). 

Although the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms and events he personally witnessed or took part in, he is not competent to opine as to a diagnosis or the etiology of his claimed right thumb sprain.  See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376.  Such findings require specialized medical knowledge and diagnostic testing that is beyond lay capacity.  While the Veteran contends that he has right thumb pain, without evidence of a present disability that resulted in a functional impairment of earning capacity, service connection is not warranted.   

In conclusion, because there is no evidence under review reflecting functional impairment of earning capacity attributable to a right thumb condition, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against showing the Veteran had a right thumb disability near the time this claim was filed or at any time during its pendency.  As the evidence is persuasively against the claim, there is no reasonable doubt to be resolved.  See Lynch, 999 F.3d 1391.  Thus, the service connection claim for a right thumb condition must be denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

For the rating period under review, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with IVDS prior to June 28, 2024, is remanded.  

On October 28, 2021, the Veteran submitted an original increased rating claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) for lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with IVDS rated 20 percent disabling at the time.  The rating period under review begins one year prior to receipt of the original increased rating claim through issuance of the April 2022 Rating Decision (i.e., April 11, 2022) that was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).  The Board observes that, during the pendency of this appeal, an October 2024 Rating Decision granted an increased rating of 40 percent effective June 28, 2024, and the issue on appeal has been recharacterized accordingly.      

A VA examination conducted in February 2022 reported the Veteran's initial range of motion (ROM) as 45 degrees in forward flexion and 15 degrees each in extension, left/right lateral flexion, and left/right lateral rotation.  After at least three observed repetitions, ROM was reportedly limited to 40 degrees in forward flexion and 10 degrees each in extension, left/right lateral flexion, and left/right lateral rotation.  The examination also estimated his ROM after repeated use over time or during flare-ups as 40 degrees in forward flexion and 10 degrees each in extension, left/right lateral flexion, and left/right lateral rotation.  Notably, although the examination form specifically requested the examiner to "cite and discuss evidence" to support such ROM estimates, no evidence was cited or discussed.  As a result, the VA examination report does not contain a soundly reasoned medical explanation connecting supporting facts/data with the conclusions reached regarding estimated ROM after repeated use over time and during flare-ups and, therefore, the report is inadequate for rating purposes.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

Thus, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by affording the Veteran another VA examination and securing an examination report adequate for rating purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).        

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea which he contends is "secondary" to his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  The March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal determined there was no direct link between his diagnosed sleep apnea and active service, or that his sleep apnea was secondary to his lumbar spine disability.   

A VA examination conducted in September 2021 (report received October 2021) reported a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as of August 2016.  The Veteran described undergoing a "lumbar puncture [...] in April 1991" and being hospitalized three days later "due to not being able to move" and later developing "constant back pain and trouble sleeping and breathing."  He endorsed progressively worsening symptoms such as loud snoring, waking gasping for breath, being observed to stop breathing while asleep, fatigue, and poor sleep quality.  The VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA was proximately due to or the result of his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  As rationale, the VA opinion noted that the conditions "are not medically related" and "though there are many studies to support the correlation between pain and OSA, however, correlation does not always equate to causation."       

However, the VA opinion does not contain a fully articulated and soundly reasoned medical explanation connecting supporting facts/data with the conclusion reached and, therefore, it is inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See McCray, 31 Vet. App. at 257; Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303.  Notably, the opinion does not identify the "evidence-based peer-reviewed medical literature" that reportedly "failed to demonstrate a causal relationship," or any of the "many studies" supporting a "correlation between pain and OSA."  Also, the opinion is based upon a "proximately due to" basis rather than the "but for" analysis articulated in Spicer v. McDonough.  61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  Lastly, the opinion does not address whether the Veteran's OSA is aggravated by his service-connected lumbar spine disability.       

Thus, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by affording the Veteran another VA examination and securing a medical opinion adequate for adjudication purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss which he attributes to noise exposure during active service.  The March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal determined there was no link between his diagnosed bilateral hearing loss disability and active service.  

A VA examination conducted in September 2021 diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  According to the examiner, although noise exposure was conceded based upon the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of "pharmacy specialist," there was no link between his hearing loss and active service given the absence of "complaint/treatment for hearing decrease" in the SMRs or "significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance to separation."  

Thereafter, because the September 2021 VA opinion erroneously referenced a "1974" separation examination (the Veteran was an infant at that time), clarification was requested, and another VA opinion was offered by a different examiner in April 2022.  Based upon a review of the claims file, although noise exposure was again conceded, the examiner determined there was no link between the Veteran's hearing loss and active service given the absence of "complaints of hearing loss during service," "no positive thresholds" at separation, and "the time between service and the date of diagnosis [...] without evidence of audiology treatment in the intervening years."  

However, the absence of in-service evidence of hearing loss does not, as a matter of law, preclude establishing service connection for a hearing loss disability.  See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993).  Otherwise, the opinion rationales do not explain how the evidence supports finding the conceded in-service noise exposure did not cause the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss.  Further, the opinions do not attribute his hearing loss to any other cause.  As a result, the opinion rationales are inadequate as they do not contain fully articulated and soundly reasoned medical explanations connecting supporting facts/data with the conclusions reached.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303; McCray, 31 Vet. App. at 257.  

Thus, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by affording the Veteran another VA examination and securing a medical opinion adequate for adjudication purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for "tinnitus" which he attributes to noise exposure during active service.  The March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal determined there was no evidence the claimed tinnitus exists.  

According to the September 2021 VA examination report, the Veteran did not endorse experiencing recurrent tinnitus "at the time" and "denies recurrent tinnitus."  However, given the nexus opinion has been deemed inadequate for adjudication purposes as to the service connection claim for bilateral hearing loss, and the claims for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus are inextricably intertwined, the abbreviated opinion as to the tinnitus claim must also be deemed inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two or more issues are inextricably intertwined if one claim could have significant impact on the other); Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303.      

Thus, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by affording the Veteran another VA examination and securing a medical opinion adequate for adjudication purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for a cervical spine condition which he attributes to active service.  The March 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal determined there was no link between his diagnosed cervical spine disability and active service, and the disability did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year after discharge.

SMRs dated March 1991 reflect the Veteran presented with complaints of "tingling in fingers of both hands" and neck pain.  At the time, he was assessed with right-sided "torticollis."        

A VA examination conducted in January 2021 diagnosed the Veteran with cervical spine degenerative arthritis and spinal stenosis with bilateral upper extremity neuropathy.  The Veteran reported "his pain started after a PT Run" and "his left arm was completely numb" for a week.  He endorsed worsening symptoms over time.  According to the examiner, because "Veteran's cervical spine degeneration was acute only" during service, there was "no evidence of chronicity of care," and it was "over 13 years after separation" before he sought medical treatment, there was no link to active service.  

However, the VA opinion rationale appears to be based largely, if not exclusively, upon an absence of medical treatment/examination evidence during the Veteran's active service, and without considering his self-reports regarding onset during active service and the persistence or recurrence of pertinent signs or symptoms over time.  Further, the opinion is internally inconsistent in noting "cervical spine degeneration" existed during active service.  As a result, the opinion rationale finding the Veteran's cervical spine condition was "acute only" during active service is inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303.  A June 2021 VA examination (report received July 2021) also noted the Veteran endorsed an onset of neck pain starting "around 1990," though a nexus opinion was not offered.               

Thus, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by affording the Veteran another VA examination and securing a medical opinion adequate for adjudication purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to a schedular TDIU prior to November 9, 2022, is remanded.  

In April 2022, the Veteran submitted a Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (VA Form 21-8940) seeking a TDIU due to his "neck" and service-connected "back" conditions.  He reported last working full time in 2005 "but the neck and back pain made it difficult to work."  

Thereafter, a June 2022 Rating Decision denied entitlement to a schedular TDIU.  In November 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 seeking Board review of the June 2022 Rating Decision and electing the Hearing docket.  That matter remains pending (Docket # H221109-298760) on the Hearing docket and will be the subject of a separate Board decision.  Nevertheless, the issue of entitlement to a schedular TDIU prior to November 9, 2022, has been raised by the Veteran and the evidence under review as part of his increased rating claims for the lumbar spine and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy disabilities on appeal here.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  As the separate appeal streams contain different evidentiary records and rating periods, entitlement to a schedular TDIU under Rice is also properly before the Board here.  

The Board observes that, during the pendency of this appeal, an October 2024 Rating Decision granted the Veteran a schedular TDIU effective November 9, 2022.  The issue on appeal has been recharacterized accordingly.        

According to the Veteran's attorney, the claim for a schedular TDIU "was raised as part of the [Veteran's] increased rating claims, which date back to October 28, 2021."  He contends a schedular TDIU is warranted "for the entire appeal period, dating back to October 28, 2021," and a vocational opinion was submitted outside of an applicable evidentiary window.  

However, the Veteran's claim for a schedular TDIU prior to November 9, 2022, is inextricably intertwined with the increased rating claim for his lumbar spine, as well as the service connection claims for sleep apnea, bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and the cervical spine, which are being remanded herein to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  See Harris, 1 Vet. App. at 183 (two or more issues are inextricably intertwined if one claim could have significant impact on the other).  As a result, the issue of entitlement to a schedular TDIU prior to November 9, 2022, must also be remanded pending adjudication of the inextricably intertwined issues.         

Accordingly, these matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an examiner possessing the necessary expertise to fully assess and offer a retrospective opinion regarding the nature and severity of his lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with IVDS during the rating period under review (i.e., October 28, 2020, to April 11, 2022).  The claims file including this Board decision must be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

The examiner must elicit a full history from the Veteran as to such considerations as the onset, nature, and progression of any pertinent signs and symptoms and functional limitations, and such history must be fully reported.  Any indicted studies must be performed.  

Based upon review of all pertinent evidence in the claims file, the Veteran's self-reports during the examination, and the examination results, the examiner must offer a retrospective opinion providing a full description of his lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with IVDS during the rating period under review, including all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating his disability under the applicable rating criteria, as well as occupational limitations.  

In offering the above opinion, full ROM testing must be performed where possible.  The lumbar spine must be tested for pain in both active and passive motion, and in and in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing.  The point(s) at which ROM first produces pain must be noted.  If unable to conduct the required testing, the examiner must clearly explain why.

The examiner must identify the nature, severity, frequency, duration, precipitating factors, and alleviating factors of any flare-ups during the rating period under review.  

The examiner is further reminded that should any additional functional impairment be noted or reported by the Veteran as occurring during flare-ups, after repeated use (including over time), and/or as a result of pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability or incoordination on movement, the examiner must estimate the additional functional loss in degrees of ROM based upon all procurable evidence.  If unable to provide the required findings/estimates, the examiner must clearly explain why.

2.  Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations with an examiner(s) possessing the necessary expertise to fully assess and render opinions regarding the nature, severity, and likely etiology of his claimed sleep apnea and cervical spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis conditions.  The claims file including this Board decision must be made available to the examiner(s) for review in conjunction with the examinations.  

The examiner must elicit a full history from the Veteran as to such considerations as relevant active service events or injuries, as well as the onset and progression of pertinent signs or symptoms including any persistence or recurrence since active service, and such history must be fully reported.  Any indicated studies must be conducted.

Based upon review of all pertinent evidence in the claims file, a full history elicited from the Veteran, and the examination results, the examiner must offer an opinion as to:

(a.)  Whether it is AT LEAST AS LIKELY AS NOT (i.e., at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) a sleep apnea condition manifested during active service or, for any chronic disease under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), within one year after separation; OR is due to or etiologically associated with active service; OR is due to or aggravated by a service-connected disability (e.g., lumbar spine).  Why or why not?  

(b.)  Whether it is AT LEAST AS LIKELY AS NOT (i.e., at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) a cervical spine condition manifested during active service or, for any chronic disease under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), within one year after separation; OR is otherwise due to or etiologically associated with active service.  Why or why not?  

The examiner is advised that a mere lack of documentary evidence of record, without more, is an insufficient basis to support a negative nexus opinion.  The Veteran's self-reports as to relevant active service injuries or events, as well as the onset and any persistence or recurrence of pertinent signs or symptoms must be fully considered and addressed.

All opinions expressed must be fully articulated and contain clear conclusions with references to supporting data (i.e., pertinent evidence of record and, as warranted, medical literature) and soundly reasoned medical explanations connecting the two.  

3.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an examiner possessing the necessary expertise to fully assess and offer an opinion regarding the nature, severity, and likely etiology of his claimed bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus conditions.  The claims file including this Board decision must be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

The examiner must elicit a full history from the Veteran as to such considerations as relevant active service events or injuries, as well as the onset and progression of pertinent signs or symptoms including any persistence or recurrence since active service, and such history must be fully reported.  Any indicated studies must be conducted.

Based upon review of all pertinent evidence in the claims file, a full history elicited from the Veteran, and the examination results, the examiner must offer an opinion as to whether it is AT LEAST AS LIKELY AS NOT (i.e., at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) left and/or right ear hearing loss and/or recurrent tinnitus manifested during active service or within one year after separation; OR is otherwise due to or etiologically associated with active service.  Why or why not?  

The examiner must also comment on the likelihood that loud noises experienced resulted in damage to auditory hair cells even though findings may or may not suggest a recovered temporary threshold shift in service.  If the examiner finds auditory hair cell damage to be a likely result of the military noise exposure, please comment on the likelihood that such damaged hair cells would result in a greater permanent hearing loss than otherwise would be manifest.

The examiner must discuss medically known or theoretical causes of hearing loss and describe how hearing loss resulting from noise exposure generally presents or develops in most cases, as distinguished from how hearing loss develops from other causes, in determining the likelihood that current hearing loss was caused by in-service noise exposure as opposed to some other cause.

The examiner is advised that a mere lack of documentary evidence of record, without more, is an insufficient basis to support a negative nexus opinion.  The Veteran's self-reports as to relevant active service injuries or events, as well as the onset and any persistence or recurrence of pertinent signs or symptoms must be fully considered and addressed.

All opinions expressed must be fully articulated and contain clear conclusions with references to supporting data (i.e., pertinent evidence of record and, as warranted, medical literature) and soundly reasoned medical explanations connecting the two.  

4.  After ensuring compliance with the foregoing directives, adjudicate the claims on appeal including entitlement to a schedular TDIU prior to November 9, 2022.  

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Worsham, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.