Citation Nr: A25032211
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240313-424896
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for shortness of breath also claimed as chronic cough with severe sputum production is granted.

Service connection for a heart condition is denied.

Service connection for a skin condition to include fungal infection is denied.

Service connection for a vision condition, to include as claimed as watery eyes, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression and anxiety condition, to include as due to military sexual trauma, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's respiratory disability, to include a chronic cough, is related to active service.

2. The competent and probative evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current heart disability began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The competent and probative evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current skin condition began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

4. The Veteran's current eye condition, to include watery eyes, is related to active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a respiratory condition, to include a chronic cough, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a heart disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a skin condition are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for an eye condition are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1988 to February 1992.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 9, 2024 rating decision addressing a chronic cough, a January 4, 2024 rating decision addressing a heart disability, an October 18, 2023 rating decision addressing the skin condition, stomach condition, and eye condition, and finally a July 7, 2023 rating decision, from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) identifying the rating decisions noted above and elected the Board's Direct Review docket.

Based upon the selection of the Direct Review, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of January 9, 2024 concerning the chronic cough, January 4, 2024 for the heart disability, October 18, 2023 concerning the skin condition, stomach condition, and eye condition, and July 7, 2023 concerning the psychiatric disability-the date of the respective rating decisions on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after these dates, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

	***	

In a July 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum shows that due to the Veteran's military occupational specialty as a field artilleryman he was exposed to petroleum oil and lubricants from military vehicles. The Veteran was found to be also tasked to repaint vehicles with chemical agent resisting coating paint (CARC). Therefore, the Veteran participated in a TERA. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) in the claims file are illegible. Unfortunately, VA has been unsuccessful in its attempts to retrieve legible copies of the Veteran's STRs. In December 2022 and March 2023, VA mailed letters to the Veteran asking him to submit any STRs or documents he had in his possession. The Veteran did response and provided a buddy statement and noted that he did not possess any other documentation. In cases such as this where STRs are unavailable through no fault of the Veteran, there is a heightened duty to assist and thoroughly explain reasons and bases for the decision. O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365, 367 (1991).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. Entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath also claimed as chronic cough with severe sputum production

The Veteran contends that he has a disability manifested by shortness of breath with a chronic cough and sputum. The Veteran reported that during active service he was exposure to chemicals and fumes while painting military vehicles, which resulted in his cough.

As noted above, the Veteran's service treatment records are unavailable for review. 

An October 2023 VA medical opinion report shows that the VA examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed cough and respiratory condition was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner noted that the place of exposure was in Germany described as painting vehicles. The VA examiner also cited to medical literature that noted exposure to certain TERA resulted in problems with the respiratory system.  

A January 2024 VA addendum opinion report shows that the previous VA examiner gave a positive TERA opinion, however, the January 2024 examiner did not find a current diagnosis for any respiratory condition, the examiner reviewed the entire record to include the October 2023 VA opinion, and determined that the Veteran did not have a respiratory disability. The VA examiner noted that Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT) testing and test x-rays showed no objective evidence of a respiratory condition. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's shortness of breath was most likely related to his heart issues and not due to his claimed respiratory disability. 

In reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory condition to include a cough is warranted.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, reasonable doubt shall be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, that doubt will be resolved in the favor of the claimant. Reasonable doubt is doubt which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim. An accurate determination of etiology is not a condition precedent to granting service connection, nor is definite etiology or obvious etiology. Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518 (1996). Further, a veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail. Entitlement need not be established beyond a reasonable doubt, by clear and convincing evidence, nor by a preponderance of the evidence. Indeed, when the evidence is in relative balance, the law dictates that the appellant prevails.

There is conflicting medical evidence as to whether the Veteran's has a current respiratory condition and whether such respiratory condition is related to active service TERA. Here, in both respects, the Board concludes that the relevant and probative evidence in this case is in approximate balance. The Board finds that no medical opinion is more probative than another. Indeed, the October 2023 VA medical opinion shows that the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a chronic cough and after a review of the record to include medication literature, and determined the cough was at least as likely as not related to his TERA. In contrast, the January 2024 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's did not have a current disability and even if one was diagnosed, the condition would not be related to any TERA. Each medical opinion is supported by a reasoned analysis of medical facts and citations to medical literature. Neives-Rodriguuez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301-04 (2008). This amounts to an approximate balance of the competent medical evidence.

In sum, the Board finds that the medical opinions and diagnoses in this case are nearly equal as to whether the Veteran's respiratory condition noted as a cough was proximately due to his conceded TERA. As such, service connection for a respiratory condition is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a heart condition

The Veteran asserted on his claim for entitlement to service connection filed in June 2022, that during active service he felt he was fatigued. He reported that he was seen during active service but never received any follow up treatments.

A May 2022 VA treatment records noted that the Veteran had a pacemaker implanted 12 years prior. 

A December 2022 VA heart condition disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) showed that the Veteran was diagnosed with cardiomyopathy with a pacemaker. Additionally, a December 2023 VA DBQ report shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with congestive heart failure, heart bloc, and cardiomyopathy. This competent evidence supports the first element of service connection. As noted above, the Veteran had a TERA in service. Next, the Board will turn to the nexus element of service connection. 

The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's pacemaker was implanted in 2010 and the Veteran self-reported this occurred after he collapsed at work in 2010. The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not the heart condition was related to or onset during active service. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran served in the US Army from October 1988 to February 1992. After reviewing medical records and performing physical exam it is less likely than not the Veteran's cardiomyopathy began in service. The VA examiner also noted that there were no medical records while in service or shortly after service showing treatment for a heart condition. 

The December 2023 VA DBQ report also indicates Veteran reported that the condition onset in August 2010. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's participation in TERA was conceded, specifically in his duties as a field artilleryman to include petroleum, oils and lubricants, and paint containing CARC. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's service treatment records showed no reports or treatments for any heart conditions. Post-service VA treatment records shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with an atrioventricular block, 1st degree; abnormal EKG, chest pain, dizziness, fatigue, hyperlipidemia, murmurs, palpitations and shortness of breath. The VA examiner noted a review of the exposure information (provided at https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/). The VA examiner determined that the Veteran had the risk factors outside of military service to include high blood pressure and smoking. The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the heart condition was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner noted that there was no medical or scientific evidence that showed a relationship between the development of the claimed condition of cardiomyopathy to the TERA. The VA examiner remarked that the list of possible health conditions suffered as a result of CARC exposure did not include heart conditions. The VA examiner noted that high blood pressure and smoking which were both present for the Veteran, far outweighed factors identified in the TERA. In support of the opinion, the VA examiner cited medical literature.

The Board finds that the most probative evidence regarding whether the Veteran's heart condition is directly related to active service to include TERA consists of the November 2022 and December 2023 VA examination reports. The November 2022 VA examiner provided an opinion as to the direct theory of entitlement and the December 2023 VA examiner determined that heart condition was not related to the established TERA. This competent and probative evidence weights against the claim. The Board finds that the VA examiners' opinions are probative because they are based on an accurate medical history for the Veteran and provide an explanation that contains clear conclusions and are supported by medical literature. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Thus, the competent and probative evidence is persuasively against the nexus element of service connection.

Because the Veteran is a lay person, he does not have the competence to give a probative opinion concerning the etiology of the heat condition as this is a complex matter that involves the body's cardiovascular system and review of diagnostic testing. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). As such, the Veteran's statements relating a current heart condition to active service or a TERA are not competent as the record does not reflect that he has the education, experience ore training to provide an etiology opinion in this complex matter. Therefore, as Veteran's statements in this regard are not competent, they lack weight. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011). For the reasons stated above, the Board finds the VA medical professionals' opinions persuasive and they weigh against this claim and, in fact, are determinative of the ultimate disposition. See King v. Shinseki, 700 F.3d 1339, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (indicating lay evidence must demonstrate some competence and affirming the Court's conclusion that the Board did not improperly discount the weight of a lay opinion in finding a medical expert's opinion more probative on the issue of medical causation). 

In sum, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against entitlement to a compensable rating for a heart condition. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

3. Entitlement to service connection for a skin condition to include fungal infection

The Veteran contends in his June 2023 claim for entitlement to service connected that his skin condition is related to his in-service TERA 

A June 2022 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran first sought treatment for a skin lesion and toe fungus condition.

An October 2023 VA DBQ medical opinion report shows that the Veteran reported skin condition identified as onychomycosis and tinea unguium were related to his TERA. The Veteran's reported exposure activities were noted as substances such as CARC paint, oils, lubricants, and petroleum. After a review of the evidence of record, the VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all tfoxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner's rationale noted that there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the skin condition(s) diagnosed and the TERA. The medical literature reviewed and cited did not show any long-term effects noted regarding fungal infections or chronic urticaria.

The Board finds that the most probative evidence regarding whether the Veteran's skin disability is directly related to active service to include TERA consists of the October 2023 VA examination report. The October 2023 VA examiner provided an opinion that the skin conditions of onychomycosis and tinea unguium were not related to in-service TERA. This competent evidence weights against the claim. The VA examiner's opinion is probative because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and medical literature. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Thus, service connection for a skin condition to include as due to TERA, is denied.

Because the Veteran is a lay person, he does not have the competence to give a probative opinion concerning the etiology a complex matter, such as the skin disability at issue here. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). As such, the Veteran's statements of relating a skin condition are not competent as the record does not reflect that he is competent to provide an etiology opinion regarding this medically complex that involves chemical exposure to the skin. Therefore, as the Veteran's statements in this regard are not competent, they lack weight. For the reasons stated above, the Board finds the VA medical professional opinions to be persuasively and they weigh against this claim. They are more probative and, in fact, determinative of the ultimate disposition. See King v. Shinseki, 700 F.3d 1339, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (indicating lay evidence must demonstrate some competence and affirming the Court's conclusion that the Board did not improperly discount the weight of a lay opinion in finding a medical expert's opinion more probative on the issue of medical causation).

In sum, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against entitlement to service connection for a skin condition. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

4. Entitlement to service connection for a vision condition claimed as watery eyes

The Veteran contends in his June 2023 claim for entitlement to service connection that his watery eyes was caused by his in-service TERA.

An August 2023 VA DBQ showed that the VA examiner reviewed the exposure information provided at https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures. The VA examiner also reviewed the Other Deployment and Non-Deployment Related Exposures that were described as painting vehicles. The VA examiner opined that the watery eyes condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. The VA examiner rationale noted that there were many risk factors such as allergy and environmental factors that far outweigh the factor identified in the TERA for watery and puffy eyes.

Subsequently, an October 2023 VA examination report concerning conditions of the ears, nose, and throat, shows that the Veteran reported a watery eyes condition. The Veteran reported that he first started experiencing watery eyes in 1990 when he was in Europe and had to paint vehicles. He reported having problems with blurred vision, watery eyes, some visual changes. He reported that he now continued to have issues with watery eyes three to four times per week. The Veteran reported that this condition interfered with his job in that he has had to call off work a couple of times in the past but not with his new job. Then, the VA examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the watery eye condition was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner cited to medical literature showing a connection between CARC exposure and eye conditions, but not sinusitis/rhinitis related. 

In reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a watery eye condition is warranted. Indeed, as noted above, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, reasonable doubt shall be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, that doubt will be resolved in the favor of the claimant. Reasonable doubt is doubt which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim. An accurate determination of etiology is not a condition precedent to granting service connection, nor is definite etiology or obvious etiology. Further, a veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail. 

The record contains conflicting medical evidence as to whether the Veteran's current eye condition is related to his active service TERA. Here, in both respects, the Board concludes that the relevant and probative evidence in this case is in approximate balance. The Board finds no medical opinion is more probative than another. The October 2023 VA DBQ shows that the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with an eye condition noted as watery eyes and after a review of the record to include medical literature the eye condition was at least as likely as not related to his in-service TERA. In contrast, the August 2023 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's eye condition was not related to any TERA. Each medical opinion is supported by a reasoned analysis of medical facts and citations to medical literature. Neives-Rodriguuez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301-04 (2008). This amounts the competent medical evidence being nearly equal.

In sum, the Board finds that the medical opinions and diagnoses in this case are at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's eye condition noted as a cough was proximately due to his conceded TERA. As such, service connection for an eye condition, to include watery eyes, is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends in his June 2023 claim for entitlement to service connection that his stomach condition was caused by his in-service TERA.

After a review of the evidence of record that Board finds that a pre-decisional error was committed by not providing the Veteran with an adequate VA medical opinion concerning the etiology of the diagnosed stomach condition. As such, a remand is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

A June 2015 private treatment records shows that the Veteran was not assessed with nor did he report diarrhea.

A July 2021 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran was assessed as negative for nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea as part of a review of systems during a primary care visit. An August 2022 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran reported no diarrhea. Then, an April 2023 VA treatment record, another primary care visit, shows that the Veteran reported diarrhea since March 2023. 

An October 2023 VA medical opinion report shows that the Veteran reported gastrointestinal pain and painful flatulence also reported as gas pains. The Veteran reported that this condition started in 1990 while stationed in Germany. He reported being on bed rest for three days at that time. For treatment, the Veteran reported that he had tried using TUMS, Alka-Seltzer, and other over-the-counter products that were not effective. Regarding work, the Veteran reported that had days when he felt unwell and had to rest. Regarding his social life he reported that he was unable to socialize, such as going out to restaurants. The VA examiner also reported that for the Veteran's claim for gas pain and diarrhea due to TERA, there was no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs and or symptoms to support a diagnosis. 

An October 2023 VA intestinal conditions DBQ shows that the Veteran reported bowel disturbances to include gas pain and diarrhea beginning in 1990. The Veteran currently reported diarrhea 20 to 30 days per year. The Veteran tried using Imodium without much help but thinks he took fiber that may have been somewhat beneficial. Regarding hs employment, the reported his job is affected as he would need to leave to use the rest room. The VA examiner opined that the for the claimed condition of chronic diarrhea and painful flatulence due to exposure to PFAS, no diagnosis of these disabilities were present. 

The Board finds that the VA examinations of record are inadequate and therefore a pre-decisional error has been committed and a remand is required for correction. The VA examiners determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of any stomach conditions to include diarrhea. However, as noted above the Veteran was indeed assessed diarrhea in 2023 during a primary care visit. While the VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of diarrhea, the requirement for service connection that there be a current disability is satisfied when the disability is shown at the time of the claim or during the pendency of the claim, even though the disability subsequently resolves. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007). As the 2023 VA treatment record showed diarrhea was assessed which meets that criterion for a current disability proximate to the filing of the claim that began this appeal. Additionally, the record shows that the stomach condition has had functional impact, to include taking days to rest. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (holding that "disability" refers to functional impairment of earning capacity).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability to include PTSD, depression and anxiety condition, to include as due to military sexual trauma, is remanded.

After a review of the evidence of record that Board finds that a pre-decisional was committed by not providing the Veteran with an adequate VA medical opinion concerning the etiology of the diagnosed psychiatric disabilities. As such, a remand is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran on his June 2022 application for service connection for a psychiatric disability reported that his PTSD was due to fear of hostile military or terrorist forces.

A July 2022 statement in support of a claim PTSD due to a personal assault shows that the Veteran reported being bullied and harassed while stationed in Germany. He also reported almost being run over by a military vehicle. Regarding the incidents of harassments, he reported that his belongings were taken, his bed was unmade for inspections, and racial remarks were made at him. 

A November 2022 VA mental health DBQ shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with a PTSD. After a review of the evidence of record, the VA examiner determined that it was less likely than not that the psychiatric disability was related to active serve. The VA examiner's rationale was based first, that medical records did not provide any documentation that the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD during service or even was experiencing symptoms of said disorder. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported having trouble in his battalion that resulted in job performance issues. However, the VA examiner noted that the record showed that the in-service performance evaluations that did not indicate this assertion. Specifically, a June 1991 documented a recommendation for an award in states it was for meritorious service while assigned as an ammunition handler specialist. The citation noted that the Veteran's "technical abilities, teamwork and dedication have made this battalion the very best." Furthermore, the VA medical records did not provide any documentation subsequent to military service that indicated treatment and/or diagnosis of PTSD. Screening for PTSD in October 2020 noted that the Veteran endorsed having experienced that were unusually or especially frightening, horrible or traumatic that contributed to symptoms of hypervigilance. The VA examiner also noted that Veteran did not endorse other symptoms and therefore resulted in a negative screening. 

A January 2023 lay statement submitted by one the Veteran's fellow service member and former spouse. This servicemember reported that she knew him during active service. She also reported visiting her ex-husband during active service and witnessing the Veteran's being harassed by other service members. 

A May 2023 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran sought initial psychiatric care with VA. The Veteran reported he had been paranoid and had to talk to someone. The Veteran reported an incident after work where he believed a motorcycle was following him home, which caused him to buy a bullet proof vest and gun. He also reported being exposed to server hazing while in the military. 

A June 2023 VA medical opinion DBQ shows that the VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that PTSD was related to or onset during active service. The VA examiner review the updated lay statements submitted on behalf of the Veteran. The VA examiner noted that a review of the record showed positive feedback and being seen as a strong asset while the Veteran was on active duty. No indications of the claimed MST was noted in the service treatment records and military personnel record. The VA examiner also noted that the Veteran showed negative standard screeners for PTSD well after discharge from the service. The VA examiner noted inconsistencies in October 2019 when the Veteran reported no symptoms of depression or anxiety however shortly after when Veteran screening for PTSD, he endorsed having experiences that were unusually or especially frightening, horrible or traumatic that contributed to symptoms of hypervigilance. The VA examiner remarked that there was no evidence to show consistency with an MST.

A June 2023 VA treatment record contains diagnostic impressions based on DSM-5 reflecting anxiety and a depressive disorder. 

Here, while VA examination reports of record determined that the Veteran's PTSD was not related to active service, they did not provided etiologies of his other diagnosed psychiatric disabilities. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran must be afforded another VA mental disorders examination that considers all psychiatric diagnosis of record, to include unspecified anxiety disorder and depression. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).

These matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA psychiatric examination and obtain a medical opinion from a qualified mental health clinician for the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder. The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion so they may become familiar with the Veteran's relevant medical history. After a review of the claims file, to include the prior examination report, the examiner must address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosis of PTSD, anxiety, and depression is attributable to his active service to include incidents described by the Veteran (harassment and military sexual trauma)? Please provide a medical nexus opinion for each mental health disorder.

The examiner is asked to provide specific evidence of record to support his conclusions, such as references from this Veteran's relevant medical history and/or medical literature.

A comprehensive rationale for all opinions is to be provided and must not be based on the lack of an in-service record of the claimed disability. All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical evidence, should be considered. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's claimed stomach condition to include diarrhea. The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion so they may become familiar with the Veteran's relevant medical history. After a review of the claims file, to include the prior examination report, the examiner must address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosis of diarrhea is attributable to his active service to include by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran?

The examiner is asked to provide specific evidence of record to support their conclusions, such as references from this Veteran's relevant medical history and/or medical literature.

A comprehensive rationale for all opinions is to be provided and must not be based on the lack of an in-service record of the claimed disability. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical evidence, should be considered. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Dworkin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.