Citation Nr: A25032452
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240207-414042
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Special monthly compensation (SMC) based on housebound status is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran served on active duty from April 1978 to August 1991; she is 100 percent disabled due to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) effective March 2015. 

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not render her housebound in-fact.

3. The TDIU is not based on a single, service-connected disability but rather considered migraine headaches, asthma, and sinusitis/rhinitis, as well as additional service connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC based on housebound status have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

This decision has been written under the guidelines of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In December 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim for a TDIU. In January 2023, the Veteran requested a Higher-Level Review (HLR). In April 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 decision, and granted TDIU.  

In February 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board via a VA Form 10182 and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. With the February 2024 VA Form 10182, she submitted correspondence that summarized her argument on appeal. Although the original claim was for TDIU, she asserted that once TDIU was granted, she became statutorily eligible for SMC based on the housebound rate, which the AOJ had not considered. 

Notably, the Veterans Claims Court has held that SMC is an ancillary benefit the Board may address in the first instance when reasonably raised by the record, regardless of whether a formal claim has been filed. Payne v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 373 (2019). Therefore, the Board finds that the claim for SMC based on housebound status is properly before the Board. As such, the appeal has been recharacterized as one for entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate.

Turning to the relevant laws and regulations, SMC at the housebound rate is payable where a veteran has a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent and, (1) has additional service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems; or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

VA's duty to maximize a claimant's benefits includes consideration of whether the disabilities establish entitlement to SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s). See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011). That statute provides for additional compensation if the Veteran is in receipt of a 100 percent rating and has additional disabilities ratable at 60 percent or higher.

The Court held in Buie and in Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008) that "section 1114(s) does not limit "a service-connected disability rated as total" to only a schedular rating of 100%, and the Secretary's current regulation permits a TDIU rating based on a single disability to satisfy the statutory requirement of a total rating." 

Thus, if there is a single service-connected disability that causes unemployability and disabilities ratable at 60 percent or greater that are "separate and distinct from the disability upon which TDIU is based" and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems, SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1) is warranted.

Otherwise, to qualify for housebound status, the veteran must have a disability rated at 100 percent and a factual determination that the veteran is permanently housebound because of service-connected disabilities. Notably, the Veteran has not argued that she is in-fact permanently housebound, but rather asserts that she is entitled to SMC on a statutory basis. See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1). Thus, the threshold question is whether TDIU was based on a single service-connected disability. 

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran is service connected for migraine headaches at 50 percent, status/post-operative hysterectomy at 30 percent, asthma at 30 percent, allergic sinusitis with allergic rhinitis at 30 percent, steroid-induced diabetes mellitus at 20 percent, status/post right knee medial and lateral meniscectomy at 10 percent, left knee chondromalacia patella at 10 percent, and residuals of a fracture to the right ring finger at 0 percent. The combined rating is 90 percent. 

The Veteran last worked in March 2015. Prior to that, she worked for a government agency primarily engaged in administrative or office duties. The nonservice-connected disorders which cannot be considered include chronic congestive heart failure, acute systolic heart failure, breast cancer, colon polyp, obstructive sleep apnea, foot pain, follicular cysts, hammer toe, dermatitis, degeneration of lateral meniscus, upper gastrointestinal bleed, low back pain, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and obesity.

A July 2015 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's migraines caused nausea, photophobia, and sensitivity to noise, and she would not be able to work with these headaches as it required her to go to a dark, quiet room and lie down. As a result, the Veteran could not work for 1 to 2 days per episode. The examiner also noted that the Veteran experienced frequent pain and pressure in her forehead above her eyes when she was having an exacerbation of allergic rhinitis as often as 2 to 3 days per week. 

The July 2015 respiratory and sinusitis/rhinitis examiner noted that the Veteran's employability was limited in that she needed to work indoors due to allergies. The same examiner found that diabetes did not impact the Veteran's ability to work. A June 2018 examiner noted that the Veteran could not work during periods of incapacitating headaches.

In a May 2022 statement, the Veteran's spouse related that, due to asthma, the Veteran had problems climbing stairs, walking short distances in hot or cold areas, it reduced her ability to perform routine tasks, and that she needed a handicap placard and used a cane to stabilize walking. He further noted that asthma affected the Veteran's ability to fall asleep and remain asleep through the night. He remarked that she often had to stop and rest when attempting household tasks and that the steroids used for treatment caused obesity and affected her memory. 

As to diabetes, her spouse observed that when the Veteran's blood sugar dropped, she became incapacitated which occurred about twice per year and that allergies caused her to constantly rub her eyes, violently sneeze, regurgitate mucus, have a runny nose, and headaches that occasionally caused the need to lie down and not be able to function or focus.

Further, a June 2022 private vocational consultant noted the Veteran's report of having at least 6 non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis monthly resulting in headaches, mucus discharge, pain, crusting, and sometimes a bloody nose, sinus pressure 4-6 times monthly, and mild asthma attacks that sometimes occurred while she was sleeping and she awakened with an incapacitating migraine headache. The consultant indicated migraines would result in 48 to 72 days absent from work annually based on the frequency and debilitating effects. The consultant noted that such absenteeism would result in the inability to maintain competitive employment. The consultant noted that asthma attacks would also cause absences from employment. 

A July 2022 VA examiner reported that the Veteran's migraines occurred 4 to 6 times monthly lasting between six hours to a full-day, and that she would be unable to perform administrative work duties during these periods.

In April 2023, the AOJ granted a TDIU. The AOJ found that the Veteran was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of multiple service-connected disabilities, including migraine headaches, asthma, diabetes, and sinusitis with rhinitis, as well as the "other service-connected disabilities" (as noted, this includes status/post-operative hysterectomy, status/post right knee disability, left knee chondromalacia patella, and residuals of right ring finger fracture), and established an effective date of March 12, 2015, the day following the date she last worked.

Based on a review of the evidence, the Veteran does not meet the criteria for SMC by reason of being housebound. Specifically, the evidence does not show and she does not assert that she is permanently confined to her place of residence or immediate premises due to service-connected disabilities nor is she institutionalized, nor has she claimed to be housebound in-fact. Therefore, SMC on this basis is not warranted.

The Veteran's primary contention that she is entitled to SMC housebound because she is 100 percent disabled based on TDIU due only to migraine headaches and has additional disabilities that are independently ratable at 60 percent or more. While a TDIU can satisfy the total rating requirement, the evidence does not show that the TDIU was based solely on a single, service-connected disability. 

Rather, the evidence reflects that the TDIU was based on migraine headaches as well as the impact of service-connected asthma and allergic rhinitis/sinusitis. To that end, the private consultant identified migraine headaches as resulting in absenteeism to a level that would prohibit competitive employment but also included asthma attacks as resulting in absenteeism. In addition, the consultant noted that the Veteran experienced 6 non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis monthly.

Further, the lay evidence indicates that service-connected asthma resulted in problems with climbing stairs, walking, performing routine household tasks, and interfered with sleep. Thus, the evidence does not support a finding that migraine headaches alone were the basis of the grant of TDIU.

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the Veteran's and her spouse's lay statements regarding the impact of her service-connected disabilities on her daily activities and abilities to maintain employment, as well as the evidence provided by the medical personnel who examined her during the current appeal and rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. 

Based on the above, SMC at the housebound rate is not warranted. To this end, the Veteran has independent disabilities rated at 60 percent or more; however, TDIU was not predicated upon a single, service-connected disability. As such, the appeal is denied.

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, for the Board's consideration. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Ferguson, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.