Citation Nr: A25032170
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240127-411751
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than August 10, 2022, for the grant of service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with emphysema, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1984 to June 1987 and from November 1990 to May 1991.  The Veteran had service in Southwest Asia.   

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the July 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  

In January 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the claim decision on appeal based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  In that rating determination, the AOJ granted service connection for COPD with emphysema under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), effective August 10, 2022.

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than August 10, 2022, for the grant of service connection for COPD with emphysema is remanded.

The Veteran seeks an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, because he contends that he has been pursuing the claim for a respiratory disorder prior to August 2022.  See January 2024 notice of disagreement.  He also asserted that the requirements for service connection were met without the PACT Act presumptions.  

This matter is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2023 rating decision on appeal. Specifically, the AOJ did not obtain an adequate nexus opinion regarding whether the Veteran's COPD with emphysema onset in service or was otherwise related to service, exclusive of presumptive service connection under the PACT Act.

In general, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, or a claim reopened after final disallowance, will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a veteran can preserve the effective date by continuously pursuing a claim or issue.  This is accomplished by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision as specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (c).

Here, the Veteran's claim for service connection was pending prior to the effective date of the PACT Act because he filed a July 2022 HLR request.  In addition, the evidence raised the possibility that the Veteran has continuously pursued the claim for a lung condition from May 5, 2021, the date he submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ because he timely submitted requests for HLR in September 2021 and July 2022.

As the Veteran's claim was pending prior to the enactment of the PACT Act, the question for the Board is the date entitlement arose.  In this regard, the Board must consider other theories of entitlement, separate from the presumptive service connection already granted under the PACT Act.  

The Veteran asserted that his current respiratory disorder began during, or is related to, military service.  See December 2021 statement.  He also asserted that his respiratory disorder was caused by in-service environmental exposures including oil well fires, fuel, exhaust fumes, burning military equipment, daily sandstorms, chemicals on base, and chemical weapons.  See May 2021 claim; December 2021 statement. In the December 2021 statement, the Veteran asserted that he had no "breathing issues" until he returned from Desert Storm. 

In the August 1984 enlistment examination, there was no abnormality of the lungs and chest.  In the August 1984 report of medical history, the Veteran denied having had asthma, shortness of breath, chronic cough, and pain or pressure in chest.  In November 1984, the Veteran complained of productive and constant cough for one week, as well as difficulty breathing and shortness of breath.  Chest sounds were normal, and an assessment was deferred.  In February 1986, the Veteran reported a 3 week history of nonproductive and hacking cough.  Chest X-ray revealed no significant abnormality.  An April 1986 pulmonary function test (PFT) noted no abnormality.  X-rays of the chest showed normal mediastinal and pulmonary vessels, and clear lungs.  In the April 1987 expiration of term of service (ETS) examination, there were no abnormalities of the lung and chest.  The April 1987 chest X-rays were negative.  The Veteran endorsed having had asthma, and shortness of breath in the April 1987 Report of Medical History (RMH).  

In a November 1990 periodic examination, there were no abnormality of the lung and chest and the Veteran was deemed 'medically qualified' for service. In the November 1990 RMH, the Veteran reported having had asthma, shortness of breath and chronic cough.  The notes show a pre-service or childhood history of asthma, with 'no trouble' for years, and 'chronic smoker cough.'  

After separation from service, the Veteran was seen for acute upper respiratory infection lasting four weeks in November 2008.  The November 2008 chest imaging showed no evidence of acute intrathoracic process.  In February 2010 a history of extrinsic asthma and a prior diagnosis of cold-induced asthma were noted.  The Veteran was seen by the emergency department in February 2014 for forceful coughs, with an impression of chronic cough/bronchitis.  The February 2014 chest X-rays noted no radiographic evidence of active cardiopulmonary disease.

A June 2014 PFT showed mild restrictive disease, and possible mixed obstruction.  The suspected etiology was related to NSAID medication.  See August 2014 VA treatment records.  A November 2017 addendum note suspected COPD.  In the January 2018 PFT, there was midexpiratory flows suggesting small airway disease with airflow obstruction.  There was also a mild-moderate restrictive ventilatory defect.  See also April 2018 VA treatment records (noting a diagnosis of emphysema and November 2017 CT scan showing mild paraseptal emphysema in upper lobes near lung apices).  

The Veteran underwent VA examinations for respiratory conditions in March 2015, June 2021, December 2021, and October 2022.  The Veteran consistently reported respiratory problems during service, as well as exposure to fuel, burn pit, and oil well fire during service.  He also reported a 35-year pack history of smoking.  The March 2015 examination report noted that service treatment records revealed a childhood history of asthma.  The VA examiners provided multiple diagnoses, and at times, expressed disagreement regarding the appropriate diagnosis.  These diagnoses included chronic cough, COPD, asthma, and emphysema.  

In the October 2022 opinion, the examiner clarified that the correct diagnosis was COPD, and not asthma.  The examiner explained that although both asthma and COPD were previously noted as diagnoses, this was based upon the listed history in the 1987 service treatment records.  The examiner indicated further that the definitive testing done later in life indicated that the Veteran's condition was actually COPD and not asthma.  The examiner explained that a high percentage of people to outgrow acute episodes of extrinsic asthma after childhood.  The Veteran's pulmonary function testing (PFT) and clinical history was diagnostic of COPD, not asthma.  The examiner explained that COPD involved airflow limitation associated with an abnormal inflammatory response of the lung and is caused by a mixture of small airway disease (obstructive bronchiolitis) and parenchymal destruction (emphysema).  As opposed to asthma, changes from COPD and/or emphysema can be identified on chest imaging. 

Although there are VA opinions which address the other theories of entitlement, there are no adequate opinions which directly addressed the Veteran's contentions in relation to the diagnosed COPD and/or emphysema.  

There are multiple VA opinions which failed to address the diagnosed COPD and/or emphysema.  In the March 2015 opinion, the examiner addressed the diagnosed chronic cough, and opined that the Veteran's chronic cough was less likely than not caused by or related to Southwest Asia exposure.  In a July 2021 opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's asthma clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, and was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  In the December 2021 opinion, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's asthma was not likely related to service.  However, none of these opinions addressed the diagnosed COPD and/or emphysema.

Although other VA opinions addressed the diagnosed COPD and/or emphysema, these opinions were not adequate.  As noted above, the June 2021 VA examiner noted diagnoses of asthma and emphysema.  In the June 2021 opinion, the examiner indicated the Veteran's lung condition was a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the lung condition was related to the exposure in Southwest Asia.  As to the Veteran's report that he had a diagnosis and treatment for asthma in service, the examiner noted there were no treatment records on file.  The examiner did not otherwise address the documented respiratory complaints during service.  As such, the rationale did not seem to consider the full factual premise in this case.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise is not probative). 

In a June 2022 addendum opinion, a different examiner did not address service connection or exposures during service.  Rather, the examiner explained that the diagnosis of COPD was not directly related to the history of childhood asthma and there was no medical rationale to indicate a connection.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had complaints of coughing/shortness of breath and a history of asthma in April 1986 service treatment records, and despite the history of childhood asthma, this was not a current diagnosis.  The examiner indicated there were other reasons that explained the notations of asthma made in the Veteran's treatment records.  He explained that although a history of asthma could render the individual susceptible to respiratory infection, childhood asthma was a disease that resolved as the lungs fully mature.

In an October 2022 opinion, the examiner who provided the June 2022 addendum opinion concluded that the Veteran's condition was not likely related to service; however, the rationale did not address the contentions relating to the Veteran's COPD and/or emphysema.  Instead, the examiner focused on explaining the relevance, or lack thereof, regarding the references to asthma in the Veteran's treatment records.  The examiner explained that the enlistment medical examination was silent for asthma.  The examiner noted a history of chronic cough and smoking in the 1987 and 1990 medical examinations, as well as notations for asthma in post-service treatment records.  The examiner again explained the difference between COPD and asthma.  Lastly, the examiner indicated that COPD and/or emphysema are now also considered presumptive conditions based on the PACT act.     

In sum, the opinions of record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision on appeal are not sufficient to allow the Board to adjudicate the claim.  The medical opinions at that time did not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's COPD and/or emphysema had its onset in service or is otherwise related to in-service exposure.  Thus, the issue is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2023 rating decision on appeal. 

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions at this time.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's COPD and/or emphysema are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including reported exposure to nerve agents or chemical weapons, oil well fires, vehicle fuel, exhaust fumes, burning military equipment, sandstorms, and chemical on base.  The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service symptoms and exposures, as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's exposures and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Vuong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.