Citation Nr: A25032158
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-418723
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine, to include entitlement to temporary total ratings under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30, is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for hallux valgus of the left lower extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for hallux valgus of the right lower extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep condition is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine is characterized by combined range of motion of the lumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had hallux valgus of the left lower extremity at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had hallux valgus of the right lower extremity at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a sleep condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242. 

2. The criteria for service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for hallux valgus of the left lower extremity are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for hallux valgus of the right lower extremity are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for a sleep condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from April 1996 to March 2000.

The Veteran submitted claims for service connection for a lumbar spine disability and peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities in May 2023 and service connection for bilateral shoulder, sleep, and hallux valgus disabilities in January 2024. A February 2024 rating decision granted service connection for a lumbar spine disability, but denied the remaining claims. The Veteran appealed with a February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement). 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shoulder disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine, to include entitlement to temporary total ratings under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30, is denied. 

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine.

The Veteran's lumbar spine arthritis is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242. Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. 

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id.  at Note 1. 

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbar spine arthritis. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to pain, lack of endurance, pain during flare-ups, and pain during repetitive use over time. However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by the statements that he has almost daily flare-ups of severe intensity lasting for hours to an entire day would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees. Additionally, the Veteran did not have muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. 

A January 2024 VA examination revealed the Veteran's report of almost daily back pain flare-ups that are precipitated by prolonged sitting, bending, carrying and lifting, and characterized by severe intensity and lasting for several hours to a whole day depending on the severity. He reported that his flare-ups are usually managed by resting, stretching exercises, and taking over-the-counter medication.

A May 2023 VA treatment record noted a history of low back pain that is moderately severe without radiation of pain, pain worse with bending over, and pain better with certain positions. Physical examination revealed moderate pain to palpation in the mid-low back in the lumbar region, and no costovertebral angle (CVA) tenderness. Clinical examination revealed the estimated range of motion during flare-ups: forward flexion of 90 degrees, extension of 20 degrees, right and left lateral flexion endpoint of 20 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation endpoint of 30 degrees. Clinical examination determined there was no localized tenderness, guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine, or ankylosis. 

Per June 2023, August 2023, November 2023 and January 2024 private treatment records from Dr. R., general examination revealed normal range of motion of the spine with no evidence of scoliosis or CVA tenderness. 

Based on the above, the Veteran's lumbar spine arthritis is characterized by combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine of 210 degrees. This approximates the criteria for a 10 percent rating under the General Rating Formula as the combined range of motion is greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees. 

Based on the above, an initial rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted as the evidence does not reveal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

Recent caselaw requires the Board to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular diagnostic code. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, ___ Vet. App. ___ (2025), 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327. In this case, the VA examiner, in rendering ROM findings, noted and considered the Veteran's lay statements describing functional limitations when his pain and functional impairment is at its worst (during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance). The Veteran has reported using over-the-counter pain medications as needed to manage flare-ups. The examination report as a whole does not indicate whether the Veteran was on any pain medications at the time of the examination, but in any case, it is clear the examiner already provided an opinion estimating range of motion findings discounting any potential ameliorating effects of medication. As such, the Board finds the report and the remainder of the evidentiary record adequate to base a decision, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor. 

Consideration has also been given to assigning a rating under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  However, the Veteran does not have IVDS. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes. The January 2024 VA examination determined, after clinical evaluation, the Veteran did not have IVDS of the spine. VA and private treatment records do not reveal a finding of IVDS. Moreover, the record does not show physician prescribed bed rest for back pain. 

Regarding neurological impairment, the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has any other neurological abnormality associated with the spine disability. The January 2024 VA examination, VA treatment records and private treatment records do not reveal neurologic abnormalities. 

As a final matter, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's argument in the February 2024 VA Form 10182 that he is entitled to convalescence periods under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30 for his lumbar spine disability. Pursuant to § 4.30, a total disability rating will be assigned if treatment of a service-connected disability resulted in:(1) surgery necessitating at least one month of convalescence, (2) surgery with severe postoperative residuals such as incompletely healed surgical wounds, stumps of recent amputations, therapeutic immobilization of one major joint or more, application of a body cast, or the necessity for house confinement, or the necessity for continued use of a wheelchair or crutches (regular weight-bearing prohibited) or (3) immobilization by cast, without surgery, of one major joint or more. However, in the present case, VA and private treatment records (to include from Dr. R., Dr. S., Hoag Orthopedic, Newport Diagnostic Center, Newport Orthopedic, and Orthopedic Specialty Institute) do not reveal surgery or immobilization by cast relating to the lumbar spine arthritis during the appeal period. As such, entitlement to a rating for convalescence periods under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30 is not warranted. 

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbar spine arthritis. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

2. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

The Veteran asserts he has a current diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy that is etiologically associated with his service-connected right and left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome and right knee meniscal tear and/or in-service administration of the anthrax vaccination and subsequent treatment with antibiotic Ciprofloxacin. 

As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination. In disability compensation claims, VA medical examination must be provided when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). However, as discussed in detail below, the record does not contain competent evidence of a current disability or recurrent symptoms attributable to a potential peripheral neuropathy disability. VA and private treatment records do not show a diagnosis or complaints relating to peripheral neuropathy. Additionally, the Veteran has not offered lay statements describing symptoms such as numbness or tingling for the claimed peripheral neuropathy. Accordingly, based on the record at the time of the February 2024 decision, a VA examination was not warranted under the McLendon elements, and VA's duty to assist was satisfied.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is approximately at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or service-connected disability.

Having reviewed the record, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current disability manifested by peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The collective medical evidence does not reveal treatment for, or a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy. Private treatment records, to include from Dr. R., Dr. S., Hoag Orthopedic, Newport Diagnostic Center, Newport Orthopedic, and Orthopedic Specialty Institute, revealed diagnoses of the knees and the lumbosacral spine, but did not reveal a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy. A January 2024 private treatment record from Dr. R. revealed extremities were normal with pulses and sensation normal. A May 2023 VA treatment record noted the Veteran's chronic history of mid-lumbar low back pain without radiation of pain.  

The Board is aware the Federal Circuit has held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-69 (Fed. Cir. 2018). However, in the instant case, the overall evidence does not reveal symptoms relating to peripheral neuropathy. A January 2024 private treatment record from Dr. R. revealed extremities, peripheral pulses, sensation, strength and neurological examination were normal. A May 2023 VA treatment record noted low back pain without radiation of pain and that extremities had full range of motion without pain. Of note, VA and private treatment records do not contain treatment for or complaints such as numbness or tingling. Likewise, the Veteran has not offered lay statements describing any claimed symptoms such as numbness or tingling for the claimed peripheral neuropathy.

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education, knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body, and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence of record, which does not establish a diagnosis or symptoms of peripheral neuropathy. 

In the absence of a current disability, the Board cannot find that the elements for service connection have been met. Accordingly, service connection is not warranted, and the claim must be denied. In denying the claim, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of service connection and, as such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102.

4. Entitlement to service connection for hallux valgus of the right lower extremity is denied.

5. Entitlement to service connection for hallux valgus of the left lower extremity is denied.

The Veteran asserts he has a current diagnosis of hallux valgus that is etiologically associated with his service-connected right and left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome and right knee meniscal tear and/or nonservice-connected pes planus. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is approximately at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or service-connected disability.

Having reviewed the record, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current disability manifested by hallux valgus of the bilateral lower extremities and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The collective medical evidence does not reveal treatment for, or a diagnosis of hallux valgus. The January 2024 VA foot examination did not reveal a diagnosis of hallux valgus. Additionally, private treatment records, to include from Dr. R., Dr. S., Hoag Orthopedic, Newport Diagnostic Center, Newport Orthopedic, and Orthopedic Specialty Institute, do not reveal a diagnosis of hallux valgus. A January 2024 private treatment record from Dr. R. revealed extremities were normal with pulses and sensation normal. VA treatment records are consistent with private treatment records and do not contain any diagnosis of hallux valgus. 

The Board is aware that pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1367-69. However, in the instant case, the overall evidence does not reveal symptoms relating to hallux valgus and, rather, symptoms appear to be attributable to a diagnosis of right 5th toe injury, per the January 2024 VA foot examination. 

The Board notes that though the January 2024 VA foot examination revealed a diagnosis of right 5th toe injury, this issue was denied in a separate April 2024 rating decision, and is not before the Board at this time. 

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education, knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body, and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence of record, which does not establish a diagnosis or symptoms of hallux valgus of either lower extremity.  

In the absence of a current disability, the Board cannot find that the elements for service connection have been met. Accordingly, service connection for hallux valgus of the bilateral lower extremities is not warranted, and the claim must be denied. In denying the claim, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of service connection and, as such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a sleep condition is denied.

The Veteran asserts he has a current sleep diagnosis that is etiologically associated with in-service administration of the anthrax vaccination and subsequent treatment with antibiotic Ciprofloxacin. 

As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). However, as discussed in detail below, the record does not contain competent evidence of a current disability or recurrent symptoms attributable to a potential sleep condition. VA and private treatment records do not show a diagnosis or complaints relating to a sleep condition. Accordingly, based on the record at the time of the February 2024 decision, a VA examination was not warranted under the McLendon elements, and VA's duty to assist was satisfied. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is approximately at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

Having reviewed the record, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current chronic sleep condition and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). 

The collective medical evidence does not reveal treatment for, or a diagnosis of a sleep condition. Private treatment records, to include from Dr. R., Dr. S., Hoag Orthopedic, Newport Diagnostic Center, Newport Orthopedic, and Orthopedic Specialty Institute, do not reveal a diagnosis of a sleep condition. A June 2023 private treatment record from Dr. R. documented that there was no snoring, witnessed apnea, day time hypersomnolence, and insomnia. VA treatment records are consistent with private treatment records and do not contain any diagnosis of a sleep condition.  

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education, knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body, and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence of record, which does not establish a diagnosis or symptoms of a sleep condition.  

In the absence of a current disability, the Board cannot find that the elements for service connection have been met. Accordingly, service connection for a sleep condition is not warranted, and the claim must be denied. In denying the claim, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of service connection and, as such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

7. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends he has a current bilateral shoulder disability that is etiologically associated with in-service administration of the anthrax vaccination and subsequent treatment with antibiotic Ciprofloxacin. 

Service treatment records reflect the Veteran received anthrax vaccinations in February 1999. Additionally, the February 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that service treatment records noted that an antibiotic (Bicillin) was administered during service. The Board notes that the Veteran has submitted correspondence that included a hyperlink to content that is not part of the record. Nevertheless, the Board finds that there was sufficient evidence to trigger VA's duty to assist. 

Thus, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not affording the Veteran a VA examination and opinion. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Accordingly, a remand is warranted to correct this error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral shoulder disability. The entire file must be made available to the examiner. 

The examiner must opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any bilateral shoulder disability is etiologically related to in-service administration of the anthrax vaccination and subsequent treatment with antibiotic Ciprofloxacin.

All opinions must include a complete rationale.

 

 

TANYA SMITH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Vang

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.