Citation Nr: A25032340
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241029-486314
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial, separate compensable rating for left knee instability prior to May 24, 2016, and in excess of 20 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to August 5, 2020, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1964 to December 1968.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 rating decision from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The Board notes the Veteran has the right to select a different Board review option by submitting a new VA Form 10182 within one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever date is later. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2); see Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Although the period to change dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not elapsed, the Veteran explicitly waived the Williams period and requested that a decision be expedited on the claim. See December 2024 Correspondence. As such, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding to adjudicate the appeal. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of increased ratings for left knee arthritis and left knee instability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

By way of procedural history, the original rating decision underlying the present appeal was issued by the RO in April 2020. The RO, in relevant part, assigned an initial 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected left knee arthritis, effective April 2, 2013. Following the denial of a higher initial rating on Higher-Level Review in October 2020, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board in November 2020.

In a March 2021 decision, the Board, in pertinent part, denied an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's service-connected left knee arthritis. He appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In November 2021, the Court granted a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR) filed by the parties to the appeal (the Veteran, through his attorneys, and representatives from VA General Counsel), thereby vacating the Board's decision insofar as it denied a higher rating for the left knee arthritis and remanding the matter for readjudication.

In April 2022, the Board granted an initial 20 percent rating for the Veteran's left knee arthritis based on limitation of motion, and also granted an initial, separate 20 percent rating for left knee instability from May 24, 2016. He appealed that decision to the Court. In February 2023, the Court granted a second JMPR filed by the parties to the appeal, thereby vacating the Board's decision insofar as it denied higher ratings for the Veteran's left knee arthritis based on limitation of motion and instability. 

The Board notes that in the February 2023 JMPR, the parties to the appeal characterized the matter regarding left knee instability as two separate issues: (1) entitlement to an initial, separate rating in excess of 20 percent for instability from May 24, 2016, and (2) entitlement to an effective date prior to May 24, 2016, for the award of an initial, separate rating for instability. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran is seeking a higher rating for left knee instability for the entire period on appeal, and that the Board's April 2022 decision, in effect, staged the rating for left knee instability by finding that a 20 percent rating was warranted for the portion of the appeal period from May 24, 2016, but not prior to that date. Under the circumstances, the September 2023 Board decision characterized the claim as entitlement to an initial, separate compensable rating for left knee instability prior to May 24, 2016, and in excess of 20 percent thereafter.

These matters were most recently before the Board in September 2023, and were remanded for further development. An October 2024 rating decision denied increased ratings for left knee arthritis and left knee instability, and as noted above, the Veteran perfected an appeal to the Board.

As discussed below, to comply with the Board's prior remand and JMPR, the Board finds the issues of entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee arthritis, and entitlement to an initial, separate compensable rating for left knee instability prior to May 24, 2016, and in excess of 20 percent thereafter must be remanded for further development. See Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268 (1998).

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that in the November 2021 JMPR, the parties to the appeal agreed that in its March 2021 decision, the Board erred by failing to address evidence that reasonably raised the issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU). In its April 2022 decision, the Board remanded the issue of entitlement to a TDIU to the RO for additional development. In a December 2023 rating decision, the RO granted entitlement to TDIU effective August 5, 2020, and the Veteran did not appeal the decision. As such, the issue has been recharacterized as noted on the title page.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee arthritis.

2. Entitlement to an initial, separate compensable rating for left knee instability prior to May 24, 2016, and in excess of 20 percent thereafter.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to higher disability ratings for his left knee arthritis and left knee instability.

The issues of entitlement to an increased rating for left knee arthritis and left knee instability are remanded to correct pre-decisional errors, as the AOJ failed to obtain an adequate medical examination and opinion. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Pursuant to the September 2023 Board remand, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023 and an addendum opinion in September 2024. The Board finds the November 2023 examination and September 2024 addendum opinion inadequate. Despite providing abnormal range of motion results, the VA examiner provided an addendum opinion and noted that there were contradictory findings on examination and there was no description in the history or exam of significantly limited motion, and no decreased range of motion, instability, or giving way. The examiner also opined, "due to the lack of service treatment records, post-service treatment records, insufficiencies and the current history and contradictory findings on examination, no estimation in terms of reduced range of motion at baseline, after repetitive use or during a flare could be made. There is simply no reliable or credible information in the history, records or current exam and thus would be speculative to estimate any decreased function in terms of range of motion as requested." As such, the VA examiner determined that no estimated range of motion results would be valid to objectively assess functional loss, either at baseline, with repetitive use, or with flares. Therefore, the Board finds the November 2023 examination and September 2024 addendum opinion inadequate for decision making purposes. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008). Failing to obtain an adequate examination and relying on an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded a VA medical opinion in September 2024. The Board finds the September 2024 opinion inadequate. The VA clinician reviewed the Veteran's records and found, "during the period from April 2013, when taking the totality of the Veteran's symptoms into account, including any functional loss due to flare-ups or with repeated use over time, it is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately or nearly equal) that the disability of his left knee (arthritis, left knee) was then manifested by (1) flexion limited to 15, 30, 45, 60, or more than 60 degrees, and/or (2) extension limited to 45, 30, 20, 15, 10, 5, or less than 5 degrees." The Board finds the September 2024 VA retrospective opinion deficient, as it did not address how frequently that level of impairment occurred and how long it lasted as directed by the Board decision. Failing to obtain an adequate opinion and relying on an inadequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The Board notes that a review of the record reveals the Veteran takes medication for his service-connected left knee arthritis and instability. See December 2023, April 2024, and August 2024 medical treatment records, and October 2024 NOD. As the applicable diagnostic codes and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025). Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of such medication, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's service-connected left knee arthritis and instability. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012). As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

3. Entitlement to a TDIU prior to August 5, 2020.

The Board finds that the issue of TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the claim for an increased rating for the Veteran's left knee disability because a positive resolution of the claim may affect the outcome of the claim for TDIU. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183(1991). Accordingly, the issue of TDIU is also remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Refer the claims file to an appropriately qualified clinician for preparation of a retrospective opinion and examination to determine the severity of his left knee arthritis and instability. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed. If the clinician rejects any medical history of symptoms, he/she must explain the reasons therefor. All indicated tests should be performed and all findings should be reported in detail. 

(a.) For the Veteran's left knee arthritis and instability for the period on appeal, since April 2013, provide a RETROSPECTIVE opinion, utilizing the Veteran's medical records, including VA examinations, and lay history, and opine as to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected left knee arthritis and instability from April 2013.

To the extent possible, the clinician should address prior range of motion of the left knee (and at what point it started), additional loss of motion after repetitions or flare-ups, and function loss due to pain - considering active and passive motion as well as weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing considerations-throughout the claims period. 

The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service-connected left knee arthritis and instability. 

If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's prior symptoms and prior ranges of motions would have been without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time. 

If, the clinician is unable to provide a retrospective opinion, the clinician must provide a thorough rationale explaining why such opinion is not provided in this examination. If the examiner reports that the opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, he or she must clearly acknowledge that he or she has considered the Veteran's reports, other lay evidence of record, and other examinations, and explain why such evidence is insufficient to avoid resorting to speculation.

(b.) In assessing the CURRENT severity of the left knee, the clinician should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's knee disability.

The clinician is also asked to indicate the point during range of motion testing that motion is limited by pain. The clinician must test the range of motion and pain of the left knee in active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weight-bearing. The clinician must also conduct the same testing on the right knee. If the clinician is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

Describe any functional limitation due to pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, pain with use, or incoordination. Additional limitation of motion during flare-ups and following repetitive use due to limited motion, excess motion, fatigability, weakened motion, incoordination, or painful motion must also be noted. If the Veteran describes flare-ups of pain, the clinician must offer an opinion as to whether there would be additional limits on functional ability during flare-ups in terms of degrees. Should the clinician state that he or she is unable to offer such an opinion without resorting to speculation based on the fact that the examination was not performed during a flare-up, the clinician is directed to do all that reasonably can be done to become informed before such a conclusion, to include ascertaining adequate information-i.e. frequency, duration, characteristics, severity, or functional loss-regarding his flare-ups by alternative means.

The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service-connected left knee arthritis and instability. If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motions would be without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.

The examiner must be advised the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide a reason for doing so.

In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record.

A rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.A. Murphy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.