Citation Nr: A25032378
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240818-466155
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right index finger trigger finger is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right little finger trigger finger is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right middle finger trigger finger is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ring finger trigger finger is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1986 to August 1990, from July 2009 to March 2010 and from May 2016 to February 2017.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). This March 2024 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a right index trigger finger, right little finger trigger finger, right middle trigger finger and right ring trigger finger, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R.                         § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the August 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

1. Entitlement to service connection for right index finger trigger finger is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right little finger trigger finger is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right middle finger trigger finger is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right ring finger trigger finger is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that his right finger conditions are related to his service. See October 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ). Specifically, the Veteran asserts that due to him overworking his right hand for 31 years while in service, using hammers and screwdrivers and other tools, his right hand is locking up. The March 2024 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran has diagnosed right finger conditions; the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  

The Board notes that a medical examination for the Veteran's right finger conditions have not been provided. The March 2024 rating decision states that the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) did not provide a VA examination because the evidence shows the Veteran's right finger disabilities are related to blunt force trauma or trauma due to repetitive use, and the Secretary has determined there is no indication of association between this condition and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). However, this is not what the Veteran contends. The Veteran contends that his disabilities are in fact related to trauma due to repetitive use of his right hand and fingers while in service not to potential exposures during service.

The Board finds that the evidence of record is sufficient to trigger the VA's duty to provide the Veteran's with adequate VA examinations for his diagnosed right finger conditions. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). On remand, such an etiology opinion should be obtained. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to ascertain the nature and etiology of his claimed right index finger trigger finger.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The examiner must review the claims file and note that review in the examination report.

The examiner must provide an opinion regarding the following question:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right index finger trigger finger had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to service, to include any repetitive motion injury?

(B) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right little finger trigger finger had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to service, to include any repetitive motion injury?

(C)  Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right middle finger trigger finger had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to service, to include any repetitive motion injury?

(D)  Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right ring finger trigger finger had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to service, to include any repetitive motion injury?

The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's contention that due to him overworking his right hand for 31 years while in service, using hammers and screwdrivers and other tools, his right hand locks up.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Adeyemi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.