Citation Nr: A25032237
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 220118-211799
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome, spondylolysis, loss of vertebral body height, and retrolisthesis is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain residuals and osteoarthritis is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain residuals and meniscal tear residuals is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome, spondylolysis, loss of vertebral body height, and retrolisthesis have been shown to originated during active service. 

2. Right knee strain residuals and osteoarthritis have been shown to originated during active service. 

3. Left knee strain residuals and meniscal tear residuals have been shown to originated during active service. 

4. Obstructive sleep apnea has been shown to originated during active service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome, spondylolysis, loss of vertebral body height, and retrolisthesis are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

2. The criteria for service connection for right knee strain residuals and osteoarthritis are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

3. The criteria for service connection for left knee strain residuals and meniscal tear residuals are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

4. The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from June 1984 to April 1988. 

In November 2021, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for a lower back disability, a right knee disability, a left knee disability, and sleep apnea.  In January 2022,  the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Hearing docket.  In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Direct Review docket.  The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) granted the Veteran's docket change.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The January 2022 VA Form 10182 expressed disagreement with a July 2021 rating decision denying service connection for a psychiatric disability to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), insomnia, and major depression disorder with anxious distress.  The September 2022 VA Form 10182 did not disagree with the denial of service connection for a psychiatric disability.  Therefore, the issue of service connection for a psychiatric disability to include PTSD, insomnia, and major depression disorder with anxious distress will not be addressed in this appeal.  The issue will be addressed in a separate Board decision.    

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for recurrent disability arising from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

Recurrent Lumbar Spine Disability

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a recurrent lumbar spine disability is warranted as the claimed disability originated as the result of his military duties including participation as an honor guard at military burials. 

The service treatment records do not refer to a lumbar spine disability. 

The service personnel records reflect that the Veteran served as an honor guard at military funerals. 

A March 2021 written statement from M. Kastrup, D.C., indicates that the Veteran's military and clinical records had been reviewed.  The Veteran was noted to have been diagnosed with lumbar spine degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease.  Dr. Kastrup opined that it was "more likely than not [the Veteran's] chronic condition originated while on active duty." 

The report of the August 2021 lumbar spine examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran reported that he had injured his lumbar spine while serving as a pallbearer at military funerals.  He was diagnosed with lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome, spondylolysis, vertebral body height loss, and retrolisthesis.  

The record is in at least equipoise as to whether the diagnosed lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome, spondylolysis, vertebral body height loss, and retrolisthesis originated during active service.  The service personnel records indicate that the Veteran served as an honor guard for military burials.  He reported having injured his lumbar spine while performing such military duties.  Dr. Kastrup concluded that the diagnosed lumbar spine disabilities originated during active service.  Upon resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that service connection for lumbar intervertebral disc syndrome, spondylolysis, vertebral body height loss, and retrolisthesis is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Recurrent Right Knee and Left Knee Disabilities

The Veteran asserts that service connection for recurrent right knee and left knee disabilities is warranted as the claimed disabilities originated as the result of his military duties including participation in burial details.    

The service treatment records reflect that he was involved in a motorcycle accident and sustained left knee trauma.  A July 1987 treatment record states that the Veteran complained of left knee pain which was exacerbated by using the stairs.  Treating medical personnel reported that the Veteran exhibited a scraped left knee and left hip bruising in a motorcycle accident.  The Veteran was diagnosed with a left knee contusion and cellulitis.  The report of the March 1988 physical examination for service separation states the Veteran complained of knee pain associated with prolonged standing.  On physical examination, the Veteran's knees were found to be normal.  

The report of an October 2018 knee examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran complained of bilateral knee pain.  He was diagnosed with bilateral knee strain.  

The March 2021 written statement from Dr. Kastrup indicates that the Veteran's military and clinical records had been reviewed.  The Veteran was noted to have been diagnosed with bilateral knee pain.  Dr. Kastrup opined that it was "more likely than not [the Veteran's] chronic condition originated while on active duty."

The report of a July 2021 knee examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran complained of knee pain as the result of his military duties including being an honor guard at military burials.  He was diagnosed with left knee meniscal tear residuals. 

The report of an October 2021 knee examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran was diagnosed right knee joint osteoarthritis.  The examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the right knee joint osteoarthritis was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  

The record is in at least equipoise as to whether the diagnosed right knee and left knee disabilities originated during active service.  The service treatment records state that the Veteran sustained left knee trauma in an in service motorcycle accident.  The service personnel records indicate that the Veteran served as an honor guard for military burials.  The Veteran reported having injured his knees while performing his military duties.  A VA examiner and Dr. Kastrup opined the right knee and left knee disabilities originated during active service.  Upon resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that service connection for both right knee strain residuals and osteoarthritis and left knee strain residuals and meniscal tear residuals is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Recurrent Sleep Disability

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a recurrent sleep disability is warranted as sleep apnea originated during active service. 

The service treatment records do not refer to sleep apnea or other recurrent sleep disability. 

An August 2019 written statement from S. P., conveys that he had served with the Veteran and had been the Veteran's roommate during active service and for a few years after service separation.  He witnessed the Veteran's loud snoring and episodes where the Veteran briefly stopped breathing. 

A December 2019 sleep evaluation from C. Spinweber, Ph.D., states that she was "a board certified sleep medicine specialist and a Diplomate of the American Board of Sleep Medicine."  She related that the Veteran had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea by an April 2015 private sleep study.  The doctor opined that "my expert opinion is that this individual's sleep apnea developed while this individual was on active duty" and "[i]t is much more likely than not that this Veteran's sleep apnea had its onset while he was on active duty." 

The report of a July 2021 sleep apnea examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea and prescribed a CPAP machine. 

The record is in at least equipoise as to whether the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea originated during active service.  The written statement from S. P., conveys that he witnessed the Veteran's in service loud snoring and apneic episodes.  The Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea by a sleep study and prescribed a CPAP machine.  Dr. Spinweber concluded that the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea disability originated during active service. Upon resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.