Citation Nr: A25032855
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240619-450821
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and/or left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from September 1981 to June 1988. The Veteran also served honorably in the United States Army Reserve from June 1988 to February 2023 with various periods of active duty for training (ADT) and inactive duty for training (IDT) with active service periods from December 1990 to August 1991, July 1999 to April 2000, June 2004 to November 2005, October 2010 to November 2011, and April 2021 to February 2023.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction.

In June 2024, the Veteran timely filed VA form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and selected the Direct Review docket.

In selecting the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and/or left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As an initial matter, the Board may recharacterize a claim based on the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). Based on the record, the Board has determined that the issue of whether OSA is secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step was reasonably raised by the record prior to the decision on appeal. See Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203 (2021) (VA must develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during adjudication of the primary service-connected disability). Therefore, the Board has recharacterized the claim to "service connection for obstructive sleep apnea" and "entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step" to better reflect the issues of record.

Additionally, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's request to correct the Rating Decision Codesheet (codesheet) due to an omission of previous rating evaluations. See June 2024 VA 10182. As the Board is an appellate body, issues properly before the Board are generally AOJ adjudicated decisions with which the Veteran disagrees. See 38 C.F.R §§ 3.155, 20.4 Rule 4, 20.104 Rule 104, 38 U.S.C. § 5104. A codesheet is an administrative document accompanying a rating decision which details the Veteran's disability rating including a breakdown of individual disability ratings and, if applicable, rating stages. Incorrect or inaccurate information on a codesheet is that of an administrative/clerical error rather than an AOJ adjudicated issue. As such, the issue is not proper before the Board. The Board encourages the Veteran to contact his local Regional Office for assistance with clerical or administrative issues to include any corrections to his rating codesheet.

Service Connection Generally

Establishing service connection on a direct basis generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show the following three elements: (1) a current disability that is not already service-connected, (2) at least one service-connected disability, and (3) evidence that the non-service-connected disability is either (a) proximately due to or the result of a service connected disability (causation) or (b) has an increase in severity that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability (aggravation). 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Additionally, although obesity is not a disability for VA compensation purposes, obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). To determine whether obesity is an intermediate step, the following sequential questions must be evaluated: (1) was the Veteran's obesity caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, (2) if yes, was the obesity, or its aggravation, a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's claimed disability, and (3) if yes, would the Veteran not have been diagnosed with the claimed condition but for the obesity, or the aggravation of the obesity. VA Gen. Coun. Prec. 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017); Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020); Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241 (2021). If the questions are all answered in the affirmative, then secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step will be established.

Entitlement to Service Connection for OSA as Secondary to Service-Connected Right Knee Replacement and/or Left Knee Impairment with Obesity as an Intermediate Step

The Board finds that prior to the decision on appeal, the AOJ failed to identify and develop, to include obtaining a VA medical examination, the issue of service connection for OSA as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and/or left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step that was reasonably raised by the record. As such, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is authorized to remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors. VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when necessary to decide a claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Such development is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but (1) contains competent evidence of a diagnosed disability or symptoms of disability, (2) establishes that the Veteran suffered an event, injury or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease during the pertinent presumptive period, and (3) indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006) (noting that the third element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and active service, including equivocal or non-specific medical evidence or credible lay evidence of continuity of symptomatology).

The Veteran is currently service connected for right knee replacement and left knee impairment effectuated in April 2000. See February 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet. The Veteran also carries a diagnosis of OSA and his weight classification is in an obese range. See February 2024 CAPRI.

By way of history, during the Veteran's United States Army service, he first reported knee concerns in March 1983 when he complained of ongoing bilateral knee instability approximating nine months prior. See April 2015 STR - Medical - Photocopy. In March 1986, the Veteran sought medical support for chronic intermittent right knee pain and tenderness exacerbated during his two-to-three-mile runs. The Veteran was prescribed medication, excused from PT for ten days, and provided quadricep strengthening exercises.

Next, after beginning his United States Army Reserve service, the Veteran reported left knee pain during a drill weekend in August 1989. See April 2015 STR - Medical. The Veteran reported injuring his knee on a desk and was subsequently diagnosed with patella-tibial tendon contusion. The Veteran was prescribed pain medication and advised to ice, elevate, and rest the knee.

In May 1991, the Veteran underwent a right knee arthroscopic and partial medial meniscectomy knee surgery after suffering a right knee meniscal tear in February 1991. See April 2015 STR - Medical. Prior to the surgery, the Veteran reported sporadic right knee pain and swelling and noted that he reduced his activity due to increased symptoms. Post-surgery, the Veteran was placed on a temporary physical profile that disallowed aerobics or squatting and limited walking or standing to no more than 20 minutes. In July 1991, the Veteran was placed on a permanent physical profile due to bilateral knee pain. The physical profile included an exemption from deep knee bending and allowed aerobic training at the Veteran's own pace and distance. Additionally, the Veteran was authorized Army Fitness Test (ACFT) walk, swim, or cycle as substitutions to the ACFT run requirement. 

After persistent right knee instability, the Veteran underwent an anterior crucial ligament (ACL) reconstruction in March 1998 with an eventual failure and subsequent ACL reconstruction in April 2002. See February 2024 CAPRI.

In May 2000, the Veteran filed a claim for an increased disability rating for, in pertinent part, bilateral knee joint pain. The Veteran reported tender knees, increased leg fatigue after prolonged walking, and the need for assistance with standing after prolonged squatting. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. During his August 2000 VA examination, the Veteran described worsening bilateral knee pain, weakness, stiffness, swelling, lack of endurance, fatiguability, give-way, and instability. See January 2002 Rating Decision - Narrative. He also endorsed flares as precipitated by strenuous weight bearing activity or sitting more than four to five hours.

During a VA outpatient appointment in April 2004, the Veteran reported physical limitations due to knee "problems" which prohibited him from exercising thereby resulting in weight gain. See February 2004 CAPRI. Subsequent appointments, the Veteran reported engaging in physical activity but variable participation in exercise. In July 2008, the Veteran began bilateral knee injections after previous treatment failed to rectify the Veteran's knee pain.

In September 2008, the Veteran underwent a sleep study due to ongoing concerns with sleep and daytime fatigue. The examiner noted the Veteran's clinical medical history to include obesity. See February 2004 CAPRI. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of loud snoring, witnessed apnea (observed by ex-spouse), waking with headaches/fatigue, and excessive daytime sleepiness. The Veteran was diagnosed with moderate OSA with oxygen desideration. Recommendations for interventions or treatment included utilizing a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and weight loss. In February 2009, the Veteran underwent a bilevel titration sleep study that indicated moderate OSA with oxygen desideration and nocturnal myoclonus and periodic limb movement. Similarly to the September 2008 recommendations and interventions, the Veteran was advised to utilize a CPAP and work on weight loss.

In November 2008, the Veteran's permanent physical profile was modified due to increased right knee and subsequent bilateral knee pain. The physical profile included an exemption from running and allowed for running at the Veteran's own pace or distance, and unlimited walking and cycling. The Veteran was also authorized Army Fitness Test (ACFT) walk or cycle as substitutions to the ACFT run requirement. See September 2023 STR.

Specific to the Veteran's weight classification, the Veteran's weight in the years immediately preceding his 2008 sleep study and resultant OSA diagnosis show substantial increases from previous years. See February 2024 CAPRI. See also April 2015 STRs. The first noticeable weight increase began in 2004 wherein the Veteran's weight ranged between 207 and 237 pounds. In 2006, the Veteran's weight was recorded as 233 pounds. In 2007, the Veteran's weight ranged between 214 and 237 pounds. In 2008, the Veteran's weight ranged between 214 to 220 pounds. The record shows that prior to 2004, the Veteran's weight did not surpass 210 pounds, and did not surpass 199 pounds prior to 2001. 

In October 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his OSA. See December 2023 C&P Exam. The Veteran reported OSA as beginning in 2009, and symptoms included loud snoring, mouth breathing, and gasping. The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition was at least likely as not related to military service due to the diagnostic date being within one-year post-active service. However, the Veteran's active service period was approximately three years prior to his OSA diagnosis and therefore, the AOJ recognized the condition as preexisting service.

In February 2024, the Veteran underwent a new VA examination based on, in part, preexisting OSA. See February 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner opined that the Veteran's preexisting OSA was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by OSA experienced thereafter in service. The examiner stated that clinical risks associated with the development of OSA included older age, male sex, obesity, and craniofacial and upper airway abnormalities. Further, they explained that medical and scientific evidence had not shown that military duties can aggravate recurrent collapse of the velopharyngeal and/or nasopharyngeal airway during sleep.

The Board finds sufficient evidence to raise the issue of service connection for OSA as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step. First, prior to the Veteran's diagnosed OSA, he consistently reported and received treatment for knee pain that required limitations on the type of physical activities, including exercise, necessitating service-related physical profiles. Next, leading up to the Veteran's 2008 sleep study, the Veteran's weight increased significantly and coincided with repeated issues and concerns related to the knee. Lastly, as cited by the February 2004 examiner, a clinical risk for the development of OSA is obesity; the Veteran is considered obese. As such, the evidence demonstrates that prior to the decision on appeal, a potential etiological link between the Veteran's OSA and service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step was raised by the record. As such, the AOJ erred when it did not identify and develop this theory of entitlement prior to issuing the decision on appeal.

Regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA as it relates to his service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment, the record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim. However, prior to the decision on appeal, the record demonstrated sufficient information necessary to afford the Veteran with a VA examination. As noted, the Veteran has a diagnosed disability of OSA and experienced in-service injuries causally connected to the Veteran's service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment. The Board considers the Veteran's (1) weight increase between 2004 and 2008, (2) reported September 2008 sleep study symptomatology, (3) February 2024 VA examination clinical associations, and (4) persistent overweight/obese weight class and apnea symptoms post-OSA diagnosis, as competent evidence that he experiences a continuity of symptomatology and that said symptoms may be associated with his service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment. Therefore, the Board finds that the low threshold as set forth in McLendon were met prior to the decision on appeal and the Veteran should have been afforded a VA examination as to this issue.

Accordingly, because the AOJ failed to identify and develop the issue of OSA as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment as reasonably raised by the record, including affording the Veteran with a VA examination, the AOJ failed in its statutory duty to assist thereby committing pre-decisional error. As such, a remand for a VA examination/medical opinion is necessary to correct this pre-decisional error.

Entitlement to Service Connection for OSA

The Board finds that the AOJ committed pre-decisional error when it relied upon an inadequate VA examination in rendering the decision on appeal.

As previously stated, under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct a pre-decisional error when the AOJ fails to meet VA's statutory duty to assist. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination, when such examination is necessary to decide a claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a service-connection claim, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

Under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), effective from August 10, 2022, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving TERA. For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.

Turning to the record, in October 2023, VA issued a TERA memorandum that verified the Veteran's service in locations under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1119 and 1117, invoking a presumption of exposure consistent with the locations (Persian Gulf War, Southwest Asia theatre). See October 2023 Other. Additionally, the TERA memorandum noted the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as aircraft maintenance however, exposure or conclusions related to the Veteran's MOS was not included.

Review of the Veteran's military personnel records (MPRs) indicates that the Veteran had garrison exposure in relation to his duty as aircraft maintenance. See February 2024 DPRIS Response. Sub-regulatory guidance for administering the PACT Act states that a "garrison exposure" can constitute a toxic exposure risk activity for the purposes of the PACT Act and 38 U.S.C. § 1168. The phrase garrison exposure includes any environmental exposure that may have been experienced while stationed on a military base, to include exposures to substances such as asbestos, fuels, lead, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances. See VBA Letter 20-24-06, 11-14, Updated Guidance on Processing Claims Involving Public Law 117-168, 87 Fed. Reg. 78, 543 (June 12, 2024). Here, according to the Veteran's MPRs, he performed, in relevant part, direct maintenance, technical inspections, and maintenance monitoring on assigned helicopters, conducted oil analysis and measurement utilizing diagnostic equipment, and evaluated maintenance operations and facilities for compliance. See February 2024 DPRIS Response. As evidenced, the Veteran's MOS operated directly with an aircraft to include all elements of maintenance which exposed the Veteran to oils, lubricants, and fuels, in other words, garrison exposure.

In development of the claim, the RO requested a TERA medical opinion in February 2024. According to the request, the RO sought inquiry as to the Veteran's exposures under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1119 and 1117 as well as "industrial pollutants, fuels, exhaust, lubricants, and oils." See February 2024 Exam Request.

In February 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA TERA examination for the purpose of evaluating toxic exposure in relation to OSA. See February 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner evaluated the Veteran's TERA exposure to inhalable coarse particulate matter less than 10 micrometers in diameter (PM10); food/waterborne diseases (e.g., bacterial diarrhea, Hepatitis A, Typhoid fever, Brucellosis, diarrhea cholera, diarrhea-protozoal); other endemic diseases (cutaneous leishmaniasis, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Sandfly fever, Tuberculosis (TB), Leptospirosis, Schistosomiasis, Rabies, Q fever); and heat stress. The examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA. The examiner's rationale noted that there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of OSA and TERA. While the opinion assessed the Veteran's exposures under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1119 and 1117, no such mention as to the Veteran's exposures to "industrial pollutants, fuels, exhaust, lubricants, and oils," as requested by the RO, were evaluated or opined upon.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the February 2024 VA TERA medical opinion inadequate. As previously noted, under 38 U.S.C. § 1168, VA is required to obtain a VA TERA medical opinion as to all of the Veteran's TERA exposures verified and/or identified when the evidence of record is not sufficient to establish service connection. In this case, the medical opinion should have included garrison exposures related to the Veteran's MOS as specialized medical knowledge is necessary to evaluate toxic exposures and relation to diseases for which agency adjudicators nor the Board are not equipped to evaluate. 

Therefore, the AOJ committed pre-decisional error when relying on an inadequate VA TERA medical opinion in rendering the decision on appeal, thereby failing to satisfy VA's duty to assist the Veteran in developing his claim. As such, a remand for a VA TERA opinion is necessary to correct this pre-decisional error.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain (1) a VA medical opinion or, if necessary, an updated examination for the Veteran's service connection claim for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment with obesity as an intermediate step and (2) a new VA TERA medical opinion or, if necessary, examination for the Veteran's military occupational specialty exposure, from an appropriate clinician or clinicians to determine the nature and etiology (origin) of the Veteran's OSA. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND, should be reviewed by the clinician (examiner).

Secondary service connection (obesity as an intermediate step): The examiner must provide an opinion as to (1) whether the Veteran's obesity was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected right knee replacement and left knee impairment, and if so, (2) whether the Veteran's obesity, or its aggravation, was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's OSA, and if so, (3) whether the Veteran would not have been diagnosed with OSA but for the obesity, or the aggravation of the obesity. The examiner must provide a full detailed rationale for this opinion and findings and any resort to speculation should be explained.

(Continued on next page)

In rendering the aforementioned opinion, the examiner should consider the following: (1) the historical etiology and progression of the Veteran's right and left knee impairments and impact on daily functioning due to pain; (2) the Veteran's increased weight in the years immediately preceding his OSA diagnosis; and (3) the Veteran's physical training profiles (limitations).

TERA: The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA is related to exposure associated with his military occupational specialty as aircraft maintenance including exposure to industrial pollutants, fuels, exhaust, lubricants, and oils. In providing this opinion, the examiner is asked to consider and speak to (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner must provide a full detailed rationale for this opinion and findings and any resort to speculation should be explained.

For all opinions, the examiner(s) must consider and discuss all relevant medical and lay evidence, to include the Veteran's assertions and reported symptomatology. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly state so and explain why. Note: The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.

(Continued on next page)

?

For all opinions, the examiner(s) is/are advised that reliance solely on medical literature or a lack of medical evidence, especially without consideration of contentions/lay statements raised by the Veteran, is considered an inadequate rationale. The examiner should rely on their medical expertise and consider/synthesize all evidence of record in rendering a well-supported and informative opinion/rationale.

For all opinions, should the examiner(s) utilize any relevant medical literature or resources in rendering their findings and opinions, they should provide the specific citation(s) in the examination report.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Klemm-Kafel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.