Citation Nr: A25032136
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-450689
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for flat feet (pes planus) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for eye disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea/sleep disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's flat feet existed prior to service and are presumed to have been aggravated by such service.

2. The Veteran's refractive error of vision is not considered a disability capable of service connection; and, the evidence does not establish a chronic disability of the eyes causing functional impairment during or proximate to the appeal period.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for flat feet (pes planus) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1111, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for eye disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 2007 to September 2011.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of rating decisions in September 2023 and October 2023 issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  

A brief procedural explanation is needed. A May 9, 2023 rating decision confirmed and continued the denials of service connection for the listed claims.  The Veteran was notified in a letter dated the next day.  He filed a request for higher-level review in August 2023.  

A September 2023 rating decision confirmed and continued the denials of service connection for the eyes, flat feet, right knee, and back, but found a duty-to-assist violation regarding sleep apnea.  Thereafter, an October 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  He filed a request for higher level review in April 2024.  He listed each of the appealed claims.  However, he cannot file for a higher-level review immediately after a higher level review.  His higher-level review was accepted for sleep apnea.

An April 2024 rating decision found a duty-to assist violation for the claim of service connection for sleep apnea.  A June 2024 rating decision denied service connection for sleep apnea and persistent daytime hypersomnolence.

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), in June 2024.  He specified that he was appealing the October 2023 rating decision on sleep apnea and the May 9, 2023, rating decision on flat feet, the right knee, back and eyes.  However, the 10182 is not timely as to the May 9, 2023, rating decision because it was received more than a year after the date of notification.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  The Board can accept the appeal if it is made in relevance to the September 2023 rating decision.  The Board will resolve reasonable doubt in his favor and accept the appeal of the issues of flat feet, right knee, eyes, and back via the September 2023 rating decision.  

Additional evidence was received, and rating decisions were issued after the October 2023 rating decision pertaining to sleep apnea.  However, a Veteran is permitted to specifically choose an earlier rating decision to appeal, if a VA Form 10182 is otherwise timely received. Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1, 14 (2023).  The Board will go by what the Veteran specified on his VA Form 10182.  This course of action is non-prejudicial because the claim of service connection for sleep apnea must be remanded to cure a pre-decisional duty-to-assist violation.  It will also allow the Board to proceed with action on his appeal rather than waiting for the one-year period for docket switching to expire as required by the holding in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).

The Veteran chose the direct review docket.  This means that the evidentiary review period expired as of the last germane rating decisions that were not higher-level reviews. The Board received and docketed the appeal in July 2024.

Service Connection - Flat Feet

The Veteran seeks service connection for flat feet.  He asserts that his condition, which clearly and unmistakable existed before service, was aggravated by active duty including ruck marches and "combat situations."

Every person employed in the active service is presumed to be in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.

To be "noted" within the meaning of the presumption of soundness statute, the condition must be recorded in the entrance examination report.  Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238, 245 (1994).  History of pre-service existence of a disease does not constitute notation of such condition.  Id. at 240.  However, the disease does not need to be symptomatic at the time of the evaluation.  See Verdon v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 529, 530 (1996).  If the presumption of soundness does not attach, the claim may still be subject to the presumption of aggravation under section 1153.

A preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated by active military, naval, air, or space service, where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease.  38 U.S.C. § 1153.  The Veteran bears the initial burden of establishing a permanent worsening of the disability during service to an equipoise standard.  Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 173-75 (2010).  Temporary or intermittent flare-ups during service of a pre-existing injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered aggravation in service unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, is worsened.  Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 297 (1991).  Evidence of a veteran being asymptomatic on entry into service, with an exacerbation of symptoms during service, may not constitute evidence of aggravation.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 320, 323 (1991).

If the evidence establishes that a pre-existing disability worsened during a period of qualifying service, then the presumption of aggravation attaches. To rebut the presumption, VA must show by clear and unmistakable evidence that worsening is due to the natural progress of the disability. See Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 390, 396 (2009). Clear and unmistakable evidence has been defined as evidence that "cannot be misinterpreted and misunderstood, i.e., it is undebatable." Vanerson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 254, 258-59 (1999).

In the case of any veteran who engaged in combat with the enemy in active service, the Secretary shall accept as sufficient proof of service-connection of any disease or injury alleged to have been incurred in or aggravated by such service satisfactory lay or other evidence of service incurrence or aggravation of such injury or disease, if consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service, notwithstanding the fact that there is no official record of such incurrence or aggravation in service, and, to that end, shall resolve every reasonable doubt in favor of the veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b). The combat presumption in section 1154(b) does not alter the requirement of a current disability and a nexus between such disability and military service in a claim of service connection. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 37 (2007).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Evidence is not in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Id.

The AOJ conceded favorable findings that 

the claimed issue existed prior to military service. Enlistment examination from September 12,2007, noted mild pes planus. You have been diagnosed with a disability. VA treatment records from January 2022 show treatment for bilateral foot pan with pes planus. Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded. Your DD Form 214 shows service in Afghanistan from November 2009 to November 2010.

The Veteran asserted that his foot disorder was aggravated by "combat situations".  He did not specify what he meant by this.  His DD Form 214 shows no decorations associated with combat service, such as the combat infantryman badge or purple heart.  His military occupation specialty was a signal support systems specialist.  He did serve in an imminent danger pay area (Afghanistan) from November 2009 to November 2010.  He told a VA psychiatric examiner in 2021 that he was at Bagram Air Force Base when a group of insurgents breached the perimeter at the main gate resulting in one known ally casualty and that helicopter gunships roamed the base firing machine guns at the enemy.  He did not state that he participated in combat operations against the enemy during this incident or at any other time.

Considering the above, the Board finds that the evidence does not support that the Veteran personally engaged in combat to the point where the combat presumption may be applied.  Being close to an area where others are engaging in combat does not mean that one engaged in combat himself.  Nevertheless, the Veteran is still competent to report that his flat feet were aggravated by marching during service because increased pain, swelling, and other foot symptoms are capable of being observed by a lay person.  The Board will resolve reasonable doubt in his favor and concede an in-service aggravation of flat feet based on his competent lay reports.

As in-service aggravation has been conceded, the Board must prove by clear and unmistakable evidence that the aggravation was due to the natural progress of the disease in order to rebut the presumption.  There is no such evidence in this case.  Service connection is warranted based on the presumption of aggravation.  

There is a VA medical opinion regarding aggravation of flat feet in January 2022. The examiner opined, among other things, that

there is no indication from service records that the [bilateral] flat feet condition worsened during service. There is no documentation that the patient sought any medical care during service in regards to the B flat feet condition. As well there is no documentation that the patient sought any medical care after service in regards to the B flat feet condition. Lastly, even current medical records (2021-2022 time frame) do not show the patient has complaints and/ or has been diagnosed with a worse flat feet condition over time. The exam today did show the patient has a B flat feet condition. The exam did not show a severely, disabling flat feet condition which worsened during military service and/ or worsened as a result of military service.

However, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay reports that his condition was aggravated by marching with a rucksack during active duty.  He also did not explain whether there is a medical basis to conclude that the Veteran would have sought medical treatment for flat feet if it had been present.  These deficiencies render the opinion inadequate.  The Board will not afford it any probative weight.

The examiner opined that current medical records do not show current complaints and/or has been diagnosed with a worse flat feet condition over time.  If the Veteran does not have active symptomatology resulting in objective evidence of functional impairment, then the AOJ may assign a non-compensable rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.  In any event, that is a consideration for the rating activity and is outside of the scope of the present appeal for service connection. 

In summary, the Veteran's flat feet existed prior to active duty service and there is competent evidence of aggravation during active duty.  There is not clear and unmistakable evidence to attribute such aggravation to the natural progress of the disease.  The presumption of aggravation is not rebutted.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1153; 5107(b). Service connection for bilateral pes planus/flat feet is warranted.

Service Connection - Eyes

The Veteran seeks service connection for an eye disorder.  He asserts that he has an eye disability capable of service connection within the meaning of applicable regulations that began during or is caused by active duty service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred coincident with or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing direct service connection generally requires competent evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, i.e., a nexus, between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Refractive errors of the eye are due to anomalies in the shape and conformation of the eye structures, are generally of congenital or developmental origin, and are not considered to be diseases or injuries capable of service connection within the meaning of applicable legislation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(c). The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has expressly upheld VA's regulatory decision to prohibit compensation for refractive errors of vision. See Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378, 1385-86 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (holding that the interpretation adopted by the Secretary in 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(c), which prohibits compensation for refractive error of the eye and is not arbitrary, capricious, or manifestly contrary to statute).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a VA compensation claim.  See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (holding that interpretation of 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 and 1131 as requiring the existence of a present disability cannot be considered arbitrary). In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the requirement of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or proximate thereto. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013).

This appeal must fail for lack of evidence of a current qualifying eye disability causing functional impairment during or proximate to the appeal period.  See Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225.  Service treatment records show that the Veteran was found to have a refractive error of vision at enlistment.  He reported wearing eyeglasses since the age of 10.  Refractive errors of vision are not considered disabilities capable of service connection.  See Terry, 340 F.3d at 1385-86.  The Board did not see evidence of a chronic eye disability in service medical records.

VA and non-VA medical records were reviewed.  The Board does not see evidence that the Veteran has a chronic eye disability other than refractive error of vision.  For example, in November 2019, the Veteran's eyes were found to have no blurriness, tearing, itching, or visual changes.  He reported wearing glasses and/or contact lenses.  Again, this is a refractive error of vision and does not qualify as an eye disability for VA disability compensation purposes. 

Consideration was given to the Veteran's lay testimony.  He wrote on his application that "While in Afghanistan, I developed a condition in my eyes that caused several vision issues while in country."  However, as a lay person, the Veteran does not have the capacity to diagnose an eye disorder or link it to active duty service.  Such requires complex medical knowledge of diagnostic testing and the internal anatomy of the eye that is outside ordinary capacity.  Higher probative weight is given to the competent medical evidence, which does not show a current eye disability.  Even if the Veteran had vision issues or an eye disorder in service (which the Board does not concede), it does not follow that he has a current eye disability capable of service connection during or proximate to the appeal. 

No VA examination was conducted for the eyes.  Yet, without competent evidence of a qualifying eye disability or symptoms thereof a VA examination is not warranted.  See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278-79 (Fed. Cir. 2010); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006).  The Veteran has not asserted, and the evidence does not reflect, that he has current symptoms of an eye disability other than refractive error of vision that began during active duty service.

In summary, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the presence of a qualifying eye disability at any time during or proximate to the appeal period.  An essential element of service connection is not established.  The appeal is denied.   

REASONS FOR REMAND

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no credibility findings as to the lay evidence of record.  Such findings will be made when (or if) these matters return to the Board.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Right Knee and Back

VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but (1) contains competent evidence of diagnosed disability or symptoms of disability, (2) establishes that the veteran suffered an event, injury or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease during the pertinent presumptive period, and (3) indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006).

The AOJ erred by failing to procure an adequate medical opinion regarding the right knee and by failing to schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's back prior to the rating decisions on appeal. 

Regarding the right knee, a VA examiner provided medical opinions in September 2022 and November 2022.  However, she failed to consider the Veteran's lay assertions that his present right knee disorder is related to a documented right knee injury during active duty service.  She opined that it is impossible to know without resorting to speculation what the injury to the knee was to determine how it relates to current pain.  She did not explain whether the inability to opine was due to a deficiency in her own knowledge or a deficiency of general medical knowledge.  Further clarification is needed before a decision.

The AOJ conceded that the Veteran has a current back disability.  He asserted that his disability is related to "field exercises, sleeping locations, ruck marches, and countless crammed traveling situation" during active duty service.  Under the low threshold required to under a VA examination, the Board finds that it was error for the AOJ to not get an examination for the Veteran's back disability. 

Service Connection - Sleep Apnea/Sleep Disorder

The AOJ erred by failing to obtain an adequate medical opinion prior to the initial rating decision.   See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA provides a medical opinion it must be adequate for a decision).

It is unclear whether the Veteran has had sleep apnea during or proximate to the appeal period, which began around August 2021.  An April 2023 sleep study at the Louisville VA medical center was normal.  The Veteran reported that he had been diagnosed with sleep apnea in 2014 by St. Mary's Hospital.  At that time, he was between 300-350 pounds, but currently weighed 260 pounds.  An active problem list from March 2022 shows sleep apnea, but it is unclear whether this was given solely based on the Veteran's reported lay history as opposed to current, active disease.  The VA medical opinions did not adequately answer whether the Veteran had sleep apnea at any time during or proximate to the appeal period.  As this question is directly relevant, it must be answered before a final decision.

The private medical records from St. Mary's Hospital are directly relevant to this case.  They are not in the claims file.  The AOJ did not request that the Veteran submit such records or provide authorization for VA to obtain them on his behalf.  The Board cannot conclude that this error was harmless.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and ask him to submit an authorization for release of medical records from any private treatment providers relevant to the disability at issue on appeal, including St. Mary's Hospital in 2014.  Allow a reasonable time for response, and if a response is received, request the authorized records.  Make two requests unless it is clear from the first request that further requests would be futile.

2. Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations for his right knee and back.  The examiner is asked to review the claims file and opine on the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the right knee and/or back disorder began during or is caused by active duty service, to include physical training and military duties?

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.  While a thorough and independent review of the claims file is expected, the Board calls the examiner's attention to the following relevant lay and medical evidence:

"	The Veteran's contentions that his right knee and back disabilities are caused by active duty service including physical training and "field exercises, sleeping locations, ruck marches, and countless crammed traveling situation"

"	Service treatment records, including July 2011 complaint of right knee pain 

The examiner is advised that lay evidence is competent to report pain.  If there is a medical basis to doubt the lay history or discount the Veteran's assertions, the examiner is asked to explain why that is the case.

If the basis of a negative opinion is in part the absence of treatment records showing reports of the disabilities, the examiner is asked to explain whether there is a medical basis to conclude that the Veteran would likely have sought treatment for the symptoms if they were present.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any present sleep disorder, to include sleep apnea and/or persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  All diagnostic testing should be completed.  The examiner is asked to opine as follows:

(a)	Does the Veteran now have or did he have an active diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea from the period beginning 2021 to the present?

(b)	Does the Veteran now have a sleep disorder other than sleep apnea (such as persistent daytime hypersomnolence) or did he have one from the period beginning 2021 to the present? 

(c)	If the answer to (a) is "yes", is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the obstructive sleep apnea began during or is caused by active duty service, to include physical training and military duties?

(d)	If the answer to (a) is "yes", is it at least as likely as not that the obstructive sleep apnea is related to toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) during active duty?

(e)	If the answer to (b) is "yes", is it at least as likely as not that the sleep disorder other than sleep apnea began during or is caused by active duty service, to include physical training and military duties? 

(f)	If the answer to (b) is "yes", is it at least as likely as not that the sleep disorder other than sleep apnea is due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service?

In rendering these opinions, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures while serving in Kuwait and Afghanistan as reflected in the Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) report received in January 2023

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.  While a thorough and independent review of the claims file is expected, the Board calls the examiner's attention to the following relevant lay and medical evidence:

(Continued on the next page)

?

"	The Veteran's contentions that he has a present sleep disorder that is related to active duty service, including poor continuous sleeping conditions

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Reed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.