Citation Nr: A25032797
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241120-495911
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for post-operative recurrent right shoulder dislocation with tendonitis and osteoarthritis (dominant) post-operative Bristow repair is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent status-post injury, right knee, is denied.

Entitlement to a separate 10 percent rating for instability of the right knee is granted. 

Entitlement to an effective date of September 16, 2021, but no earlier, for the award of a separate 20 percent rating for unstable right shoulder scars is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), bipolar disorder and anxiety, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, claimed as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected status-post injury, right knee, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, claimed as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability based rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  Throughout the course of the appeal, the Veteran's service-connected post-operative recurrent right shoulder dislocation with tendonitis and osteoarthritis (dominant) post-operative Bristow repair has not been manifested by limitation of motion of 45 degrees from side; there is no medical evidence documenting the functional equivalent of ankylosis. 

2.  Throughout the course of the appeal, the Veteran's residuals of right knee injury, has not been manifested by flexion limited to 30 degrees; there is no limitation of extension, functional equivalent of ankylosis, malunion of the tibia and fibula, removal of semilunar cartilage, or genu recurvatum.

3.  The Veteran's residuals of right knee injury have been manifested by incomplete ligament tear causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device.

4.  The Veteran submitted an increased rating for his right shoulder disability on September 16, 2021; when resolving the benefit of the doubt, his right shoulder scars were unstable and painful since that date.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent for post-operative recurrent right shoulder dislocation with tendonitis and osteoarthritis (dominant) post-operative Bristow repair have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including §§ 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71(a), Diagnostic Code 5201.

2.  The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for status-post injury, right knee, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including §§ 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71(a), Diagnostic Code 5260. 

3.  The criteria for a separate 10 percent rating, but no higher, for right knee instability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including §§ 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71(a), Diagnostic Code 5257. 

4.  The criteria for an effective date of September 16, 2021, but no earlier, for the award of a separate 20 percent rating for unstable right shoulder scars have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 ; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1979 to March 1983.

The claim with respect to entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder has been continuously pursued since the Veteran submitted his initial claim in April 2019.  With respect to the remaining issues, the appeal has been continuously pursued since the Veteran filed his supplemental claim on September 16, 2021.  This matter comes on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision.  

In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

With respect to the issues decided herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, hypertension, left knee disorder and sleep apnea as well as entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Increased Rating Claims

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

To evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  As in the instant case, where an increase in the level of a disability is at issue, the primary concern is the present level of disability.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

A disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination and endurance. Functional loss may be due to the absence or deformity of structures or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior in undertaking the motion.  Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

In Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, although pain may cause a functional loss, "pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by VA regulations applicable to the musculoskeletal system."  Rather, pain may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance." Id., quoting 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

With respect to joints, in particular, the factors of disability reside in reductions of normal excursion of movements in different planes.  Inquiry will be directed to more or less than normal movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity or atrophy of disuse.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45.

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59.  When 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record, even in non-arthritis contexts, the Board should address its applicability.  Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011).

The Board also notes that the Court held that "to be adequate, a VA examination of the joints must, wherever possible, include the results of the range of motion testing described in the final sentence of."  38 C.F.R. § 4.59.  See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).  Specifically, the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that VA examinations include joint testing for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.  Recent VA examinations in September 2023 comply with the requirements set forth in Correia. 

Post-operative recurrent right shoulder dislocation with tendonitis and osteoarthritis (dominant) post-operative Bristow repair 

The Veteran filed a claim seeking an increased rating in September 2021.  He has generally asserted that an increased rating is warranted; however, the representative has not put forth any argument with respect to this issue.  

The Veteran's right shoulder disability has been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.  This code provides that a minimum 20 percent evaluation is warranted for either arm when its motion is limited to the shoulder level.  A 30 percent evaluation is warranted for the major arm and a 20 percent rating for the minor arm when its motion is limited to midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees).  A 30 percent evaluation is warranted for the minor arm when flexion and/or abduction is limited to 25 degrees from the side.  A 40 percent evaluation, the maximum available, is warranted for the major arm when flexion and/or abduction is limited to 25 degrees from the side.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  Normal forward flexion and abduction of the shoulder are from 0 degrees to 180 degrees with 90 degrees being at shoulder level.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I.  The medical evidence of record reflects that the Veteran is right hand dominant.  

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent for right shoulder rotator cuff tear with tendonitis and osteoarthritis (dominant) post-operative Bristow repair is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 5201.  In this regard, even considering pain and additional functional loss during flare-ups or repeated use over time, there is no competent medical evidence showing that the Veteran's range of motion of the right shoulder is limited to 45 degrees from the side to warrant a higher disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5201.  The October 2021 and September 2023 VA examinations clearly showed that the Veteran's range of motion did not result in limitations to meet the next higher criteria.  In this regard, the most restrictive range of motion findings as documented at the September 2023 VA examination were 85 degrees flexion and abduction during flare-ups and following repeated use over time.  Moreover, VA clinical records while documenting shoulder pain also do not show that the Veteran's motion has at any point during the course of the appeal been limited to 45 degrees on the right side.

Although the Veteran reported right shoulder pain, again, the recent VA examiner found that during flare-ups, motion was limited to 85 degrees.  The examiner also found that motion was limited to 85 degrees following repeated use over time.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).  The prior VA examination in October 2021 showed less functional impairment.  As such, there is no persuasive evidence of additional functional loss due to pain, weakness, fatigue, or incoordination to such a degree to warrant the next highest rating for limited motion of the right arm.  See Mitchell, cited above.

The Board now turns to whether a higher rating is warranted under other Diagnostic Codes pertaining to the shoulder and arm.  In the instant case, the Board finds that a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 5200 is not applicable because there has been no competent medical evidence showing that the Veteran has the functional equivalent of ankylosis of his right shoulder.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).  The VA examinations clearly document no findings of ankylosis.  Importantly, the evidence shows that the Veteran has retained motion in his shoulder to almost shoulder level.

Further, the VA examiners also clearly found that there was no impairment of the humerus to warrant a higher or separate rating under Diagnostic Code 5202.  Further, the examiner found no impairment of the clavicle or scapula to warrant a separate rating under Diagnostic Code 5203.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Diagnostic Codes 5200 to 5203.

The Board has carefully reviewed and considered the Veteran's statements regarding the severity of his right shoulder disability.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran, in advancing this appeal, believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects.  Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  In this case, however, the competent medical evidence offering detailed specific specialized determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal; the medical evidence also largely contemplates the Veteran's descriptions of symptoms.  The lay testimony has been considered together with the probative medical evidence clinically evaluating the severity of the pertinent disability symptoms.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings are appropriate for the Veteran's right shoulder disability; however, as discussed above, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable since the award of service connection.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  See Hart, cited above.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 20 percent for status post operative recurrent right shoulder dislocation with tendonitis and osteoarthritis (dominant) post-operative Bristow repair.  In denying a higher rating, the Board finds the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. 

Status-post injury, right knee 

The Veteran generally contends that an increased rating is warranted for his right knee disorder.  His disability has been rated 10 percent disabling based on limitation of flexion.  Again, the Veteran's representative has not put forth any argument as to why a higher rating is warranted.  

Limitation of motion of the knee is contemplated in 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a , Diagnostic Codes 5260 and 5261.  Normal range of knee motion is 140 degrees of flexion and zero degrees of extension.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.  Diagnostic Code 5260 provides for a zero percent evaluation where flexion of the leg is only limited to 60 degrees.  For a 10 percent evaluation, flexion must be limited to 45 degrees.  A 20 percent evaluation is warranted where flexion is limited to 30 degrees.  A 30 percent evaluation may be assigned where flexion is limited to 15 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5261 provides for a zero percent evaluation where extension of the leg is limited to five degrees.  A 10 percent evaluation requires extension limited to 10 degrees.  A 20 percent evaluation is warranted where extension is limited to 15 degrees.  A 30 percent evaluation may be assigned where the evidence shows extension limited to 20 degrees.  For a 40 percent evaluation, extension must be limited to 30 degrees. And finally, where extension is limited to 45 degrees a 50 percent evaluation may be assigned.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257, for recurrent subluxation or instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for one of the following: (a) sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; or (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation.

Additionally, for patellar instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker.

Note (1) states that for patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon. Note (2) states that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration).

VA's General Counsel has stated that separate ratings under Diagnostic Code 5260 (limitation of flexion of the leg) and Diagnostic Code 5261 (limitation of extension of the leg) may be assigned for disability of the same joint. VAOPGCPREC 9-04 September 17, 2004), published at 69 Fed. Reg. 59,990 (2004).  VA's General Counsel has also stated that when a knee disorder is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257 and an appellant also has limitation of knee motion which at least meets the criteria for a noncompensable evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260 or 5261, separate evaluations may be assigned for arthritis with limitation of motion and for instability. 

However, General Counsel stated that if an appellant does not meet the criteria for a noncompensable rating under either Diagnostic Code 5260 or Diagnostic Code 5261, there is no additional disability for which a separate rating for arthritis may be assigned.  VAOPGCPREC 23-97 (July 1, 1997), published at 62 Fed. Reg. 63,604 (1997).  If a rating is assigned under the provisions for other knee impairment (38 C.F.R. § 4.71a , Code 5257) a separate 10 percent rating may be assigned where some limitation of motion, albeit noncompensable, has been demonstrated.  See VAOPGCPREC 9-98, 63 Fed. Reg. 56,704 (1998).  Moreover, separate ratings may be assigned under Diagnostic Codes 5258 and 5259 for dislocation or removal of cartilage. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's right knee disability under Diagnostic Code 5260 for limitation of flexion is not warranted.  In this regard, although limitation of motion has been observed, the probative evidence does not show that flexion has been limited to 30 degrees or more at any point during the course of the appeal to warrant a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 5260.  The most restrictive range of motion documented for the right knee during the course of the appeal was 85 degrees flexion during flare-ups and following repeated use over time as shown at the September 2023 VA examination.  The prior examination in October 2021 showed less functional impairment.  In sum, the medical of evidence of record documents flexion of right knee to be much higher than 30 degrees to warrant a higher rating.  Further, extension has always been normal and, thus, a separate rating for limitation of extension is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 5261.  

The Veteran has reported chronic right knee pain and thus, the Board recognizes the application of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, and Mitchell, supra.  However, a higher compensation is not warranted under these provisions because there is no persuasive evidence of additional functional loss due to pain, weakness, fatigue, or incoordination that would limit motion to such a degree so as to warrant higher ratings based on limitation of motion during this period.  In this regard, again, the most restrictive limitations documented during flare-ups was 85 degrees flexion to zero degrees extension at the most recent VA examination during a flare-up and following repeated use over time.  See Sharp v. Shulkin 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

Moreover, pain alone is not sufficient to warrant a higher rating, as pain may cause a functional loss, does not itself constitute functional loss.  Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011).  Rather, pain must affect some aspect of "the normal working movements of the body" such as "excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance," in order to constitute functional loss.  Id. at 11; see 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. In this case, it does not.  In sum, an increased rating is not warranted based on limitation of motion.

Further, the Board has considered whether separate ratings are warranted under other diagnostic codes pertaining to the knee.  Importantly, the recent September 2023 VA examination showed that the Veteran had recurrent subluxation or persistent instability to warrant a separate 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5257.  In this regard, the examiner observed an incomplete partial ligament tear, which is the criteria for a 10 percent rating.  However, a 20 percent rating or higher is not warranted as the examiner specifically found that a medical provider has not prescribed a brace and/or assistive device.  In order to afford the Veteran his full due process, the AOJ will award the appropriate effective date for this separate rating when effectuating this grant.  

With respect to the remaining diagnostic codes, as the Veteran has been able to flex and extend his knee even during flare-ups and following repeated use over time, the evidence of record fails to demonstrate the functional equivalent of ankylosis at any time and, thus, a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 5256 is not warranted.  As the evidence also fails to demonstrate meniscal conditions, impairment of the tibia or fibula, or genu recurvatum, the Veteran is not entitled to a higher or separate rating under Diagnostic Codes 5258, 5259, 5262 or 5263, respectively.

The Board has carefully reviewed and considered the Veteran's statements regarding the severity of his right knee disability.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran, in advancing this appeal, believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability ratings reflect. Moreover, again, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  However, in this case, the competent medical evidence offering detailed specific specialized determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal; the medical evidence also largely contemplates the Veteran's descriptions of symptoms. The lay testimony has been considered together with the probative medical evidence clinically evaluating the severity of the pertinent disability symptoms.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings are appropriate for the Veteran's right knee disability; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

In conclusion, the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for status-post injury right knee (limitation of flexion).  Moreover, when resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that a separate 10 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for right knee instability.  In denying higher ratings, the Board finds the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable as there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  

Effective Date for Unstable Right Shoulder Scars

The Veteran's representative has specifically requested an effective date of September 16, 2021, the date the Veteran submitted his claim for an increased rating for his right shoulder disability.   The Veteran did not appeal the rating assigned.  

The law pertaining to the effective date of a VA claim for increase in disability mandates that unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date for the increase shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of the claim for increase.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Law and regulation also specifically provide that the effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if any application is received within one year from such date. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o).  If the increase became ascertainable more than one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim, then the proper effective date would be the date of claim. In a case where the increase became ascertainable after the filing of the claim, then the effective date would be the date of increase.  See generally Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125 (1997).

The Veteran filed his current claim for an increased rating on September 16, 2021.  The Veteran was initially afforded a VA examination pertaining to his right shoulder scar in October 2021, which identified one scar, which measured 5 x .2 cm., and was not unstable or painful.  However, the recent examination in September 2023 showed the following scars: right anterior shoulder .8 x .6 cm., circular superior .5 x .5 cm. and posterior .7 x .6 cm.  The examiner also found that the scars were unstable and tender to palpation. 

Based on this examination, essentially finding that this was the date entitlement arose, the AOJ awarded a separate 20 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7804, which provides that three or four scars that are unstable or painful scars warrants a 20 percent rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118.  However, the Board finds that the prior October 2021 examination was inadequate as it appears that the examiner failed to measure and examine all of the right shoulder surgical scars present as done at the subsequent VA examination.  

In turn, when resolving the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the September 2023 VA examination is the most probative medical evidence as to the severity of the Veteran's scars throughout the course of the appeal.  Thus, an effective date of September 16, 2021, the date of claim for increase, for the award of a separate 20 percent rating for unstable right shoulder scars is warranted.  

As noted above, the Veteran's representative specifically requested an effective date of September 16, 2021.  As such, in light of the representative's statement, the Board finds that the Veteran has limited his appeal.  AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 39 (1993).  Thus, this award represents a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal. In sum, entitlement to an effective date of September 16, 2021 for the award of a separate 20 percent rating for unstable right shoulder scars is granted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, PTSD, bipolar disorder and anxiety, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his current psychiatric disorder is related to service.  In this regard, the Veteran asserts that he participated in Operation Gallant Eagle Airborne jump, which resulted in mass casualties and injuries during the jump.  The Research Records Center Response provided that on March 30, 1982, members of the 82nd Airborne Division participated in a low-level parachute jump (800 feet) at Ft. Irwin, California (Operation Gallant Eagle).  Due to gusty winds and turbulence six individuals were killed and 140 individuals were injured in the parachute jump.  However, the individual active duty companies, battalions and brigades under the 82nd Airborne Division were not identified.  Importantly, the Veteran's service treatment records show that he was never stationed at Ft. Irwin.  Thus, this stressor has not been verified.  

However, the Veteran has generally asserted that his disorder is due to a parachute jump where suffered a right shoulder injury.  At a September 1985 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he dislocated his right shoulder the second time during a parachute jump.  He also reported that he was hospitalized at Fort Bragg for this injury.  However, the Veteran's service hospital records have not been obtained as they are stored separate from clinical records.  As these records pertain to a stressor incident, the AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not attempting to obtain them.  Thus, this matter must be remanded to obtain such records.  

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a September 2024 private opinion.  This examiner found that the Veteran encountered stressors during the service that impacted his mood and led to the development of bipolar symptoms.  The examiner opined that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's bipolar disorder started with depressive symptoms during his service.  The examiner also appeared to indicate that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was due to his service-connected disorders.  In this regard, the examiner noted that due to chronic pain and physical limitations, the Veteran is unable to complete daily tasks and exercise, and has a limited range of movement, all of which impact his mood and sleep.  

However, this opinion is inadequate as it is contradicted by the remaining evidence of record, which the examiner failed to address.  In this regard, service treatment records and post service treatment records are silent with respect to any psychiatric symptoms until approximately 2014, over 20 years after the Veteran's discharge from service.  An August 2014 VA clinical record showed that the Veteran was seen for an initial visit.  Although the record noted that the Veteran reported seeing a psychiatrist in the past due to depressed mood, the Veteran reported that his current symptoms were secondary to multiple personal stressors as he had been homeless for one year.  Significantly, there was no mention of any symptoms being related to inservice incidents at that time.  

The private examiner also indicated that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was secondary to his service-connected disorders due to chronic pain and physical limitations.  However, in contrast, recent VA psychiatric records show that the Veteran reported outlook as "stable" and "optimistic," citing exercise and gardening as good habits in maintaining mood.  In sum, it does not appear that the private examiner considered all of the relevant evidence of record.  Thus, given these inconsistencies, this opinion cannot be the basis for the award of service connection.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008)

However, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA psychiatric examination.  The Board finds that given the Veteran's contentions concerning the inservice incidents, his current diagnosis and the private opinion indicating that there may be a link, a VA examination is necessary.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Accordingly, on remand, the Veteran should be afforded an examination to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, claimed as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

The Veteran appears to assert that his hypertension is secondary to the chronic pain caused by his service-connected disabilities.  In support of his claim, in August 2023, prior to the decision on appeal, he submitted a publication indicating an association between pain and high blood pressure.  However, despite the Veteran's assertion as well as supporting documentation, he has not been afforded a VA examination with opinion to determine the etiology of his hypertension.  Moreover, all theories of entitlement to service connection mut be considered.  See Szemraj v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1370, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Thus, a remand is necessary to afford the Veteran a VA examination to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.   

?

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected status-post injury, right knee, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his left knee disability is due to inservice parachute jumps.  In the alternative, the Veteran has asserted that his disorder is secondary to his service-connected right knee disability.  

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted an August 2024 private opinion.  The private examiner found that based on review of the Veteran's claims file, including his medical records, consultation with the Veteran as well as research on the subject of the causes of knee disabilities, and medical experience, it is as likely as not that the Veteran's parachute jumps during service caused the development of his current left knee disability.  In addition, the examiner stated that the Veteran's service-connected impairment of the right knee with a history of derangement and knee sprain has caused his left knee condition by causing chronic pain and altered, limping gait.

However, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate as it failed to consider and discuss relevant evidence of record.  In this regard, the examiner did not address the lack of any complaints pertaining to the left knee while in service.  Moreover, the Veteran underwent VA examinations in September 1983 and November 1984, which showed a normal left knee.  Further, a November 2020 x-ray of the left knee was normal and the Veteran exhibited normal range of motion at the October 2014 examination for the left knee as well as the October 2021 and September 2023 VA examinations for the right knee.  In fact, at the October 2021 VA examination, the Veteran denied functional loss and impairment of the left knee.  

Additionally, the private examiner indicated that the Veteran's left knee was due to the right knee due to an impaired gait.  However, the most recent VA examination is silent with respect to any sort of gait issues and noted that no assistive devices were used.  Likewise, recent VA clinical records expressly show that there was no impaired gait.  Given these inconsistences with the remaining medical evidence, this opinion cannot be the basis for the award of service connection.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination pertaining to the left knee in October 2014.  The examiner opined that left knee impairment is less likely as not (less than 50/50 probability) caused by or aggravated by the right knee condition.  The examiner rationalized that there is no objective medical evidence of on-going disease pathology of the right knee to cause or aggravate a left knee pathology.  In addition, the left knee examination is normal.  Furthermore, if the right knee were to cause limited activity, there would be less stress applied to the left knee because overall activity performed is diminished.  

However, the Veteran has continued to report left knee pain at times and a November 2020 evaluation for Social Security Administration (SSA) disability benefits showed that the Veteran wore a left knee brace and flexion was limited to 70 degrees due to pain.  Thus, it is unclear whether the Veteran has a current left knee disability given the claims of functional impairment.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Moreover, the Veteran's personnel records show that he was the recipient of a Parachute Badge.  Given the Veteran's contentions indicating that his left knee is secondary to his right knee as well as the fact that he did participate in parachute jumps during service, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not affording him a VA examination with etiological opinion.  Thus, a remand is necessary to correct this error.  

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, claimed as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

The Veteran is also seeking service connection for sleep apnea.  He is asserting that his sleep apnea is related to weight gain caused by his service-connected disabilities.  

The Board notes that VA's Office of General Counsel has held that a claim for secondary service connection may rest on obesity as an intermediary between the claimed secondary disability and the service-connected primary disability. See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  In order to meet this criterion, the Veteran must demonstrate that a previously service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese; that obesity was a substantial factor in causing secondary disability; and the secondary disability would only have occurred but for the obesity. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (January 6, 2017).

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted an August 2024 private opinion.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obesity, which contributed to his sleep apnea, was caused by his inability to exercise due to his service-connected disabilities.  However, the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea in March 2013, and the medical evidence cited by the examiner showing that the Veteran was unable to exercise was after this date.  Moreover, the examiner indicated that the Veteran was unable to exercise, but recent VA clinical records show that the Veteran continued to exercise and work in the garden for mood stabilization.  Thus, given these inconsistencies, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate and cannot be the basis for the award of service connection.  

Nevertheless, prior to the decision on appeal, VA clinical records indicated that weight gain contributed to the Veteran's sleep apnea.  The Veteran also submitted a publication showing some sort of an association between obesity and knee disorders.  The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this issue, which in light of his contentions, the Board finds is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination with opinion addressing whether the Veteran's obesity is caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities; and whether obesity was a substantial factor in caused sleep apnea.  

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded. 

At this time, the Veteran does not meet the schedular criteria for a TDIU.  Nevertheless, this issue is inextricably intertwined with the remaining issues on appeal as well as the effectuation of the benefits awarded herein.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's service hospital records from Ft. Bragg.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a psychiatric examination with a VA psychologist or psychiatrist to determine the nature and cause of any acquired psychiatric disability, including PTSD.  The examiner must be notified as to whether or not any of the Veteran's stressors have been corroborated.  The examiner must review the claims file.  The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Clearly delineate the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disabilities. including PTSD, by diagnosis(es).

(b.)  If the Veteran meets the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, whether it is at least as likely as not related to any corroborated in-service stressors.

(c.)  For each diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorders other than PTSD, whether it is at least as likely as not related to active duty service.

(d.)  For any psychiatric disorder found to not be directly related to service, whether it is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase regardless of permanence, even transient) by service-connected disabilities.  

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for any opinion expressed.  The examiner must address the service treatment records, post service treatment records, and the Veteran's lay statements.  With respect to secondary service connection, the examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his psychiatric disorder.  The examiner must also provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of his hypertension.  The examiner must review the claims file.  The examiner should respond to the following:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not that it (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service, or (4) related to active duty service.

b)	If hypertension is found to not be directly related to service, whether it is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase regardless of permanence, even transient) by his service-connected disabilities, including chronic pain caused by such.

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for any opinion expressed.  The examiner must address the service treatment records, post service treatment records, the publication submitted by the Veteran indicating an association between chronic pain and hypertension, and the Veteran's lay statements.  With respect to secondary service connection, the examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his hypertension.  The examiner must also provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation. 

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of any left knee disability.  The examiner must review the claims and clearly delineate all disabilities of the left knee.  If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below.  Also, if a disorder is not diagnosed, this finding must be reconciled with the November 2020 SSA evaluation.  With respect to each diagnosis of the left knee, the examiner should respond to the following:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not that it (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service, or (4) related to active duty service, including inservice parachute jumps.

b)	If the left knee disorder is found to not be directly related to service, whether it is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase regardless of permanence, even transient) by his service-connected right knee disability, to include any altered gait.

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for any opinion expressed.  The examiner must address the service treatment records, post service treatment records and the Veteran's lay statements. With respect to secondary service connection, the examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability and his left knee disability.  The examiner must also provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation. 

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of his sleep apnea. The examiner must review the claims file.  The examiner should respond to the following:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not related to active duty service.

b)	If sleep apnea is found to not be directly related to service, whether it is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase regardless of permanence, even transient) by his service-connected disabilities.  The examiner must also opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity is caused by or related to the service-connected disabilities. If so, further opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the obesity, which was the result of service-connected disabilities, was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his sleep apnea.

?

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for any opinion expressed.  The examiner must address the service treatment records, post service treatment records, the publication submitted by the Veteran indicating an association between obesity and the knee, and the Veteran's lay statements.  With respect to secondary service connection, the examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his sleep apnea.  The examiner must also provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation.  

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.N. Moats, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.