Citation Nr: A25032400
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230619-355365
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder degenerative joint disease is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder degenerative joint disease is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from March 1975 to May 1975.

The higher level review rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the June 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher level review in the September 2022 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for left and right shoulder disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder degenerative joint disease is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder degenerative joint disease is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral shoulder disabilities. He contends that his shoulder disabilities arose during service.

The Board notes by way of history that these claims were remanded in January 2022 for a VA addendum opinion. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2022. The examiner opined that the Veteran's shoulder disabilities were less likely related to service. The examiner indicated that the Veteran was an unreliable historian, and that in the absence of objective evidence the Veteran's lay statements alone could not be used to establish the likelihood of onset during service. 

The examiner's opinion and rationale largely rely on a lack of records showing a diagnosis or treatment for any shoulder condition until 2009. A negative opinion based solely on the lack of evidence in service treatment records is inadequate. See generally, Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, an addendum opinion is required. The Board makes no credibility findings at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disabilities are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including his report of symptom onset during service.

A complete rationale for proffered opinion must be provided. The rationale should reflect consideration of the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran report of symptom onset during service. 

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?  For purposes of this opinion only, presume the Veteran's lay statements are credible.

 

 

G. E. Wilkerson

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Lauritzen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.