Citation Nr: A25032130
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 220330-231902
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, to include as due to environmental exposures in Southwest Asia, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder, claimed as a left hand sprain, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder, claimed as a right knee strain, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome, including as due to exposure to environmental hazards, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, including as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.   The Veteran's diagnosed bilateral hearing loss is etiologically related to acoustic trauma sustained in active service.  

2.   The Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during Persian Gulf War, is presumed to have been exposed to fine particulate matter and has been diagnosed with allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis.  

3.   The Veteran's allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis are presumed to be due to exposure to fine particulate matter while serving in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.  

4.   The Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease is not etiologically attributable to service, was not incurred in service, or was incurred within one year of discharge, and are not alternatively attributable to Southwest Asia service.  

5.   The Veteran's left hand disorder was not incurred in service, is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease and arthritis did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service discharge.  

6.   The Veteran's right knee disorder did not have its onset in active service, is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease and arthritis did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service discharge.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.   The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.385.  

2.   The criteria for service connection for allergic rhinitis as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320.  

3.   The criteria for service connection for chronic sinusitis as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320.  

4.   The criteria for service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.317.  

5.   The criteria for service connection for a left hand disorder, claimed as a left hand sprain, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  

6.   The criteria for service connection for a right knee disorder, claimed as a right knee sprain, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1975 to July 1978 and from October 1978 to October 1995. He had service in Southwest Asia from December 1990 to May 1991.  

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2021 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In May 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2021 decision.  In December 2021, the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2021 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2021 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In May 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2021 rating decision.  In December 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2021 rating decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2021 rating decision.

In the March 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2021 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for bilateral hearing loss, headaches and plantar fasciitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran was previously denied entitlement to service connection for hearing loss, allergic rhinitis, sinusitis, hypertension, headaches, a left hand disorder, bilateral plantar fasciitis, right knee strain, and service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease.  In the December 2021 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence was submitted to warrant readjudicating the claims; the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the March 2022 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

In addition, for certain chronic diseases, such as arthritis and peptic ulcers, a presumption of service connection arises if the disease is manifested to a degree of 10 percent within one year following discharge from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  When a chronic disease is not shown within one year after service, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) for the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support a claim for such diseases; however, such continuity of symptomatology may only support a claim for those chronic diseases listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

Furthermore, compensation may be granted for disability due to undiagnosed illness of a Veteran who served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.  38 U.S.C. § 1117.  

During the pendency of this appeal, Congress revised 38 U.S.C. § 1117, effective March 1, 2002.  In the revised statute, the term "chronic disability" was changed to "qualifying chronic disability," and the definition of "qualifying chronic disability" was expanded to include (a) undiagnosed illness, (b) a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness, to include chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome, that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, or (c) any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines, in regulations, warrants a presumption of service connection.  Effective June 10, 2003, VA promulgated revised regulations to, in part, implement these statutory changes.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).  

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1), as amended, compensation is warranted for a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a "qualifying chronic disability" that became manifest during service on active duty in the Armed Forces in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, or to a degree of 10 percent during the presumptive period prescribed by the Secretary. The period within which such disabilities must become manifest to a compensable degree in order for entitlement to compensation to be established is currently December 31, 2026.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1)(i).  In order to qualify, the chronic disability must not be attributed to any known clinical disease by history, physical examination, or laboratory tests.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a), (b).  

The term "objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability" includes both "signs," in a medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3).  Signs or symptoms that may be manifestations of undiagnosed illness or a chronic multi-symptom illness include the following: fatigue, unexplained rashes or other dermatological signs or symptoms, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, neurological signs or symptoms, neuropsychological signs or symptoms, signs or symptoms involving the upper or lower respiratory system, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal signs or symptoms, cardiovascular signs or symptoms, abnormal weight loss, or menstrual disorders.  38 U.S.C. § 1117(g).  

The term "medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness" means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic multi symptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered medically unexplained.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii).  Disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic. The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(4).  

For the purpose of applying the laws administered by VA, impaired hearing is considered a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory threshold for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature.  Id. see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  

1.   Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral hearing loss which developed as a result of noise exposure during military service. Specifically,, the Veteran claimed his military occupational specialty of supply specialist and armorer as a reason for his hearing loss. See November 2020 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-525EZ).  A December 2021 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a current disability as the February 2021 VA examination showed hearing loss for VA purposes and that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise during service as his DD Form 214 showed a military occupational specialty that was consistent with hazardous noise exposure; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

Turning to the question of whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and service, the Board notes that the record contains several opinions which must be considered and weighed.  See Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993) (citing Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 192-93 (1992)).  See also Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-471 (1993) (stating that the probative value of medical evidence is based on the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the physician reaches; as is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board).  When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other.  See Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998), citing Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995).  The Board will consider each of these opinions below.  

An April 2015 opinion from Dr. K.B., a private audiologist, indicated that, based on her examination, review of the military records, and interview with the Veteran, she believed that it is at least as likely as not that his hearing loss was caused by or contributed to by noise exposure during his military service. She further stated that her opinion was based on the fact that he was exposed to excessive noise levels while in the military without benefit of adequate hearing protection and that a hearing test performed in 1996 revealed a significant threshold shift in his left ear compared to his hearing test performed in 1986. The provider's opinion is grounded in the record and supported by a reasoned and adequate rationale.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  This opinion is therefore being afforded probative weight.  

A March 2021 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the right and left ear hearing loss is due to military noise exposure as there were no differences in threshold between enlistment and separation that were 15 decibels or more.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the current hearing loss most likely was not caused by noise exposure that was experienced while the Veteran was in active duty and that it occurred after separation from active duty.  However, the March 2021 VA examiner seems to rely solely on the lack of a diagnosis during active service when rendering the opinion.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.  

In sum, the Veteran has been diagnosed with bilateral hearing loss and was exposed to acoustic trauma during military service. Although the April 2015 private opinion reflects a limited rationale, the Board notes that it is prohibited from developing additional evidence for the purpose of obtaining evidence against a claimant's case. Cf. Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) (noting that, because it is not permissible for VA to undertake additional development to obtain evidence against an appellant's case, VA must provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases for its decision to pursue such development where such development could be reasonably construed as obtaining additional evidence for that purpose).  

As such, the Board finds that service connection for bilateral hearing loss is warranted.  The appeal is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

2.   Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia is granted.

3.   Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia is granted.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis as due to inservice exposure to burn pits in Iraq. See November 2020 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ); July 2021 VA Form 20-0999.  The December 2021 rating decision reflected favorable findings that the Veteran's personnel records confirm service in Iraq, that he is presumed to be exposed to particulate matter during active duty, that allergic rhinitis and sinusitis are presumptively linked to exposure to particulate matter, and the Veteran had been diagnosed with chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

Effective August 5, 2021, VA revised 38 C.F.R. § 3.320.  These revisions apply to all claims received by VA on or after August 5, 2021, or that were pending before VA, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, or the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit on August 5, 2021.  86 Fed. Reg. 42724.  

As of August 5, 2021, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320, if a veteran was exposed to particulate matter during active military service, certain chronic diseases, including allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis, shall be service connected if it becomes manifest to any degree (including non-compensable) at any time following separation from military service that includes a qualifying period of service as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(4), except as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(b) or if there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to fine, particulate matter during that service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320. As noted above, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with allergic rhinitis in March 2021 and sinusitis in August 2021. 

The term qualifying period of service means any period of active military naval or air space in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf war.  The term Southwest Asia theater of operations means Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations.  The term Persian Gulf War means August 2, 1990, and thereafter.  38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(5). As noted above, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had performed service in Southwest Asia.  

Therefore, as allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis are listed as chronic diseases presumed to be associated with exposure to fine particulate matter, service connection is warranted on a presumptive basis as allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis were diagnosed following the Veteran's separation from service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War.  The claims are therefore granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

4.   Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, including as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia, is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he has gastroesophageal reflux disease as a result of combat stress associated with his period of active duty in Iraq. See November 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ. The December 2021 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran was exposed to environmental hazards and particulate matter during military service as his DD Form 214 confirms service in Iraq, that the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to his military service, and he has been diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease and hiatal hernia; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

Initially, the Board notes that gastroesophageal reflux disease is not an undiagnosed illness and does not qualify as one of the chronic disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Significantly, the Court in Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 87 (2018) held that gastroesophageal reflux disease is excluded from consideration as a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness as a matter of law, as provided in § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B)(3) As such, presumptive service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease due to Persian Gulf War service is not applicable here.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Notwithstanding, further consideration under the direct service connection is warranted.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994).  

The service treatment records are completely negative for complaints, treatment for or diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease.  A May 1995 service retirement examination found the Veteran's abdomen to be normal.  In an accompanying Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he suffered from, or ever suffered from, frequent indigestion.  The Veteran also indicated that he was in good health, that he was taking no medications and that he had not had any illness or injury other than those already noted.  

The Board has next considered whether service connection for a hiatal hernia is warranted on a presumptive basis, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology. In this regard, the clinical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran manifested such disease to a compensable degree within the year following his discharge from active duty service. The Veteran's post-service treatment record did not reflect any complaints for a gastrointestinal disorder in February 2014. See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (ruling that a prolonged period without medical complaint can be considered, along with other factors, as evidence of whether an injury or a disease was incurred in service which resulted in any chronic or persistent disability). Therefore, the Board finds that presumptive service connection for a hiatal hernia, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

With regards to direct service connection, a March 2021 VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported that his condition began when he had acid reflux after he eats spaghetti meat sauce while stationed in Germany 15 years ago.  He indicated that he was treated then with Nexium but until now he is experiencing the same symptom, and he still cannot eat sauce with acid and that he has to watch what foods he can eat. The examiner made diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease and hiatal hernia. The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner stated the record was silent and did not show evidence that establishes and confirm the presence of gastroesophageal reflux disease during active service.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the current gastroesophageal reflux disease is a new and separate condition not incurred in or during service.  

Subsequently, following a Gulf war examination in August 2021, a VA examiner opined that gastroesophageal reflux disease is a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.  The examiner concluded that it is less likely than not that the claimed condition was caused by a specific exposure event during Southwest service; rather, the examiner stated that the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease is related to excessive stomach acid.  This opinion confirms the findings of an August 2016 Gulf War General Medical examination, which noted a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease; at that time, the examiner also stated that gastroesophageal reflux disease is a specific diagnosis and less likely as not related to environmental exposure.  

The Board finds the above opinions, taken together, to be probative as the examiner reviewed the claims file and provided a well-reasoned and clear rationale.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions.").  These opinions are therefore afforded great probative weight.  There is no contrary probative opinion of record.  

The Board has considered the Veteran's general contention that his active military service resulted in his gastroesophageal reflux disease.  As a lay person, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, such as heartburn.  See Washington v. Nicholson, supra; see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  Lay evidence may be competent on a variety of matters concerning the nature and cause of disability.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.  While the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease, he is not competent to opine on the etiology of the condition and/or to determine that these symptoms are somehow related to his service.  Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 n.4.  As such, the Board places more probative emphasis on the medical opinion evidence of record, which opines against a nexus.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is not warranted. The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

5.   Entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder, claimed as a left hand sprain, is denied.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for a left hand disorder which had its onset in service. Specifically, the Veteran maintains that he developed a left hand disorder from carrying heavy loads while performing his duties in service.  See November 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ.  A December 2021 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with left hand sprain in a March 2021 VA examination and that the evidence showed that a qualifying event, injury or disease had its onset during his service based on a complaint for left hand pain in July 1986; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

The service treatment records show that the Veteran had a wart removed from the left hand in July 1980.  He was subsequently treated for an injury to the left hand in July 1986 which he sustained while playing baseball and an X-ray study revealed no fracture with soft swelling due to old degenerative disc head of 1st metacarpal; he was instructed to use warm soaks.  The May 1995 service discharge examination was negative for any complaints or findings related to the hands; clinical evaluation of the upper extremities was normal. In an accompanying Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he suffered from, or ever suffered from, arthritis.  The Veteran also indicated that he was in good health, that he was taking no medications and that he had not had any illness or injury other than those already noted.  

The Board has first considered whether service connection for left hand arthritis is warranted on a presumptive basis. However, the earliest evidence of a left hand disorder following service was in March 2021, more than 25 years following the Veteran's discharge from service.  The multi-year gap between discharge from active duty service and when the Veteran complained of a left hand injury is a factor that weighs against in-service onset.  Further, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with left hand arthritis.  Consequently, presumptive service connection, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, for left hand disorder is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; See generally Maxson v. Gober, supra.  

With regards to direct service connection, a March 2021 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness and that the diagnosed bilateral hand sprain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by bilateral hand conditions during service. The examiner noted that the record shows consultations for left hand condition in 1980 and 1988 during active service; however, the record was silent since service, and the long gap of more than three decades the record did not show evidence that establishes or demonstrates continuity or chronicity of symptoms during active service.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the current left hand condition, bilateral hand sprain, is a new and separate condition not incurred in or during service.  This opinion reflects clear conclusions and supporting data or a reasoned medical explanation. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra.  This opinion is therefore probative weight.  There is no contrary probative opinion of record.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that he has a left hand disorder which is related to an in-service injury.  The Veteran is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of anatomical relationships.  Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that he has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the March 2021 medical opinion.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a left hand disorder, to include a left hand sprain, is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

6.   Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder, to include a right knee strain, is denied.

The Veteran contends that his currently diagnosed right knee disorder is due to his active service. The Veteran essentially contends that he developed a right knee disorder due to the physical rigors of his service, to include running, marching and jumping in boots. See November 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ. The December 2021 rating decision included a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with right knee strain in a March 2021 VA examination; the Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

Service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, and/or diagnoses relating to a right knee disorder. The May 1995 service discharge examination was negative for any complaints or findings related to the right knee; clinical evaluation of the lower extremities was normal. In an accompanying Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he suffered from, or ever suffered from, arthritis or a trick or "locked" knee.  The Veteran also indicated that he was in good health, that he was taking no medications and that he had not had any illness or injury other than those already noted.  

The Board has first considered whether service connection for right knee arthritis is warranted on a presumptive basis. However,  the post service treatment records show that the Veteran was not diagnosed with a right knee disorder until March 2021, approximately 25 years after his discharge from service. The multi-year gap between discharge from active duty service and when the Veteran complained of a right knee disorder is a factor that weighs against in-service onset.  Further, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with right knee arthritis.  Consequently, presumptive service connection, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, for a right knee disorder is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; See generally Maxson v. Gober, supra.  

With regards to direct service connection, a March 2021 VA examiner opined that the claimed right knee condition, diagnosed as a right knee strain, was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner noted that the record did not show evidence that establish and confirm the presence of a right knee disorder during active service.  Therefore, the current right knee disorder is a new and separate condition not incurred in or during service. This opinion reflects clear conclusions and supporting data or a reasoned medical explanation. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra.  This opinion is therefore probative weight.  There is no contrary probative opinion of record.  

 The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that he has a right knee disorder which is related to an in-service injury.  The Veteran is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of anatomical relationships.  Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that he has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; see also Kahana v. Shinseki, supra.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the March 2021 medical opinion.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a right knee disorder, to include a right knee stain, is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome, including as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for irritable bowel syndrome due to his exposures while serving in Southwest Asia. See November 2020 VA Form 21-536EZ. A December 2021 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome and that he was exposed to environmental hazards during service and that he performed service in Southwest Asia; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

The Board notes that the AOJ awarded service connection for irritable bowel syndrome as due to an undiagnosed illness and assigned an initial noncompensable rating, effective September 12, 2022, in a March 2023 rating decision. The Board note that this March 2023 rating decision was issued after the March 2022 VA Form 10182 was filed in this case and that the assigned effective date for the award of service connection is after the November 2020 VA Form 21-536EZ. Therefore, the issue of entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome remains on appeal as the award of service connection in the March 2023 rating decision is not a full award of benefits. 

A March 2021 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness as the record was silent and did not show evidence that establish and confirm the presence of irritable bowel syndrome during active service. The examiner reasoned that the current irritable bowel syndrome is a new and separate condition not incurred in or during service.

The Board finds that the March 2021 VA opinion is insufficient to decide the appeal. In this regard, the examiner relied heavily on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome until several years following the Veteran's separation from service in forming the negative etiology opinion. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a veteran's reports of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a Veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).  Moreover, the opinion was provided without an adequate rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra.  Therefore, the Board finds this opinion to be insufficient to decide the appeal.  

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed irritable bowel syndrome.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he has hypertension that is a result of his active duty service. Specifically, the Veteran maintains that he developed hypertension as a result of inservice exposure to burn pits in Southwest Asia. See November 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ; July 2021 VA Form 20-0999. The December 2021 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran was exposed to environmental hazards and particulate matter during military service as his DD Form 214 confirms service in Iraq, that the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to his military service, and he has been diagnosed with hypertension; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

A March 2021 VA examiner opined that the claimed hypertension was less likely than not incurred in or caused by hypertension during service as the record was silent and did not show evidence that established and confirm the presence of hypertension during active service.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the current hypertension is new and separate condition and not incurred in or during service.  

Following a subsequent VA examination in August 2021, another VA examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that the Veteran's service treatments records were silent and did not show any evidence that established and confirm the presence of hypertension during active service; therefore, the current hypertension is new and separate condition that was not incurred during service.  

The Board is unable to decide the claims based on the March 2021 and August 2021 VA opinion reports.  In this regard, the examiners relied heavily on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of hypertension until several years following the Veteran's separation from service in forming the negative nexus opinions.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, supra. Moreover, the opinions were provided without an adequate rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Therefore, the Board finds these opinions are insufficient to decide the appeal.  

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed hypertension.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.  

3.   Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for headaches which he claims developed as a result of his exposure to environmental hazards during his period of active duty in Southwest Asia. See November 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ. The December 2021 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran is diagnosed with headaches, and that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, namely exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

A March 2021 VA examiner opined that the claimed migraine headaches was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness and that the migraine headaches were less likely than not incurred in or caused by headaches during service. The examiner reasoned that the record was silent and did not show evidence that established and confirm the presence of headache, migraine including migraine variants during active service.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the current headache, migraine including migraine variants is a new and separate condition not incurred in or during service.  

The Board is unable to decide the claim based on the March 2021 VA opinion report. In this regard, the March 2021 VA examiner relied heavily on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of migraine headaches until several years following the Veteran's separation from service in forming the negative etiology opinion.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, supra. Moreover, the opinion was provided without an adequate rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Therefore, the Board finds this opinion to be insufficient to decide the appeal.  

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed headaches.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.  

4.   Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he developed a bilateral foot disorder as a result of service. Specifically, the Veteran asserted that he developed such disorders due to the physical rigors of his service, to include running, marching and jumping in boots. See November 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ. A December 2021 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis in a March 2021 VA examination and that the evidence showed that a qualifying event, injury or disease had its onset during his service based on a complaint for foot trouble during his May 1995 separation examination from active duty; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.  

The service treatment records show that the Veteran was seen with complaints of swelling of the right foot in September 1976; he was diagnosed with ligament damage right foot.  In June 1982, the Veteran was seen for complaints of swelling and pain in the left foot.  During a periodic examination in November 1993, it was noted that the Veteran had multiple inversion injuries of both ankles; clinical evaluation of the feet noted asymptomatic pes planus and asymptomatic bunion on the right foot.  At his separation examination in May 1995, the Veteran reported a history of foot trouble; clinical evaluation of the feet was reported as normal.  

Post service treatment records show ongoing treatment for bilateral foot pain.  A Gulf War General Medical examination, dated in August 2016, noted a diagnosis of bilateral hallux valgus.  The examination report also noted that X-ray study of the feet in 2014 revealed findings suggestive of prior trauma or Freiberg's infraction of the second metatarsal head of the right foot, bilateral pes planus, degenerative changes of the talotibial joint of the left, plantar calcaneal spur on the left, and bilateral hammer digit syndrome.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had arthritis of the feet, bilateral flat feet and bunions, all of which are specific diagnoses and less likely as not related to environmental exposure.  

Following a March 2021 VA examination, the examiner opined that the claimed right and left plantar fasciitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness and were less likely than not incurred in or caused by bilateral plantar fasciitis during service.  The examiner stated that the record did not show evidence that establishes and confirm the presence of plantar fasciitis during active service.  Therefore, he concluded that the current right and left plantar fasciitis is a new and separate condition not incurred during service.  

The Board is unable to decide the claim based on the March 2021 VA opinion report. In this regard, the March 2021 VA examiner relied heavily on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis until several years following the Veteran's separation from service in forming the negative etiology opinion.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, supra. Moreover, the opinion was provided without an adequate rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Therefore, the Board finds this opinion to be insufficient to decide the appeal.  

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral plantar fasciitis.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed irritable bowel syndrome.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner, and note review of the record in the examination report.  All indicated tests and studies should be conducted and clinical findings reported in detail.  The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Following complete review of the record, the examiner must respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome had its onset in service or is otherwise etiologically related to his service, including burn pits, during service in Southwest Asia? 

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge. 

2.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed hypertension.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner, and note review of the record in the examination report.  All indicated tests and studies should be conducted and clinical findings reported in detail.  The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Following complete review of the record, the examiner must respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension had its onset in service or is otherwise etiologically related to his service, including burn pits, during service in Southwest Asia? The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's contention that his hypertension is the result of his in-service exposure to burn pits.  

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

3.  Obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed migraine headaches.  The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and the findings then reported in detail.  The need for in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Based on the review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present migraine headaches had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to include environmental exposures sustained while serving in Southwest Asia?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resorting to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge. 

4.  The Veteran should be afforded an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the current bilateral plantar fasciitis.  The entire electronic VA claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and the findings reported in detail.  

The examiner must provide an opinion regarding the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any bilateral plantar fasciitis had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner should address the Veteran's statements that his feet began hurting as a result of the marching, running and jumping during service. The examiner should address the impact, if any, of the complaints of right foot swelling and diagnosis of right foot ligament swelling in September 1976; complaints of left foot pain and swelling in June 1982; a clinical evaluation of the feet noting asymptomatic pes planus and asymptomatic bunion on the right foot in November 1993; and the Veteran's reports of a history of foot trouble in May 1995.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Suzie Gaston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.