Citation Nr: A25032313
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-448953
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for asthma (claimed as shortness of breath) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1979 to April 1999.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

By way of background, the Veteran submitted an August 2022 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of his claim for asthma, most recently addressed by the RO in a July 2022 rating decision.  In November 2022, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision, which confirmed and continued the previous decision based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Subsequently, the Veteran submitted a December 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of the November 2022 (and July 2022) rating decision.   However, in March 2023, the AOJ discovered a duty to assist error and found that the Veteran's federal records were missing from his file.  Subsequently, in March and October 2023, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for the issue of service connection for asthma.  In March 2024, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision (addressing the October 2023 Supplemental Claim), which continued the previous decision based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  In April 2024, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for the issue of service connection for asthma.  In April 2024, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal (addressing the December 2022 HLR claim and March 2023 duty to assist error noted above), which implicitly found that new and relevant evidence was received for the Veteran's asthma claim, but denied the claim based on the merits.  No clear or unmistakable error has been shown to rebut the AOJ's favorable finding; therefore, the Board is bound by this finding and does not need to readdress whether new and relevant evidence has been received to reconsider the claim herein.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran submitted a June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, identifying the March 2024 rating decision.  However, as noted above, the Veteran also submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim identifying the March 2024 rating decision for the issue of service connection for asthma, which was a prohibited concurrent election.  Nevertheless, it is noted that when a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) is filed, the Board will construe arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  In this case, it is clear the Veteran wishes to seek review of the service connection claim for asthma and has pursued his claim throughout.  Given the procedural history outlined above, the Board will liberally construe the June 2024 Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, as an appeal of the April 2024 rating decision.  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  As the Board is remanding the matter on appeal, if this additional evidence is present, it will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of these matters.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran included July 2012 and July 2022 rating decisions in his June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal.  However, the Board finds that the issues from these rating decisions are not properly before the Board for adjudication and will not be addressed herein.  Specifically, July 2012 and July 2022 rating decisions denied the claim for asthma and the Veteran did not file a Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182) within one year from the date the AOJ mailed notice of those rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.203.  As such, the Veteran's appeal of July 2012 and July 2022 rating decisions are untimely and not properly before the Board on appeal.    

The Veteran contends that his asthma is related to service.  Specifically, he claims he was exposed to airborne chemicals while serving aboard navy ships.  See August 2021 VA 21-526EZ.  He added that he struggled with shortness of breath when he exercised during service.  See December 2023 VA examination.

The Veteran was afforded a VA respiratory conditions examination in August 2022.  Upon examination, the examiner diagnosed him with asthma.  The examiner concluded that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's asthma is related to service.  He explained that there is no evidence of asthma in his service treatment records (STRs).

However, a February 1983 STR (Report of Medical History) notes that the Veteran answered "yes" to experiencing shortness of breath.  In addition, his April 1998 separation examination notes that he answered "yes" to having asthma, and the examiner appears to have written "asthma as child" in response.  However, the Veteran's entrance examination was normal and did not note asthma.  It does not appear that the examiner considered these treatment records when formulating the opinion.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate or incomplete factual premise is not probative).  Moreover, the Veteran reported that he has been dealing with breathing issues since service.  See March 2023 HLR Informal Conference.

Further, the VA examiner did not consider the relevant private treatment records from October 2019 noting the Veteran's report that his symptoms are chronic, and he has had a long history of episodes of difficulty breathing.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) (stating that it is incumbent on the VA examiner to consider all of the relevant evidence before forming an opinion).

The Veteran was afforded another VA respiratory examination in December 2023.  The Veteran reported that his asthma onset approximately in the 1980s.  The examiner noted that a November 2023 toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memorandum acknowledged that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos, firefighting foam, industrial solvents, and fuels.  The examiner concluded that his asthma was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The examiner explained that a review of the available evidence including the medical records, medical literature, lay statements, and current examination fails to reveal any indication of a causal relationship between the TERA and the development of asthma.  While asbestos exposure can cause certain respiratory issues such as asbestosis, there is no evidence of asbestos-related lung damage in the available medical records.  The Veteran's medical records do reveal tobacco use as a risk factor for the development of asthma.  This risk factor far outweighs the TERA and is unrelated to the TERA.  

The RO requested an addendum VA medical opinion, which was provided by the same examiner in April 2024.  The examiner again concluded that his asthma was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The examiner explained that a review of the available evidence including the medical records, medical literature, lay statements, and current examination fails to reveal any indication of a causal relationship between the TERA and the development of asthma.  While asbestos exposure can cause certain respiratory issues such as asbestosis, there is no evidence of asbestos-related lung damage in the available medical records.  The Veteran's medical records do reveal a history of cigarette smoking as a risk factor for the development of asthma.  This risk factor far outweighs the TERA and is unrelated to the TERA.

The Board finds the December 2023 and April 2024 opinions inadequate because the examiner did not specifically address the Veteran's exposure to firefighting foam, industrial solvents, and fuels.  For the opinions to be adequate, the examiner would need to clearly explain why the Veteran's specific in-service exposures did not contribute to his current asthma diagnosis and why tobacco use (cigarette smoking) is the more likely cause.  

Additionally, it does not appear that the examiner considered all the relevant evidence.  While the examiner acknowledged the Veteran's in-service exposure to asbestos, it appears the examiner disregarded pertinent STRs in finding that there was no evidence of asbestos-related lung damage in the available medical records. Specifically, a February 1983 STR notes that the Veteran answered "yes" to experiencing shortness of breath and his April 1998 separation examination notes that he answered "yes" to having asthma.  It does not appear that the examiner considered these treatment records when formulating his opinions.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate or incomplete factual premise is not probative).  

Given the above, the Board finds the August 2022, December 2023, and April 2024 VA medical opinions are inadequate for adjudication purposes.

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here, the VA medical opinions mentioned above were before the AOJ at the time it issued the April 2024 rating decision on appeal.  Therefore, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not ensuring the Veteran was provided an adequate medical opinion and a remand is necessary to correct this error.  Id.      

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's asthma.  An in-person examination need not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner or otherwise required by the evidence.  The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety, to include a copy of this REMAND, and the review should be noted in the examination report.

The examiner must:

a.)	Provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's asthma was incurred during or as a result of his active service, to include his TERA in-service (exposure to asbestos, firefighting foam, industrial solvents, and fuels).

When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider: 

1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments;  

2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Please include a discussion on potential short and long-term effects of exposure to asbestos, firefighting foam, industrial solvents, and fuels;

3) the normal entrance examination;

4)STRs from February 1998 noting that the Veteran answered "yes" to experiencing shortness of breath; 

5) the Veteran's April 1998 separation examination noting that the Veteran answered "yes" to having asthma;

6) the Veteran's private treatment records from February 2009 noting difficulty breathing and a history of asthma;

7) the Veteran's private treatment records from August 2009 noting that he was assessed with chronic asthma;

8) the Veteran's private treatment records from October 2019 noting that he complained of difficulty breathing and stated that his symptoms are chronic, and he has had a long history of episodes of difficulty breathing;

9) the Veteran's private treatment records from July 2020 noting that he was told that he may have had asthma about 20 years ago; and

10) the Veteran's December 2023 VA examination noting his report of shortness of breath with exercise during service.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The opinion should reflect consideration of the pertinent evidence of record (e.g., the Veteran's documented relevant history and assertions).      

                                                   (Continued on next page)

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Miller, D. M. Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.