Citation Nr: A25032269
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 191016-38592
DATE:  April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), adjustment disorder with anxiety, and major depression, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has been diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, adjustment disorder with anxiety, and major depression, which did not have its onset in service and is not otherwise related to active-duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, adjustment disorder with anxiety, and major depression, have not been met.?38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 4.125. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September?1971 to September?1974. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2019 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder.

In October 2019, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, electing the Hearing docket, and a Board hearing was held on August 18, 2023. For this AMA appeal on the Hearing docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the September 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or representative, within 90 days following the August 18, 2023, hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). This 90-day period ended on November 16, 2023. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period between when the AOJ issued the decision on appeal but prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the date of the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim, and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

In December 2023, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) issued a decision denying the Veteran's claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD. The Veteran appealed this decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In November 2024, the Veteran and the Secretary of VA (parties) filed a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) to vacate the Board's December 2023 decision and remand the claim back to the Board, which the Court granted. The Board addresses the deficiencies in its December 2023 decision herein. November 2024 JMR.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. 

Service connection for PTSD specifically requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38?C.F.R. §?4.125(a); (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. See?38?C.F.R. §?3.304(f), 4.125(a).

Regarding the in-service stressor element of a claim of service connection for PTSD, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that credible supporting evidence means that the Veteran's testimony cannot, by itself, as a matter of law, establish the occurrence of a non-combat stressor; nor can credible supporting evidence of the actual occurrence of an in-service stressor consist solely of after-the-fact medical nexus evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3). Instead, the record must contain service records or other independent credible evidence corroborating the Veteran's testimony as to the alleged stressor. The service records that are available must support and not contradict the Veteran's lay testimony concerning stressors.

The diagnosis of PTSD must comply with the criteria set forth in the American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition, of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-5). See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125(a), 4.130.

A veteran's testimony, by itself, can establish the occurrence of an in-service stressor event if the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(3) are met. Currently, 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3) provides that if a stressor claimed by a veteran is related to the veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a psychiatrist or psychologist with whom VA has contracted, confirms that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3). 

In this case, the evidence does not show, and the Veteran does not contend, that he engaged in combat, or that he was exposed to hostile military or terrorist activity; therefore, the presumptions afforded to veterans who allege fear of hostile military or terrorist activity are inapplicable in this case. Thus, any alleged in-service stressors must be independently verified, i.e., corroborated by objective, credible supporting evidence.

A claim for service connection for a mental disability may encompass claims for any psychiatric disability that may reasonably be encompassed by several factors, including the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms the claimant describes, and the information the claimant submits or that the Secretary of VA obtains in support of the claim. Clemons?v. Shinseki,?23?Vet. App.?1, 5?(2009). Accordingly, the Board has taken an expansive view of the Veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD pursuant to Clemons and re-characterized it as shown on the cover page of this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, adjustment disorder with anxiety, and major depression.

Factual Background 

In a September 1971 entrance Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied ever suffering from "frequent trouble sleeping," "depression or excessive worry," "loss of memory or amnesia," or "nervous trouble of any sort." September 1971 Report of Medical History. In a September 1971 entrance Report of Medical Examination, the Veteran's psychiatric clinical evaluation was normal. September 1971 Report of Medical Examination. In a September 1974 separation Report of Medical Examination, the Veteran's psychiatric clinical evaluation was normal. September 1974 Report of Medical Examination.

In a November 2011 VA Nursing Note, the Veteran denied depression and depression symptoms. He also denied nightmares or intrusive thoughts, avoidance behaviors, being constantly on guard, watchful, or easily startled, and numbness or detachment from others, activities, or his surroundings. November 2011 VA Primary Care Nursing Note. In a November 2011 VA Primary Care Note, the Veteran denied depression, agitation, panic attacks, anxiety, memory issues, personality changes, hallucinations, and mood swings. November 2011 VA Primary Care Note. In July 2012, the Veteran was seen for a primary care follow-up. He denied psychiatric problems. July 2012 Primary Care Note. 

In January 2018, the Veteran was seen by Jennifer M. Starritt, FNP (Ms. Starritt), a private medical professional. She noted that the Veteran had no anxiety, depression, hallucinations, delusions, aggressive behavior, wandering, crying, or stress. January 2018 Starritt Progress Note.

In June 2018, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD, wherein he describes three stressful incidents. In the first, the Veteran reported that he awoke one night during advanced individual training (AIT) at Fort Knox, Kentucky, to find a fellow servicemember (whom the Veteran indicated was black) holding an axe to the Veteran's throat demanding money. The Veteran stated that the soldier knew he had money as they had just gotten paid. A physical confrontation ensued, and another solider (who the Veteran also described as black) assisted the Veteran by pushing the other servicemember through a window. The Veteran indicated that "tensions between the races were very high" at the time, and that he feared for his life. 

The second stressful incident involved the Veteran finding another servicemember laying in his bunk in the barracks. After the servicemember refused to get up when asked, a fight ensued between the servicemember and the Veteran, culminating in the servicemember pulling a knife on the Veteran and putting it against the Veteran's throat. Another servicemember, which the Veteran claims was named "Parks," helped the Veteran get the knife-wielding servicemember out of the barracks. In the final stressful incident reported in this form, the Veteran described several "run ins" with black and Puerto Rican "gangs" that would steal food from the mess hall. The Veteran reportedly was assigned to keep order. The Veteran reported that he had to stay away from several cities in Germany because of the gangs and tensions in the cities. The Veteran claimed that these reported incidents "caused [him] to have flashbacks and a sense of hypervigilance," and that it is "hard for [him to] trust anyone or to really make new friends." June 2018 Statement in Support of Claim.

In May 2019, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. There, he wrote that he does not remember any of the names of the soldiers from basic training or anyone from his time in Germany. He stated that there were shootings around the time and two separate gangs within the Army. He added that members of these gangs "caused havoc" and "racial tensions" were "very heated" with altercations occurring all the time. May 2019 Statement in Support of Claim.

In VA medical records from June, July, and August?2019, the Veteran reported having issues since his service in Germany (1973 to 1975) due to trauma exposure. He described feeling in constant danger while in Germany and that he was frequently threatened by others while in service. He indicated that he witnessed a great deal of violence due to racial tension in the area during that time. The Veteran specifically reported the incident where a fellow service member held an axe to his throat for his paycheck but was saved from harm by his roommate. June, July, and August 2019 VA Treatment Records.

In September 2019, the Veteran was afforded a VA Initial PTSD examination. After an in-person examination and a review of the Veteran's records, the VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD that conformed to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria, as the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the requisite DSM-5 diagnostic criteria. However, the VA examiner found that the Veteran had a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with anxiety. September 2019 Initial PTSD Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). 

The Veteran reported three stressors during his VA examination. The first stressor was an account from the Veteran of his time in AIT at Ft. Knox wherein he was "awakened by an African American holding a fire ax[e] to [the Veteran's] throat on payday demanding money from him." The Veteran reported that he was "rescued from this situation by another African American soldier who punched his attacker knocking him off of the Veteran." The VA examiner noted that although the Veteran's attacker bunked above the Veteran, the Veteran did not report the incident. Despite this stressor being related to personal assault, the examiner determined there were "no markers as [the Veteran] told no one about this." Id. 

The second stressor was an account from the Veteran's time in Nuremburg, West Germany, where the Veteran reported that he once "was chased by several African American soldiers for no other reason he knew other than he was white during a period of racial unrest that remained constant while he served there." Although this stressor was related to the "fear of personal assault," the VA examiner noted that the Veteran "was never caught and he therefore did not know what would actually take place," and that the Veteran also feared "the gangs formed by Puerto Ricans and Mexicans" despite these alleged "gangs" never interacting with the Veteran. The Veteran reported that he attempted to approach the chapel on one occasion to talk to the priest, however, "the priest turned out to be African American and the Veteran turned around and walked away." The Veteran stated that he did not disclose his feelings and concerns to anyone else nor did he write anything down about these incidents or communicate his fears to his family members. Id.

The final reported stressor was also the most proximal to the Veteran's VA examination: the Veteran was "laid off without warning from the 'best job [he] ever had' and was told that he had been hired illegally." The VA examiner noted that "although [the Veteran's firing] occurred in civilian life," this event was "the subject that the Veteran show[ed] the most emotional response to." The Veteran reported having nightmares about his firing which cause him to wake up with the same physiological responses during his sleep as he does when he has nightmares about his time in Nuremberg. Id. 

The examiner had considered the Veteran's mental health record after service, to include June, July, and September?2019 VA records, wherein the Veteran reported the stressors as noted above. The examiner noted that the first mental health contact was in June?2019, for a mental health intake consultation and since was seen the same provider in July?2019 and August?2019. The examiner wrote that no medication had been used for mental health purposes despite the Veteran's diagnosis of recurrent major depression which the VA examiner opined calls for, and should at least demand, consideration of the use of medication if the disorder truly was suspected. Id.

The examiner added that in July?2019, both major depression recurrent moderate and chronic PTSD were entered as problems into his record. He noted that in November?2011, the Veteran's PC-PTSD score had been zero, and the Veteran did not have another visit with the PC nurse until early June?2019, at which time, his PC-PTSD was 3/4, a positive screen score. The examiner explained it was an odd occurrence when a PC-PTSD score becomes positive after previously being zero if the stressor is from military service. Id.

The Veteran reported that, in 2006, he began working for the National Park Service as a carpenter, then a historical preservationist, then as a maintenance mechanic, for a total of 11 years until he was laid off in 2017. The Veteran had been told that he "worked illegally," as he had been hired for three four-year terms, and although it was not his fault, he was still let go but not terminated. The Veteran reported that this his firing had "bothered [him] so bad cause this was the best job [he] ever had." He reported that it had been so bad on him that he had nightmares about it and has been worried about it ever since. He reported, "I was just did wrong," and the examiner described the Veteran as being visibly upset and trembling as he said it. The Veteran reported he unsuccessfully attempted to appeal the layoff and had worked odd jobs since his lay off. The examiner noted that although this occurred in his civilian life, it is the subject to which the Veteran showed the most emotional response. Id.

Ultimately, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current adjustment disorder with anxiety was not caused by or a result of his service. The examiner explained that the Veteran failed to provide symptoms to meet the C, D, and G criterions for a DSM-5 diagnosis of PTSD. The VA examiner explained that the Veteran's job loss was his most pressing stressor, noting that the Veteran tried to explain how he lost his job multiple times, and that the Veteran's emotion about his job loss remained "raw and painful" to him, bringing tears to his eyes as he talked about it. The VA examiner stated that this was "easily" the Veteran's most painful stressor at the time of the examination. As it is "impossible" to find a nexus to his service arising from the Veteran's job loss, the VA examiner concluded that he was "pained" to opine that the Veteran's adjustment disorder with anxiety was not caused by or a result of his service. Id. 

The Veteran attended his Board hearing in August 2023. There, the Veteran reported an incident that occurred in AIT in Fort Knox, Kentucky, where he was assaulted in the middle of the night. He reported that he was sleeping in his bunk when he was awakened by a soldier threatening him with an axe, but other soldiers had stopped it. The Veteran reported that he did not "snitch" and that he did not have any physical injuries. He indicated that there were also several incidents when he was in Germany and his roommate had to hit people with a bat to keep them out. The Veteran also reported for the first time a "three day war" in Germany and the bombing of the Olympics and terrorist attack in Munich. The Veteran indicated that he believed it was the first time that he thought about telling people about the terrorist attack in Munich. The Veteran's representative confirmed that the two incidents were not on the stressor statement. The undersigned VLJ informed the Veteran that he may submit a supplemental claim if he wanted to add the stressor. The Veteran's representative stated that when the Veteran was in service, it was a "time of great racial tension." August 2023 Hearing Transcript.

Two friends of the Veteran, C.R.D., Jr., and M.D., also provided testimony on behalf of the Veteran. M.D. testified that he knew the Veteran since 1993. He stated that the Veteran was a "really good guy" but had "went downhill," being angrier and more aggressive towards people. He indicated that the Veteran had told him about the "black guy" that attacked the Veteran with an axe and that "another black guy" helped the Veteran avoid being harmed. Another friend of the Veteran, C.R.D, also testified on behalf of the Veteran during the August 2023 hearing, stating that he had known the Veteran since 2009 and worked with him. C.R.D. also indicated that the Veteran had progressively become more easily agitated, noting that things that used to not bother him seemed to bother him more. He reported that the Veteran easily could become aggressive for no apparent reason and that the Veteran sometimes is "very withdrawn and quiet," but noted that the Veteran usually was "a very personable, talkative, friendly kind of guy." C.R.D. reported that the Veteran was almost like a brother, and that the Veteran has reported bad things happening to him, but that he had heard more detail during the hearing than he had previously from the Veteran. Id.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a letter (dated August 2023) from his friend, C.R.D. C.R.D. reports that the Veteran was "much calmer, easy-going, and personable" when they first met, but believes that the Veteran has changed and "seems to be getting worse," and that the Veteran is exhibiting signs and symptoms of PTSD. C.R.D. explained that the Veteran recounts his experiences from the military, including "his ill experiences with fellow soldiers in 1971 that attacked him in the barracks, one soldier that once came at him with an axe," and hearing the explosions during 1972 during the German Olympics. According to C.R.D., the Veteran "would become distant, quiet, and short-tempered" after discussing his service, and that that the Veteran's "vocal tones almost immediately changed, and his anger was very apparent," a behavior that has "gotten more frequent and worse." As a result, C.R.D. has avoided the Veteran due to the Veteran's short fuse and quick temper. The Veteran reportedly has apologized to C.R.D., attributing his outbursts to "thinking about that time in the Army." October 2023 C.R.D. Letter.

In October 2023, the Veteran also submitted a letter from his brother, B.H.S., who claims to know that the Veteran "had an altercation with a fellow soldier in his barracks that came at him with a fire axe," and that the Veteran was "over in Nuremburg during the Olympic bombings." B.H.S. has noticed that the Veteran is "moodier, depressed, quick-tempered, and not his normal easy-going self," that the Veteran has trouble concentrating and sleeping, and that the Veteran has had angry outburst with family, friends, and co-workers. Although B.H.S. admits that he is not a doctor, he believes that the Veteran is exhibiting signs and symptoms of PTSD. October 2023 B.H.S. Letter.

In October 2023, the Veteran provided a letter from K.G., the VA clinical psychologist who had been treating him with individual psychotherapy since April?2021. She noted that the Veteran reported traumatic incidents from his time in the Army, including race riots and an attempted robbery in training where the Veteran woke up with a man holding an axe to his throat. K.G. noted several of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms and indicated that the Veteran avoided processing those issues in therapy, which K.G. notes is not unusual for victims of trauma. She notes that each person experiences and processes their personal trauma in their own unique way and believes it is "clear" that the Veteran was "deeply impacted by the threat on his life while in the military." October 2023 K.G. Letter.

?

Analysis

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, including PTSD, asserting that his current psychiatric disorder was caused by or is related to service, to include being threatened by a soldier with an axe, a separate incident where he was threatened with a knife, issues with "gangs," and a terrorist attack while he was stationed in Munich.

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection for a psychiatric, including PTSD. The reasons follow.

The Board first considers whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for PTSD. Service connection for PTSD first requires a diagnosis of PTSD in accordance with 38?C.F.R. §?4.125(a). The Veteran submitted an October?2023 letter from K.G. (a VA clinical psychologist) who had provided individual psychotherapy treatment for the Veteran since April?2021. This letter included a diagnosis of PTSD. Although there is no indication within K.G.'s letter that the PTSD diagnosis was made in accordance with 38?C.F.R. §?4.125(a), the Board assumes that it was for the sake of argument. This element is met.

The second element for service connection for PTSD requires a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor. No such link exists in the record. The September 2019 VA examiner explicitly found that the Veteran's current psychiatric disorders were not caused by or are related to service. Although K.G. opined that the Veteran "was deeply impacted by the threat of his life while in the military," October 2023 K.G. Letter, this statement is not sufficiently clear for the Board to find that she opined that the Veteran's current psychiatric disorders were caused by or are related to the Veteran's service. As such, this nexus element is not met.

Even if the Board were to find that K.G.'s statement that the Veteran "was deeply impacted by the threat on his life while in the military" is sufficient to establish the second element of service connection for PTSD, the final element of service connection for PTSD requires credible supporting evidence that the stressor actually occurred. 

In his June 2018 Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD, the Veteran reported three stressors. The first involved a soldier holding an axe to his throat demanding money (hereinafter, the axe stressor), the second involved the Veteran getting into a confrontation and ultimately having a knife put to his throat (hereinafter, the knife stressor), and the third involved the Veteran's vague "run ins with black and Puerto Rican gangs" that would steal food from the mess hall, to which he was assigned to keep order (hereinafter, the gang stressor). The Veteran claimed that these reported stressors "caused [him] to have flashbacks and a sense of hypervigilance," and that it is "hard for [him to] trust anyone or to really make new friends." June 2018 Statement in Support of Claim. During his September 2019 examination, the Veteran noted three stressors. The first was an account of the axe stressor, the second seemed to be an account of the gang stressor, where the Veteran claimed that he was "chased by several African American soldiers for no other reason he knew other than he was white," and the third was the Veteran's firing "without warning from the 'best job [he] ever had'." September 2019 Initial PTSD DBQ.

As noted, the Veteran's testimony cannot, without more, establish the occurrence of a non-combat stressor, nor can credible supporting evidence of the actual occurrence of an in-service stressor consist solely of after-the-fact medical nexus evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3). Instead, the record must contain service records or other independent credible evidence corroborating the Veteran's testimony as to the alleged stressor. 

A veteran's testimony, by itself, can establish the occurrence of an in-service stressor event if the stressor claimed by the veteran is related to the veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and a VA or VA-contracted psychiatrist or psychologist confirms that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, and the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the Veteran's service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3). 

The Veteran's claimed stressors do not reasonably encompass being related to his fear of hostile military or terrorist activity. Therefore, the Veteran's testimony, without more, is not credible supporting evidence that the stressors actually occurred. There is no competent evidence in the record before the Board, aside from the Veteran's own testimony, that any of the Veteran's claimed in-service stressors occurred. As examples, there is no documentation of the cited stressors within the Veteran's service records, nor are there contemporary accounts to support the Veteran's assertion. Moreover, although M.D., C.R.D., and B.H.S. all state that the Veteran has shared an account of the axe stressor with them, M.D. met the Veteran in 1993 (almost two decades after the Veteran left service), C.R.D. met the Veteran in 2009 (more than three decades after the Veteran left service), and the Veteran told B.H.S. of the incident years after it occurred. August 2023 Hearing Transcript (Veteran admitted that "[i]t was years before [he] said anything" about the axe stressor); September 2019 Initial PTSD DBQ (Veteran stating that he did not tell anyone about the stressor events). As these reports are based on the Veteran recounting his stressor event many years after they occurred, the Board finds that these statements are of diminished probative value. 

The same is true regarding the gang stressor. Vague and unsubstantiated statements that the time of the Veteran's service was a "time of great racial tension," August 2023 Hearing Transcript, are not sufficient to provide support to his claimed stressors. As the evidence does not provide credible supporting evidence for the Veteran's claimed stressors, the Veteran cannot establish entitlement to service connection for PTSD with the evidence currently before the Board.

In the October 2024 JMR, the parties agreed that "the Board should have weighed and evaluated" the Veteran's testimony regarding witnessing a terrorist attack while stationed in Germany. November 2024 JMR. During his August 2023 hearing, the Veteran claimed, for the first time, the stressor of being exposed to a "three day war" in Germany and the bombing of the 1992 Munich Olympics. Subsequently, the undersigned VLJ informed the Veteran that he may submit a supplemental claim if he wanted to add the stressor. The Veteran's representative confirmed that the two incidents were not on the stressor statement. August 2023 Hearing Transcript. 

Even assuming that this stressor event is related to the Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity (a fear which the Veteran never has endorsed), neither a VA nor a VA-contracted psychiatrist or psychologist has confirmed that the stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD, nor has a VA nor a VA-contracted psychiatrist or psychologist confirmed that the Veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor. As such, the Veteran's testimony cannot, by itself, establish the occurrence of the in-service stressor event. As the parties noted, the AOJ did not fail to comply with its duty to assist the Veteran because the Veteran did not claim this stressor prior to promulgation of the rating decision. November 2024 JMR. This evidence, then, cannot provide support for the Veteran's claim. The undersigned VLJ once more informs the Veteran that he may submit a supplemental claim if he wishes to pursue this stressor.

In the October 2024 JMR, the parties also agreed that "the Board did not address whether the examiner adequately addressed the Veteran's in-service stressors" noting specifically that "the examiner did not address a June 2018 stressor statement where [the Veteran] noted flashbacks and being in fear for his life due to in-service events." November 2024 JMR. The Board finds that the VA examiner did adequately address the Veteran's in-service stressors.

First, in examining the Veteran and providing an opinion, the VA examiner considered the Veteran's claimed axe stressor. The VA examiner specifically discussed only the three stressors reported to him by the Veteran during the September 2019 VA examination, and he failed to specifically discuss the knife stressor. That said, the knife stressor is analogous to the Veteran's claimed axe stressor. In both, the Veteran reported the following: he feared for his life, the assailant was a fellow servicemember, he was saved by a roommate, he was not physically harmed, he did not share an account of the stressors with anyone until many years later, and the stressor was related to a personal assault, not the Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity. As the two claimed stressors fundamentally are the same, it is doubtful that the September 2019 VA examiner would have concluded differently than he did.

Second, the September 2019 VA examiner marked that the Veteran suffered from the following under Criterion B (considering the presence of intrusion symptoms associated with the claimed stressors): Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s); Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or effect of the dream are related to the traumatic events; and Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic events. September 2019 Initial PTSD DBQ. As such, the VA examiner specifically acknowledged the flashback symptoms claimed by the Veteran in his June 2018 stressor statement.

Finally, the knife stressor, as a matter of law, cannot provide the basis for the grant of service connection for PTSD. Although the Veteran claims that he was in fear of his life when this claimed stressor occurred, this stressor cannot create a fear of hostile military or terrorist activity as the incident was a personal assault, just as the VA examiner acknowledged the axe stressor incident was. As such, the Veteran's testimony cannot, by itself, establish the occurrence of the in-service stressor event. As there exists no other evidence in the record of the occurrence of this claimed stressor, this claimed stressor cannot support the Veteran's PTSD claim.

The Board now considers the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for any psychiatric disorder aside from PTSD. The first element for service connection of a disability requires a current disability. In its September?2019 rating decision, the AOJ included as a favorable finding that the September?2019 VA examination showed a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with anxiety. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c). Moreover, the Veteran has since submitted an October?2023 letter from K.G., a VA clinical psychologist, which included diagnoses for PTSD and major depression. Thus, there is evidence of a current disability.

The second element for service connection of a disability requires an in-service injury or the aggravation of an injury or disease. There is no credible evidence to support a finding of a disease, injury, or event. The service treatment records do not document that the Veteran experienced psychiatric symptoms during service, and the Veteran denied ever suffering from "frequent trouble sleeping," "depression or excessive worry," "loss of memory or amnesia," or "nervous trouble of any sort" during his entrance examination, and both the Veteran's entrance and separation Reports of Medical Examination reveal "normal" psychiatric clinical diagnoses. September 1971 Report of Medical Examination; September 1974 Report of Medical Examination. Moreover, as noted above, aside from the Veteran's own statements, the evidence does not establish credible evidence of the Veteran's claimed stressors. That said, the Board will assume, for the sake of argument, that this element is met. 

What remains is for the Board to consider the final element for service connection of a disability, whether there exists a causal relationship between the present disability and the Veteran's service.

The September 2019 VA examiner attributed the Veteran's current psychiatric disorders to the Veteran's firing "without warning from the 'best job [he] ever had'" and specifically opined that the Veteran's current psychiatric disorders were not caused by, or are a result of, his service. September 2019 Initial PTSD DBQ. Although K.G. believed it is "clear" that the Veteran was "deeply impacted by the threat on his life while in the military," October 2023 K.G. Letter, K.G. did not directly provide a causal relationship between the Veteran's current psychiatric disorders and service.

The September?2019 VA examiner's opinion is supported by the Veteran's service treatment records, which are absent for the treatment for, or the diagnosis of, a psychiatric disorder or psychiatric symptoms. In his September 1974 separation examination, the Veteran's psychiatric clinical evaluation was normal. September 1974 Report of Medical Examination. 

Further support comes from the Veteran's post-military treatment records. Records before the Board indicate that the Veteran denied psychiatric symptoms while out of service, twice in November 2011 and once in July 2012. See November 2011 VA Primary Care Nursing Note; November 2011 VA Primary Care Note; July 2012 Primary Care Note. The first time the Veteran complained of psychiatric symptoms was more than 40 years after the Veteran was discharged from the military in April 2018, when he first sought service connection for PTSD. Just three months prior to claiming service connection for PTSD, the Veteran was deemed not to have anxiety, depression, hallucinations, delusions, aggressive behavior, wandering, crying, or stress. January 2018 Starritt Progress Note. It stretches credulity to believe that the Veteran would deny psychiatric symptoms just three months prior to claiming service connection for PTSD when he claims to have suffered from PTSD symptoms ever since service.

The probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that the medical professional reaches. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). Whether a medical professional provides a basis for a medical opinion goes to the weight or credibility of the evidence in the adjudication of the merits. See Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Other factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the physician's access to the claims folder and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000).

The September 2019 VA examination report was provided by a VA medical professional who possess the necessary education, training, and expertise to provide the requested opinion, the examination report was shown to have been based on an in-person examination of the Veteran coupled with a review of the Veteran's claims file, and the VA medical professional provided a detailed rationale for the included medical opinions. Taking these factors into consideration, the Board finds significant probative value in the September 2019 VA examination report because the VA medical examiner directly interfaced with and examined the Veteran, reviewed the Veteran's treatment records, and provided detailed rationales for the conclusions contained within. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

By contrast, K.G. did not address the Veteran's 2017 lay off from the National Park Service, which is a notable post-service stressor. Consequently, K.G. did not consider all the relevant evidence that the Board has found to be credible. See Reonal v. Brown,?5?Vet. App.?458, 460-61?(1993) (holding that medical opinions based on incomplete or inaccurate factual premises are not probative); Dalton v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?23?(2007); Nieves-Rodriguez,?22?Vet. App.?at 295. As such, the Board finds this opinion to be of diminished probative value.

The Veteran, his friends, M.D. and C.R.D., and his brother, B.H.S., as lay individuals, are competent to report observable symptoms. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). That said, nothing in the record shows that the Veteran, M.D., C.R.D., or B.H.S. have the medical training or credentials to grant them the competence to attribute the Veteran's current mental disorders to his service, as doing so requires specialized training to determine a diagnosis and causation. As such, the Veteran, M.D., C.R.D., and B.H.S. are not competent to make such a determination. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 n.4; see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011). Therefore, the Board finds that the lay assertions proffered by the Veteran, M.D., C.R.D., and B.H.S. regarding a link between the Veteran's service and his current mental disorders, to include C.R.D.'s and B.H.S.'s assertions that the Veteran's changing demeanor is a sign of PTSD, lack probative value.

Additionally, the Board considers C.R.D.'s, M.D.'s, B.H.S.'s statements that the Veteran's disposition has changed over the years in that he has become less personable and more irritable. August 2023 Hearing Transcript; October 2023 C.R.D. and B.H.S. Letters. Although these statements may provide support to the conclusion that the Veteran currently suffers from some psychiatric disorder, these statements have limited impact on the ultimate question of a nexus between the Veteran's current psychiatric disorders and his time in service.

In VA medical records from June, July, and August?2019, the Veteran reported having issues since his service in Germany (1973 to 1975) due to trauma exposure. He described feeling in constant danger while in Germany and that he was frequently threatened by others while in service. He indicated that he witnessed a great deal of violence due to racial tension in the area during that time. The Veteran specifically reported the incident where a fellow service member held an axe to his throat for his paycheck but was saved from harm by his roommate. June, July, and August 2019 VA Treatment Records. As noted above, these events were considered by the September 2019 VA examiner that opined a lack of nexus between the Veteran's in-service stressors and the Veteran's current mental disorders. 

The Board finds of most probative value the medical opinion of the September?2019 VA examiner. The VA examination report and opinion provide competent and probative evidence that weighs against the Veteran's claim because the examiner reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, performed an appropriate psychiatric examination, and provided a medical opinion supported by a well-reasoned rationale, which was based upon the facts of the case and medical principles. The examiner's opinions are consistent with the lay and medical evidence of record. The examiner directly addressed the psychiatric diagnoses of record, including PTSD, during the time and explained why the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the criteria for a PTSD diagnosis and why his current psychiatric disorder was not related to his claimed in-service stressors. The VA examiner had attributed the Veteran's psychiatric disorders to his loss of the "best job" he ever had, which was in 2017. He explained that the Veteran's medical records did not reflect these psychiatric symptoms after service, including in November?2011 when the Veteran's PC-PTSD score had been zero, indicating that the Veteran does not suffer from PTSD. The Board reiterates that the VA examiner noted he was "pained" in providing this opinion and that the Veteran was a "very likable man." September 2019 Initial PTSD DBQ. The undersigned understands why the examiner described the Veteran as very likable. 

The Board finds no other competent and credible evidence in support of a nexus between the Veteran's current psychiatric disorder and his military service, to include his reported stressors. In the absence of a nexus, service connection for a psychiatric disorder cannot be established. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply, and the claim is denied. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21?F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application); 38?U.S.C. §?5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Louis M. Figueroa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.