Citation Nr: A25032459
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-438545
DATE: April 8, 2025

ISSUES

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition.

ORDERS

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition is GRANTED.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is GRANTED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's left ankle condition began during, and is related to, his active service.

2. The Veteran's right shoulder condition began during, and is related to, his active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for left ankle condition are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for right shoulder condition are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Coast Guard from July 2007 to May 2012. The matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the service connection claims on appeal, most recently addressed in a December 2022 rating decision. In May 2023, the RO issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 RO decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Considering the favorable determination contained herein, further development with regard to VA's duties to notify and assist as set forth by the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 would serve no useful purpose. See Soyini v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 540 (1991). 

Although the Board has an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting this Decision, there is no requirement that every piece of evidence submitted be discussed in detail. Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-130 (2000). 

Legal Criteria

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be established for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

Generally, to prevail on a claim of direct service connection on the merits, there must be competent evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

The Board is required to give due consideration to all pertinent competent medical and lay evidence. Competent medical evidence is evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions. Competent medical evidence may also include statements conveying sound medical principles found in medical treatises. It also includes statements contained in authoritative writings, such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1). 

Competent lay evidence is any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience. Id. § 3.159(a)(2). Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. Id. This may include some medical matters, such as describing symptoms or relating a contemporaneous medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). 

The Board is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claims or is in approximate balance, with the veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claims, in which case the claims are denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. Id. 

The Board is required to assess the credibility and probative weight of all relevant evidence, and may consider factors such as facial plausibility, bias, self-interest, and consistency with other evidence of record. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 325 (2007) (Greene, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (noting that the Board has the duty to assess credibility and probative weight of evidence); see Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376 (affirming that the Board retains discretion to make credibility determinations and otherwise weigh the evidence submitted, including lay evidence); Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337 (holding that the Board, as fact finder, is obligated to, and fully justified in, determining whether lay evidence is credible in and of itself, i.e., because of possible bias, conflicting statements, etc.). The court has also held that contemporaneous records are more probative than history reported by an appellant. See Curry v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 59, 68 (1994). 

In evaluating the probative value of competent medical evidence, the court has stated that the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge, and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that the physician reaches. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). 

Analysis-Left Ankle

The Veteran contends that his left ankle condition should be service connected for purposes of disability compensation. He contends that he injured his left ankle while on active duty during training, and from falling while aboard the USCGC Midgett.

In this case the Board finds that the first element of service connection has been satisfied. The May 2023 rating decision included a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosed left ankle condition. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. Therefore, the first element of a service connection claim is met. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

Therefore, the claim turns on the second and third Shedden elements-in-service incurrence or aggravation and nexus.

Regarding in-service incurrence, the Veteran contends that "during active-duty military service, I injured my left ankle . . . from Physical Training exercises, a fall, and falling down the stairs." See April 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. A January 2009 service treatment record shows that, while aboard the USCGC Midgett, the Veteran underwent an X-ray of his lower left leg following a documented impact two weeks earlier. The Veteran also submitted two lay statements from fellow service members who witnessed the Veteran's fall. See September 2022 Lay Statements. The service members stated, "during rough seas, the Veteran fell down a ladder well/steel staircase and was knocked unconscious . . . [he] was carried to the Navy corpsman medical bay for evaluation." Id. (alteration added).

The lay and medical evidence of record support a finding that the Veteran's left ankle disability began when the Veteran injured his ankle during training and when he was deployed on the USCGC Midgett following a fall due to rough seas. Therefore, the second Shedden element is met. 

Regarding the third element of service connection - nexus - there are both positive and negative medical opinions of record. 

Following a December 2022 record review, a VA examiner opined "the Veteran's left ankle condition is less likely than not (less than 50% probability) incurred in or caused by combat action in the course of his duties as a Coast Guard special operation boarding and air assault law enforcement during service." In support of this opinion, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran's "service records are silent for chronic or recurrent ankle pain on active duty or within a year of separation from service to relate his current complaints to his duties as a Coast Guard special operation boarding and air assault law enforcement during service." 

In Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims ("Court") held that the absence of in-service evidence of a disability is not fatal to a claim for service connection. Id. at 89. Here, the VA examiner relied on the absence of in-service evidence of a disability to provide the negative nexus opinion. This alone renders the VA opinion inadequate.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a March 2023 private medical opinion regarding the diagnosed left ankle condition. The March 2023 private examiner opined "it is my professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the veteran's current Left Ankle Sprain/Strain condition is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his Left Ankle Overuse Injury that occurred during active duty military service." In support of this opinion, the private examiner stated:

The veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active duty onset of symptoms of the left ankle and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date. There is no evidence of a pre-military left ankle condition or an intercurrent event, injury, or disease process that occurred after the veteran's active duty separation that would have caused his current disability condition or symptoms. There is a current diagnosis of Left Ankle Sprain/Strain that correlates with documented symptoms in service. 

The medical literature supports and documents that overuse and repetitive micro trauma in the ankle can cause chronic mechanical and functional instability, leading to pain and inflammation, weakened muscles and joint capsules, and impaired proprioception and neuromuscular/postural control.

See March 2023 Private Medical Opinion.

The probative value of medical opinions is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, their knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that they reach. The private examiner's medical opinion considers the lay statements of the Veteran and his fellow service members, cites to relevant medical literature, and his rationale is clear and consistent with the evidence available. The Board, therefore, finds the private examiner's opinion to be highly probative medical evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim.

The Board finds that, considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the private examiner's March 2024 medical opinion persuasively establishes that the Veteran's left ankle disability is causally linked to in-service overuse and repetitive microtrauma of the left ankle.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a left ankle disability is warranted. The appeal is granted.

Analysis-Right Shoulder Condition

The Veteran contends that his right shoulder condition should be service connected for purposes of disability compensation. He contends that he developed progressive pain in the right shoulder while on active duty related to military occupational duties and over-usage, and from falling while aboard the USCGC Midgett.

The Board finds that the first element of service connection has been satisfied. The May 2023 rating decision included a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosed right shoulder condition. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. Therefore, the first element of a service connection claim is met. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Therefore, the issues in this case turn on the second and third Shedden elements-in-service incurrence or aggravation and nexus.

Regarding in-service incurrence, the Veteran contends that "during active-duty military service, I injured my right shoulder . . . from Physical Training exercises, a fall, and falling down the stairs." See April 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran also submitted two lay statements from fellow service members who witnessed the Veteran's fall. See September 2022 Lay Statements. The service members stated, "during rough seas, the Veteran fell down a ladder well/steel staircase and was knocked unconscious . . . [he] was carried to the Navy corpsman medical bay for evaluation" and that the Veteran had "visible physical bruising all over his upper body from this event." Id. (alteration added).

Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish onset of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 (footnote omitted). Lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

The Veteran states that his right shoulder symptoms began after he suffered a fall during active service, as well as from overuse during active-duty service, and that he has continued to experience right shoulder symptoms since that time. See April 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. Based on these same symptoms, the Veteran sought disability compensation in August 2022, and at a resulting medical examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with a right shoulder strain. See October 2022 VA examination. This satisfies the third element of the Jandreau test. 492 F.3d at 1377; see Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the in-service incurrence element of the claim has been met. Id.; 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(d).

Regarding the third element of service connection - nexus - there are both positive and negative medical opinions of record. 

Following a December 2022 record review, a VA examiner opined "the Veteran's right shoulder condition is less likely than not (less than 50% probability) incurred in or caused by combat action in the course of his duties as a Coast Guard special operation boarding and air assault law enforcement during service." In support of this opinion, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran's "service records are silent for chronic or recurrent shoulder pain on active duty or within a year of separation from service to relate his current complaints to his duties as a Coast Guard special operation boarding and air assault law enforcement during service."

As with the left ankle condition, the VA examiner again relied on the fact that the there is no in-service evidence of a disability to provide the negative nexus opinion. This alone renders the VA opinion inadequate. Ledford, 3 Vet. App. at 89. 

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a March 2023 private medical opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed right shoulder condition. The March 2023 private examiner opined "it is my professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50 %/50 % probability) that the veteran's current chronic Right Shoulder Strain is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his Right Shoulder Progressive pain that occurred during active duty military service." In support of this opinion, the private examiner shared the following:

The veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active duty onset of symptoms of the right shoulder and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date. There is no evidence of a pre-military right shoulder condition or an intercurrent event, injury, or disease process that occurred after the veteran's active duty separation that would have caused his current disability condition or symptoms. There is a current diagnosis of chronic Right Shoulder Strain that correlates with documented symptoms in service. The medical literature supports and documents that overuse of the shoulder muscles can lead to a chronic shoulder strain with decreased range of motion, proprioception, function, and strength. This can cause a significant disability due to pain and loss of function.

See March 2023 Private Medical Opinion.

The probative value of medical opinions is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, their knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that they reach. The private examiner's medical opinion considers the lay statements of the Veteran and his fellow service members, cites to relevant medical literature, and his rationale is clear and consistent with the evidence available. The Board, therefore, finds the private examiner's opinion to be highly probative medical evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim.

The Board finds that, considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the private examiner's March 2024 medical opinion persuasively establishes that the Veteran's right shoulder disability is causally linked to his in-service overuse of the shoulder muscle.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a right shoulder disability is warranted. The appeal is granted.

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.P. Blackburn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.