Citation Nr: A25032407
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240802-461375
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2016 to May 2018

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran's August 2024 VA Form 10182 indicates that the Veteran is appealing the September 2023 rating decision which denied entitlement to service connection for headaches and the June 30, 2023, rating decision which denied entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression. The August 2024 VA Form 10182 was filed more than one year after the June 30, 2023, rating decision, as such the appeal for entitlement to service connection for anxiety and entitlement to service connection for depression is untimely, and the Board will not adjudicate those claims. Accordingly, the Board will only address the claim for entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches. 

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records.  Required notice and information were provided in the claim form which the Veteran signed, certifying to the fact that such notice was received and further than they have included or identified relevant evidence. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release and/or adequately identified. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If a Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records. Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same.  Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

1. Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMAITON FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR: 

This is a remand to cure a predecisional duty to assist error. 

(a) The Veteran is seeking entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches. Evidence of record including a September 2023 VA examination shows that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of migraine headaches. Service treatment records show that the Veteran complained of headaches in service in December 2016. The Veteran has also been deemed a Persian Gulf Veteran with TERA. 

The September 2023 VA opinion the examiner provides a negative TERA opinion because there is no evidence that the Veteran "had any individual toxic exposure." The Veteran has been deemed to have TERA, which means she has been presumed to have toxic exposure. Any opinion rendered should be based off the presumption of TERA.  

Additionally, the Veteran was afforded a Gulf War exam. The examiner noted that the Veteran headaches were a diagnosed illness for which no etiology was established. However, the examiner did not offer a nexus opinion, and the record does not contain a direct service connection opinion for the Veteran's migraine headaches. 

(b) Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW: 

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's migraine headaches. 

The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a)	Is the etiology of the Veteran's migraine headaches (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood?

(b)	Is the pathophysiology of the Veteran's migraine headaches (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood?

(c)	If both the etiology and pathophysiology are partially understood or fully understood, is the Veteran's migraine headache disability at least as likely as not related to her military service, to include as due to due to the combined synergistic effects of her presumed toxic exposure risk activity and/or complaints of and treatment for headaches in service in December 2016?  Why or why not?

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

All opinions must be based on a review of all evidence of record and supported by adequate rationale. 

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

3. Provide the Veteran and the representative notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

4. Readjudicate.  

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Wimbish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.