Citation Nr: A25032181
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230526-350184
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the rating period on appeal, PTSD has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas but without total occupational and social impairment.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

In the May 26, 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

It is acknowledged that on May 30, 2023, a rating decision was issued which denied an increased rating for PTSD.  The June 2024 Appellate Brief references an April 2023 C&P examination but such examination was conducted after issuance of the December 2022 rating decision and will not be considered.  To date, the Veteran's representative has not submitted an Appellate Brief regarding the findings in the December 2022 rating decision.  01/23/2025 BVA Letter.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id.

In a December 2017 rating decision, service connection was established for PTSD, rated 50 percent disabling, effective July 20, 2017.  In September 2022, the Veteran filed an increased rating claim.  In a December 2022 rating decision, a 70 percent disability rating was assigned to PTSD effective August 17, 2022.  The May 2023 VA Form 10182 expressed disagreement with the disability rating assigned in the December 2022 rating decision.  The Veteran's PTSD is rated 70 percent disabling, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  

The Board first observes that the symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In Vazquez-Claudio, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that the frequency, severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443; see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

Indeed, "VA must engage in a holistic analysis" that assess the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to symptoms such as the following: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

It is noted that July 2020 VA correspondence reflects that the Veteran's application for Vocational Rehabilitation & Employment (VR&E) benefits was denied due to her lack of cooperation or failure to participate.  She did not show up for a July 1, 2020 appointment, did not turn in a 1902w or 28-0800, and did not cancel or reschedule her appointment.  07/13/2020 VR-58 Decision Letter.

A January 2022 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran was last seen for treatment in June 2021.  She was contacted by VA for follow-up.  The Veteran reported she stopped taking Bupropion due to an adverse drug event.  She reported mood swings and irritability.  She denied any safety issues and denied violent thoughts.  She accepted a trail of Oxcarbazepine 150 mg twice a day and would be continued on Lamictal and Propranolol.  09/13/2022 CAPRI at 61.

In February 2022, the Veteran underwent a psychiatric assessment.  She reported that her new medications were "working good for my swings/I feel stable."  She reported driving for Uber Eats and had been feeling good about it.  Her mood had been stable, and she denied any safety issues.  She denied any violent thoughts.  She reported a history of hypomanic episodes, a history of spending spree, irresponsibility with finances, excessive use of alcohol and being hyperactive.  She reported that she had been sad and depressed and had been concerned about her memory.  She denied any violent thoughts or commands to harm self.  She has no history of hallucinations or paranoid thoughts.  On mental status exam, her appearance is casually dressed and well groomed.  She was cooperative and engaged.  She had variable eye contact.  Her speech was spontaneous and normal in rate, tone and volume.  She had no psychomotor agitation or retardation.  She reported she was "feeling good."  Her affect was mood congruent.  Her thought process was logical, and goal directed.  She denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  She denied hallucination/delusions.  She did not appear to be responding to internal stimuli.  Her memory/cognition was intact with no gross cognitive impairment.  Her attention/concentration was fair.  She was oriented times four.  Her insight and judgment were fair.  Id. at 46.  

A March 2022 psychology individual therapy treatment record reflects that the Veteran reported she has started working with Uber and other delivery and pick up services.  She got a hybrid vehicle to help save on gas to do this.  She looked at the benefits of this job.  She is not interested in a corporate job right now and is not able to do it with vaccine and mask requirements.  She discussed appreciating the benefits of what she is getting now as she may miss it someday if she goes back to working full-time.  She gets angry with what is going on in the world but is limiting news media.  She discussed the importance of acknowledging and feeling emotions and then letting them pass.  She would like to read more and limit TV.  On mental status examination, her affect was congruent with mood.  Her hygiene was adequate.  She was cooperative and reasonable.  Her insight and judgment were intact.  She was alert and oriented to all spheres.  Her mood was euthymic.  She did not voice/appear in acute distress/pain.  Her perception was within normal limits.  Her thought process and content were unremarkable.  Id. at 45.

In a May 2022 psychology individual therapy treatment record the Veteran reported she has been stressed with everything going on in the world.  She notes everything is so expensive.  She discussed how frustrating the situation was grateful to have the resources to still do the things she enjoys.  She has been frustrated with her husband.  He continually lets her down and is dismissive.  She discussed health communication and sharing feelings.  She was not sure she wants to continue with him, but it was difficult to think of separating as well.  She discussed taking things one day at a time and figuring things out slowly.  She discussed the importance of self-care during this time with exercise and doing things she likes and focusing on smaller enjoyable things in her world versus the larger world as a whole.  On mental status examination, her affect was congruent with mood.  Her hygiene was adequate.  She was cooperative and reasonable.  Her insight and judgment were intact.  She was alert and oriented to all spheres.  Her mood was euthymic.  She did not voice/appear in acute distress/pain.  Her perception was within normal limits.  Her thought process/content was unremarkable.  Id. at 30.

A June 2022 psychology individual therapy treatment record reflects the Veteran's report that she was getting ready to go on vacation and had been feeling more anxious.  She had been getting to know a friend better and invited her to go with on vacation and since that time has realized they don't really seem to like each other that much.  She went to her house the other day and got physically sick.  She is not sure how to break it to her if she contacts her about it.  Healthy boundaries and communication were discussed.  She had been getting along better with her husband and has talked about things and trying to speak each other's love languages more.  On mental status examination her affect was congruent with mood.  Her hygiene was adequate.  She was cooperative and reasonable.  Her insight/judgment were intact.  She was alert and oriented to all spheres.  She did not voice/appear in acute distress/pain.  Her perception was within normal limits.  Her thought process/content was unremarkable.  Id. at 28.

An August 2022 psychology individual therapy treatment record reflects the Veteran's report that she had a decent time on vacation, but it was upsetting that her friend went, understanding that she doesn't like her.  It felt very awkward for everyone.  She did things alone with her husband and this was enjoyable.  She discussed the disappointment with her friend and not doing such a vacation in the future.  She has been feeling more manic and isn't sure why.  She discussed paying attention to thoughts feelings and behaviors and getting back to regular routine and helps and seeing what happens.  She is also worrying about starting a new job, but she'll be back in her regular routine this week.  On mental status examination, her affect was congruent with mood.  Her hygiene was adequate.  She was cooperative and reasonable.  Her insight/judgment were intact.  She was alert and oriented to all spheres.  Her mood was euthymic.  She does not voice/appear in acute distress/pain.  Her perception was within normal limits.  Her thought process/content was unremarkable.  Id. at 15.

An October 2022 C&P examination reflects that the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  The Veteran is divorced and in a long term committed relationship for the past 17 years.  She sleeps apart from her partner due to her mood and sleep problems.  She reported being short tempered, argumentative, with bouts of "crying, yelling or sleeping."  She has varying degrees of difficulty with the three children she raised.  She reported being in communication with the twins she put up for adoption.  These children are the product of military sexual trauma (MST) in the military.  She avoided telling them of the MST and indicated having a difficult relationship with them.  She has no friends and notes not trusting others (regardless of how long she has known them). She is not close to extended family. She reports her partner is supportive, but she underutilizes their support.  She does not want to burden others.  She has not worked since 2019.  She was working as a sales manager at that time.  She reported difficulty maintaining employment.  She indicated "turning people off" and not being able to meet performance goals.  Her PTSD was manifested by depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  With regard to behavioral observations, she was polite, cooperative, and easy to engage in conversation.  She was coherent, expressed herself clearly, with no evidence of thought blocking, flight or ideas or loose associations.  She appears her stated age, was well groomed and is addressing activities of daily living adequately.  She had a distressed demeanor, dysphoric mood/affect, oriented to person, time, place, able to understand questions posed and respond accordingly.

Based on a review of the evidence of record, to include the subjective and objective findings, the Boards finds that a disability rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted.  Rather, the Board finds that the 70 percent disability rating in effect compensates the Veteran for her psychiatric symptomatology associated with her PTSD.  As detailed above, the October 2022 C&P examination reflects that the Veteran's PTSD is manifested by depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and impaired impulse control.  As detailed, the Veteran's personal hygiene has been adequate, and her thought processes and judgment were determined to be intact.  She has not suffered from any hallucinations or delusions.  She has been able to maintain a relationship with her partner.  She worked as a sales manager until 2019, she did not follow through with VR&E assistance and reported via VA outpatient treatment that she works as a delivery driver.  While she reported to the October 2022 examiner that she had not worked since 2019, she specifically told VA examiners in 2022 that she was a delivery driver and was driving a hybrid vehicle due to this employment.  Thus, total occupational impairment has not been shown.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Additionally, the objective findings do not reflect gross impairment in thought processes or communication as her thought processes were normal and she was able to communicate.  The records do not reflect any grossly inappropriate behavior.  The examination reports and treatment records do not reflect a persistent danger of hurting self or others; she has denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.  She has not been disoriented to time or place, and she experiences mild memory loss.  In sum, a disability rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted as total occupational and social impairment is not shown for the appeal period.  The Veteran's impairment is deemed within the scope of the 70 percent rating, which contemplates an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and impaired impulse control.

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kreindler, Marcy W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.