Citation Nr: A25032141
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448024
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol abuse, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, claimed as ringing in the ears, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a dental and oral disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, including bilateral pes planus, plantar fasciitis with hallux valgus and hallux rigidus, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.   The Veteran failed to report for VA examinations that were necessary to obtain evidence to properly adjudicate his claims, he has not presented good cause for his failure to respond to such attempts or expressed a willingness to attend such VA examinations.  

2.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for an acquired psychiatric disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

3.   The Veteran's current tinnitus did not have its onset in service, is not etiologically related to his service and did not have its onset within one year of service discharge.  

4.   The Veteran's hypertension did not have its onset in service, is not etiologically related to his service and did not have its onset within one year of service discharge.

5.   The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a dental disability for which VA compensation may be paid.  

6.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for gastroesophageal reflux disease, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

7.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for headaches, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

8.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a lumbar spine disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

9.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a cervical spine disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

10.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis of a right ankle disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

11.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis of a left ankle disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

12.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis of a right wrist disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

13.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis of a left wrist disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.   The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including PTSD and alcohol abuse, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.655.  

2.   The criteria for service connection for tinnitus, claimed as ringing in the ears, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R.§§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.655.  

3.   The criteria for service connection for hypertension have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.655.  

4.   The criteria for service connection for an oral and dental disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.655.  

5.   The criteria for service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.655.  

6.   The criteria for service connection for headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.655.  

7.   The criteria for service connection for a lumbar spine disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.655.  

8.   The criteria for service connection for a cervical spine disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.655.  

9.   The criteria for service connection for a right ankle disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.3.03, 3.655.  

10.   The criteria for service connection for a left ankle disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.3.03, 3.655.  

11.   The criteria for service connection for a right wrist disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.655.  

12.   The criteria for service connection for a left wrist disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.655.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1989 to June 1993. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In this case, a further docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decisions on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the June 2024 VA Form 10182.  Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.  

Service Connection Criteria

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

For a showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word chronic.  Continuity of symptomatology is required where the condition noted during service is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  If the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  

In addition, the law provides that, where a veteran served ninety days or more of qualifying service and certain chronic diseases, such as psychosis or organic disease of the nervous system becomes manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  While the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time.  Id.  

Alternatively, when a disease at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) is not shown to be chronic during service or the one-year presumptive period, service connection may also be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  However, the use of continuity of symptoms to establish service connection is limited only to those diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) and does not apply to other disabilities which might be considered chronic from a medical standpoint.  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

In an October 4, 1995, opinion, VA's Under Secretary for Health determined that it was appropriate to consider high frequency sensorineural hearing loss an organic disease of the nervous system and therefore a presumptive disability. Additionally, in Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015), the Court determined that tinnitus is an "organic disease of the nervous system" subject to presumptive service connection where there is evidence of acoustic trauma and nerve damage.

Furthermore, compensation may be granted for disability due to undiagnosed illness of a veteran who served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.  38 U.S.C. § 1117. A Persian Gulf veteran is defined as a veteran who served on active military, naval, or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. The Southwest Asia theater of operations includes Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(d). The Veteran had no foreign deployments. See DD Form 214. He did serve aboard the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln (CVN 72) and PRVT in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. See November 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity Memorandum; December 2022 VA Memorandum.

Under that section, service connection may be warranted for a Gulf War veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability (relevantly, here, this includes signs or symptoms involving the skin, respiratory system, and joint pain) that became manifest during active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War. For disability due to undiagnosed illness and medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness, the disability must have been manifest either during active military service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).

The term "objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability" includes both "signs," in a medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3). Signs or symptoms that may be manifestations of undiagnosed illness or a chronic multi-symptom illness include the following: fatigue, unexplained rashes or other dermatological signs or symptoms, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, neurological signs or symptoms, neuropsychological signs or symptoms, signs or symptoms involving the upper or lower respiratory system, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal signs or symptoms, cardiovascular signs or symptoms, abnormal weight loss, or menstrual disorders. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(g).

For purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, other than conditions that have been presumptively linked to service in Southwest Asia, there are two types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding gastrointestinal diseases). With regard to functional gastrointestinal disorders, this would include, but are not limited to, irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, functional vomiting, functional constipation, functional bloating, functional abdominal pain syndrome, and functional dysphagia. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B).

An undiagnosed illness is defined as a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis. In the case of claims based on undiagnosed illness under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, unlike those for direct service connection, there is no requirement that there be competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed illness and service. Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8-9 (2004). Further, lay persons are competent to report objective signs of illness. Id.  To determine whether the undiagnosed illness is manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more the condition must be rated by analogy to a disease or injury in which the functions affected, anatomical location or symptomatology are similar. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(5); see also Stankevich v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 470 (2006).

On the other hand, the term medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. Chronic medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered medically unexplained. Id.

For purposes of section 3.317, disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic. The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(4).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of a current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service.  Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992).  Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability").  

In McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007), the Court held that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time he files his claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim.  However, in Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013), the Court held that when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to a claimant filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.  

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature.  Id., See also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (the Board's categorical statement that 'a valid medical opinion' was required to establish nexus, and that a layperson was 'not competent' to provide testimony as to nexus because she was a layperson, conflicts with Jandreau).   

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a), when entitlement to a benefit cannot be established without a current VA examination or reexamination, and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination or reexamination, action shall be taken in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) or (c) as appropriate.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b), when a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record, but when a claimant fails to report without good cause for an examination scheduled in conjunction with a reopened claim or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, and death of an immediate family member, etc.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).  

In this case, the Veteran was scheduled for VA examinations in conjunction with his claims in December 2023.  Applying 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (a) and (b) to the facts of this case, and as discussed further below, the Veteran failed to report for VA examinations without good cause, the regulation states that the original claims shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  The Veteran's claims were original compensation claims and will be decided based on the evidence of record.  

In a December 2024 correspondence, one year after the scheduled examinations, the Veteran indicated that he was experiencing pain when he was supposed to have one of the examinations, and he simply forgot about the others.  The Veteran also indicated that, once he realized that he had missed the appointments, he tried to reschedule; however, there is no documentation of record indicating that the Veteran attempted to reschedule the examinations.  The Board finds the Veteran's arguments unpersuasive. Here, the Veteran concedes that he received notice of the scheduled exams, and the argument of good cause does not actually tend to show that the Veteran did not or could not attend the scheduled examinations particularly since he had attended his foot examination two weeks earlier. Moreover, the Board notes that the December 2023 rating decision clearly indicated that the Veteran failed to appear for the scheduled examinations and that he did not provide good cause for his failure to appear. The Veteran submitted a June 2024 VA Form 10182 where he acknowledged missing an appointment for his left ankle condition and that he wished to start over; however, the Veteran did not provide any explanation for his failure to appear for the scheduled examinations, did not attribute his failure to appear for the scheduled examinations to pain and only acknowledged missing one scheduled examination.  

Given that VA provided the Veteran notice of the examinations, that he reported to one of the scheduled examinations, that he did not contact the AOJ to reschedule any of his other VA examinations, and that did not provide any explanation for this failure to appear for the scheduled examinations until one year after the scheduled examinations and months after he filed his appeal to the Board, the Board finds that good cause has not been shown. Therefore, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the Veteran's appeal in the absence of an examination and opinion, which could have helped the Veteran in substantiating his claims, based on the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  VA's duty to assist is not "a one-way street."  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).  A claimant has an obligation to cooperate in the development of evidence pertaining to his claims, and his failure to do so could subject him to the risk of an adverse adjudication based on an incomplete and underdeveloped record.  Further, the regulations are clear, VA does not need to endlessly offer examinations where a claimant does not attend multiple examinations and does not offer good cause for not attending.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).  

1.   Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including PTSD due to personal trauma, also claimed as alcohol abuse, is denied.

The Veteran generally contends that he suffers from an acquired psychiatric disorder as a result of his experiences while on active duty. See June 2023 VA Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits Form 21-526EZ. The Veteran reported seeing the body of a shipmate who hang himself; he subsequently experienced depression and insomnia. See June 2023 VA Form 21-0871 Statement in support of claim for PTSD.  

Service treatment records indicate that the Veteran was seen for mental status evaluation in August 1989, at which time he expressed a refusal to participate in remedial swim training because he previously "watched a person drown.'  It was noted that the Veteran appeared slightly depressed with sad and quiet affect.  It was also noted that the Veteran appeared motivated to finish boot camp but appeared to be afraid of the water. The examiner noted that mental status examination was unremarkable, but also noted fear of drowning, existed prior to service. A March 1993 service discharge examination found the Veteran to be psychiatrically normal. In an accompanying March 1993 service discharge Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had nervous trouble of any sort, depression or excessive worry or frequent trouble sleeping. He also denied that he experienced any illness or injury other than those already noted.

Post-service treatment records are negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to any acquired psychiatric disorder.

As record does not reflect a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted.  See Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra. No further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary.  Further, the Veteran did not allege manifestations of similar severity, frequency and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person.  Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020). The current clinical records do not support a diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder that confirms with the American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed. 2013) (DSM-5) as is required for compensation for psychiatric disabilities. See Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393 (2020). As detailed above, the Veteran did not appear for any of his scheduled examination; the Board in unable to determine whether the Veteran currently has an acquired psychiatric disorder that is related to service.  Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 390, 394 (2009); Monroe v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 513, 515 (1993).  

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra.  

However, the matter of a medical diagnosis for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of an acquired psychiatric disorder, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-38 (1994).  In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has developed an expertise in the diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder.  Therefore, as he does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose an acquired psychiatric disorder, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value.  Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnoses of an acquired psychiatric disorder for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.  

In summary, the controlling question in this case is answered in the negative.  In the absence of proof of a present disability (and, if so, of a nexus between that disability and service), there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.  Therefore, as the evidence of record shows that the Veteran does not have current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary.  See Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309, 314 (1993) ("A determination of service connection requires a finding of the existence of a current disability and a determination of a relationship between that disability and an injury or a disease incurred in service."); see also Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection).  

In sum, Veteran failed to appear without good cause for a scheduled examination which could have produced the necessary evidence to support a grant of the benefits sought. The evidence currently of record does not support a grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and/or alcohol abuse, on any basis.  Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and/or alcohol abuse is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

2.   Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, claimed as ringing in the ears, is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has ringing in his ear, i.e. tinnitus, that is related to his period of active service. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The December 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the evidence shows a qualifying event during the Veteran's service as he was seen for ringing in his ear during service and that he had sufficient service to meet requirements for presumptive service connection; the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  

Service treatment records reflect that, in July 1992, the Veteran reported that he heard ringing due to a cherry bomb explosion and that the assessment was morning explosion causing frequent ringing. A March 1993 service discharge examination found the Veteran's ears to be normal. In an accompanying March 1993 service discharge Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had ear trouble or hearing loss. He also denied that he experienced any illness or injury other than those already noted.

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms that he experiences such as ringing in his ears.  See Fountain v. McDonald, supra. Inasmuch as the Veteran has submitted an application for service connection for ringing in his ears, the Board finds that the Veteran has a diagnosis of tinnitus for VA purposes.  

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in December 2023 to determine the nature and etiology of his claim for service connection for tinnitus.  As the examination was scheduled in connection with the claim, 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) is for application. An appointment confirmation was sent to the Veteran at his mailing address of record in November 2023; however, the record indicates that the examination was cancelled due to Veteran's failure to report in December 2023. A December 2023 rating decision indicates that the Veteran failed to report for a scheduled examination and that medical evidence that could have been used to support his claim was not available to VA. The December 2023 rating decision was mailed to the Veteran's last known address of record and was not returned as undeliverable. The Veteran has not reported that he did not receive notice of the examination or provided good cause as to why he did not appear for the scheduled examination.  The Board notes that VA's "duty to assist is not always a one-way street."  Wood v. Derwinski, supra.  If a claimant wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining relevant evidence.  Id.  

Upon review of the above evidence, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is not warranted on a direct or presumptive basis.  While there is evidence of one incidence of ringing during service attributed to an explosion, service separation examination found the Veteran's ears were found to be normal and the Veteran denied experiencing ear trouble. The post-service treatment records do not show that the Veteran currently suffers tinnitus or that tinnitus was related to service. Finally, there is no clinical evidence in the record that links the Veteran's claimed tinnitus to an incident of the Veteran's active military service.  While a medical examination and opinion would have been helpful with regard to this claim.  VA has been unable to obtain such an examination/opinion.  As above, given the Veteran's failure to report for the scheduled examination, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.  

While the Veteran may believe that his tinnitus symptoms had their onset in service or are the result of service, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis or nexus opinion regarding that issue.  Layno v. Brown, supra.  The record does not show, nor does the Veteran contend, that he has specialized education, training, or experience that would qualify him to render a medical opinion on this matter.  Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, see Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011), the issue in this case is outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person because it involves a complex medical issue that goes beyond a simple and immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.  Thus, while the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of tinnitus, such as ringing in his ears, he is not competent to opine on the etiology of the condition and/or to determine that the symptoms are somehow related to his active service.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus, claimed as ringing in the ears, is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

3.   Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, claimed as high blood pressure, is denied.

The Veteran contends that he developed hypertension as a result of his active service in Southwest Asia.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The December 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the evidence shows that the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia and was exposed to burn pits and other toxins during military service, that the evidence also shows a qualifying event during the Veteran's service as he was seen for a complaint of high blood pressure during service, and that he had sufficient service to meet requirements for presumptive service connection; the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Veteran's service treatment records show some elevated blood pressure reading in January 1993 without a diagnosis of hypertension. A March 1993 service discharge examination found the Veteran's; blood pressure to be 130/88 and that his heart was normal. In an accompanying March 1993 service discharge Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had high or low blood pressure. He also denied that he experienced any illness or injury other than those already noted.

Post-service treatment records show a diagnosis of hypertension. A June 2021 VA treatment note indicated that the Veteran was seen to establish care for several medical problems, including hypertension.  A January 2022 primary care note indicated that the Veteran was being seen for six month follow up; the treatment note reflects a diagnosis of hypertension.  Diagnoses of hypertension were also noted in August 2022 and October 2023.  

The Board has first considered whether service connection for hypertension as a cardiovascular rental disease is warranted on a presumptive basis, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology. In this regard, the clinical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran manifested such disease to a compensable degree within the year following his discharge from active duty service. The Veteran's post-service treatment record did not reflect any complaints for his hypertension until June 2021. Therefore, the Board finds that presumptive service connection for hypertension, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in December 2023 to determine the nature and etiology of his claim for service connection for hypertension.  As the examination was scheduled in connection with the claim, 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) is for application. An appointment confirmation was sent to the Veteran at his mailing address of record in November 2023; however, the record indicates that the examination was cancelled due to Veteran's failure to report in December 2023. A December 2023 rating decision indicates that the Veteran failed to report for a scheduled examination and that medical evidence that could have been used to support his claim was not available to VA. The December 2023 rating decision was mailed to the Veteran's last known address of record and was not returned as undeliverable. The Veteran has not reported that he did not receive notice of the examination or provided good cause as to why he did not appear for the scheduled examination.  The Board notes that VA's "duty to assist is not always a one-way street."  Wood v. Derwinski, supra.  If a claimant wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining relevant evidence.  Id.  

There is no clinical evidence or other competent medical evidence in the record that links the Veteran's claimed hypertension to his service.  While a medical examination and opinion would have been helpful with regard to this claim.  VA has been unable to obtain such an examination/opinion.  

While the Veteran may believe that his hypertension symptoms had their onset in service or are the result of service, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis or nexus opinion regarding that issue.  Layno v. Brown, supra.  The record does not show, nor does the Veteran contend, that he has specialized education, training, or experience that would qualify him to render a medical opinion on this matter.  Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, see Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011), the issue in this case is outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person because it involves a complex medical issue that goes beyond a simple and immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.  Thus, while the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of hypertension, such as ringing in his ears, he is not competent to opine on the etiology of the condition and/or to determine that the symptoms are somehow related to his active service.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for hypertension is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

4.   Entitlement to service connection for an oral and dental disorder is denied.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a dental and oral condition which had its onset while on active duty.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that his dental condition was caused by improper fillings placed during service.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

Under VA regulations, compensation is only available for certain types of dental and oral conditions listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, including conditions of the mandible, maxilla, ramus, condyloid process, coronoid process, hard palate, and loss of teeth due to loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Codes 9900-9916.  

Compensation is also available for loss of teeth only if such is due to loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible; bone loss through trauma or disease, such as osteomyelitis, must be shown for compensable purposes.  The loss of the alveolar process as a result of periodontal disease is not considered disabling.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Code 9913.  In addition, to be compensable, the lost masticatory surface for any tooth cannot be restorable by suitable prosthesis. Treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal disease will be considered service connected solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for outpatient dental treatment and cannot be considered for compensation purposes.  38 U.S.C. § 1712; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.381, 4.150.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.381, treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal diseases are to be considered service-connected only for the purpose of establishing eligibility for outpatient dental treatment as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 17.161.  Thus, to warrant compensation for a dental disability, as opposed to treatment only, the evidence must show not only that there was dental trauma or disease, but that the trauma or disease caused a loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible resulting in a loss of teeth.  

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was treated for diagnosed with gingivitis in April 1990.  The Veteran was next seen for a chipped tooth, number 25, in April 1992; he reported that he chipped his tooth while eating a pork chop.  Subsequently, in September 1992, the Veteran was treated for a cavity in tooth number 30; he was diagnosed with gingivitis.  He underwent extraction of teeth numbers 1, 16, 17 and 32 (upper and lower wisdom teeth).  

Post-service treatment records show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with dental and gum problems.  An October 2013 urgent care note indicates that the Veteran was seen for a tooth problem for the past week; it was noted that his face was swollen and he had foul taste.  The assessment was gum abscess.  A May 2016 VA nursing note shows that the Veteran was treated for right facial pain and swelling related to tooth infections; the assessment was dental infection.  

The AOJ attempted to schedule the Veteran for VA examination and notice regarding the scheduled examination was sent in November 2023.  A December 2023 document reflects that the Veteran did not report for VA examination scheduled in December 2023.  A December 2023 rating decision indicates that the Veteran failed to report for a scheduled examination, and that medical evidence that could have been used to support his claim was not available to VA.  The December 2023 rating decision was mailed to the Veteran's last known address of record and was not returned as undeliverable.  To this date, the Veteran has not reported that he did not receive notice of the examination or provided good cause as to why he did not appear for the scheduled examination.  The Board notes that VA's "duty to assist is not always a one-way street."  Wood v. Derwinski, supra.  If a claimant wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining relevant evidence.  Id.  

In this case, the evidence indicates that the Veteran's had teeth removed during service.  However, the evidence does not indicate that the loss of teeth was due to the loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible, and/or the soft tissue surrounding that region.  Moreover, the Board notes that while the Veteran has gingivitis, periodontal disease is not considered disabling for compensation purposes.  Thus, there is no evidence, medical or otherwise, that the Veteran has a current dental disability for which compensation is payable.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.  

Notably, the Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence showing that he suffers from any of the disabilities included under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.  The Board has considered his arguments.  However, to whatever extent such assertions are being offered to establish that the criteria for awarding compensation for tooth loss, the Board finds they provide no basis for allowance of the claim.  As indicated above, this claim turns, in large part, on the question of whether the Veteran has a dental disability for which service connection for compensation purposes may be granted i.e., one with loss of the substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible due to injury or disease the resolution of which requires consideration of matters within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, supra.  As the Veteran is not shown to have the appropriate medical training and expertise, he is not competent to render a probative (persuasive) opinion on such a medical matter.  See, e.g., Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.  Hence, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a dental and/or oral disorder is not warranted. The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

5.   Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

6.   Entitlement to service connection for headaches is denied.

7.   Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is denied.

8.   Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disorder is denied.

9.   Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disorder is denied.

10.   Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder is denied.

11.   Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disorder is denied.

12.   Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder is denied.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and a left wrist disorder, all of which he claims developed as a result of military service.  As to gastroesophageal reflux disease, the Veteran contends that it is due to bad food in service. As to the headaches, the Veteran contends that berthing was located below the flight deck; therefore, the noise caused him to suffer from chronic headaches.  The Veteran indicates that his lumbar spine pain was caused by the boots issued by the military.  Additionally, the Veteran noted that his cervical spine was caused by improper sleeping accommodations.  Lastly, the Veteran contends that his ankle conditions were caused by playing basketball on the hanger bay.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

A December 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that toxic exposure risk activity was conceded for all claims and that the evidence showed that a qualifying event, injury or disease had its onset during his service based on treatment during service for headaches and stomach related issues in January 1992; the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was seen for complaints of painful arches in August 1989; he was diagnosed with bilateral ankle/foot stress.  In August 1991, the Veteran was seen with complaints of abdominal cramping and diarrhea; he was diagnosed with viral gastroenteritis.  In January 1992, the Veteran was again seen with complaints of stomach pain, vomiting and headaches; the assessment was viral gastroenteritis.  The service treatment records are negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to a cervical spine disorder, a lumbar disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or a left wrist disorder. A March 1993 service discharge examination found the Veteran's spine, upper extremities, lower extremities, abdomen and viscera and head to be normal. In an accompanying March 1993 service discharge Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had recurrent back pain, foot trouble, frequent indigestion, swollen or painful joints or frequent or severe headaches. He also denied that he experienced any illness or injury other than those already noted.

Post-service treatment records do not reflect complaints, treatments or diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder. Moreover, the Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence supporting the claims that he has gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder.  

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in December 2023 to determine the nature and etiology of his claim for service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a right ankle disorder and left ankle disorder.  As the examination was scheduled in connection with the claim, 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) is for application. An appointment confirmation was sent to the Veteran at his mailing address of record in November 2023; however, the record indicates that the examination was cancelled due to Veteran's failure to report in December 2023. A December 2023 rating decision indicates that the Veteran failed to report for a scheduled examination and that medical evidence that could have been used to support his claim was not available to VA. The December 2023 rating decision was mailed to the Veteran's last known address of record and was not returned as undeliverable. The Veteran has not reported that he did not receive notice of the examination or provided good cause as to why he did not appear for the scheduled examination.  The Board notes that VA's "duty to assist is not always a one-way street."  Wood v. Derwinski, supra.  If a claimant wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining relevant evidence.  Id.  

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder that results in functional impairment.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra.  In this case, there is no probative evidence or allegation that the Veteran suffers from diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left disorder that was productive of functional impairment.  To that end, the record contains no evidence or allegation that the Veteran experienced functional impairment associated with diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder. In addition, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran did not allege, that he suffered from impairment of earning capacity due to his claimed diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder that was of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person.  Wait v. Wilkie, supra.  As detailed above, the Veteran did not appear for any of his scheduled examinations.  As a result, the Board in unable to determine whether the Veteran currently has gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a right ankle disorder and/or a left ankle disorder that is related to service.  Quirin v. Shinseki, supra; Monroe v. Brown, supra.  

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination addressing his claimed lumbar spine disorder, cervical spine disorder, right wrist disorder and left wrist disorder. However, the Board finds that such an examination is not required. In this regard, in determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration. These four factors are: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). With respect to the third factor above, the Court has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The service treatment records are otherwise negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right wrist disorder and a left wrist disorder. Further, the evidence does not indicate that he has a current lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or a left wrist disorder may be related to his military service. See McLendon, supra. Significantly, the Veteran has not alleged suffering from muscle or joint pain related to the lumbar spine or the cervical spine and he has not identified any functional impairments related to the lumbar spine, cervical spine, right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. In this regard, while the Veteran himself has advanced such a theory, a mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the claimant's current condition is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010). The Court has held that VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is not credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service. See Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010). Therefore, the Board finds that a VA examination and/or opinion is not necessary to decide this claims.

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra.  In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra.  However, the matter of a medical diagnosis for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, supra.  In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has developed an expertise in the diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder. Therefore, as he does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.  

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, supra; Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.  

In summary, the controlling question in this case is answered in the negative.  In the absence of proof of a present disability (and, if so, of a nexus between that disability and service), there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Boyer v. West, supra; Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.  Therefore, as the evidence of record shows that the Veteran does not have current diagnoses of gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and/or left wrist disorder, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary.  See Watson v. Brown, supra; see also Coburn v. Nicholson, supra.  

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, a cervical spine disorder, a right ankle disorder, a left ankle disorder, a right wrist disorder and left wrist disorder are not warranted.  The appeals are denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1.   Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, including bilateral pes planus, plantar fasciitis with hallux valgus and hallux rigidus is remanded.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for a bilateral foot disorder which he claims developed as a result of the shoes issued by the military.  The Veteran indicates that he has had problems with his feet since his discharge from service. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. A December 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with bilateral pes planus, plantar fasciitis with hallux valgus and hallux rigidus and that the evidence showed a qualifying event, injury or disease in service as the service treatment records showed that he was seen for painful arches and flatfeet during service in August 1989; the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023, at which time he noted that the shoes issued by the Navy caused bilateral foot pain and issues with overuse; he also reported slipping and falling once and had to seek medical treatment. Following an examination, the pertinent diagnoses reported were bilateral pes planus, bilateral plantar fasciitis, bilateral hallux valgus and bilateral valgus rigidus. The examiner opined that the claimed conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness as there was a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of bilateral foot pain and flat feet and military service. The examiner indicated that, without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. The examiner further noted that the medical records were silent for chronicity from 1989 to 2021.  

The Board finds the November 2023 VA etiology opinion insufficient to decide the claim.  In this regard, the examiner seems to rely on the lack of medical evidence in active service as a reason for denial. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  The examiner's rationale appears to wrongly require that a nexus be based on a finding of chronicity of care. However, symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of evidence of recurrent symptoms or a continuity of symptomatology.  See Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997) (citing Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 16, 19 (1991)). In this case, the Veteran has competently alleged recurring feet symptoms from an in-service onset to the present.  However, the VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's contentions regarding his in-service injuries to his feet as a result of walking and working while wearing the military issued boots in service.  It is not sufficient merely to note such reporting as medical history.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 257 (2020).  An opinion that does not consider all relevant evidence of record, including lay statements, will also be considered inadequate.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. This opinion is therefore insufficient to decide the appeal.

Based on the foregoing, the Board will remand for a new examination and to obtain an opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed bilateral foot disorder.  Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any bilateral foot disorder, to include plantar fasciitis.  The claims file, including this remand and copies of all pertinent records, should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and the findings reported in detail.  The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

For each such diagnosed foot disorder, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such had its onset during service or is etiologically related to service? The examiner should discuss the impact, if any, of the Veteran's complaints of foot pain and diagnosis of plantar fasciitis and bilateral foot stress in August 1989 and slipping and landing on the left foot in August 1990.

The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, to include his reports that he developed bilateral foot pain as a result of working and walking in the military issued boots in service.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.  

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Suzie Gaston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.