Citation Nr: A25032574
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231229-404844
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance is granted.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on housebound status is dismissed.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran is in need of aid and attendance by reason of his service-connected disabilities.

2. The issue of SMC based on housebound status is moot, due to the award of SMC based on the need for aid and attendance herein.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an award of SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.350, 3.352(a).

2. The criteria for the dismissal of the appeal concerning entitlement to SMC based on housebound status have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 7105(d)(5); 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.204.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1997 to June 2000.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023.  In December 2023, the Veteran elected the modernized review system.  84 Fed. Reg. 138, 177 (Jan. 18, 2019) (to be codified at 38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d)).  

The Veteran elected the Direct Review lane.  Accordingly, the Board will consider evidence of record as of the October 2023 rating decision.  

SMC

1. Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance

Increased compensation at the aid and attendance rate is payable when a veteran is helpless or so nearly helpless as the result of service-connected disability that he requires the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).  To establish a need for regular aid and attendance, the veteran must, as a result of service-connected disability, (1) be blind or so nearly blind as to have corrected visual acuity of 5/200 or less, in both eyes, or concentric contraction of the visual field to 5 degrees or less; (2) be a patient in a nursing home because of mental or physical incapacity; or (3) show a factual need for aid and attendance.  Id.

Determinations as to need for aid and attendance must be based on actual requirements of personal assistance from others.  In making such determinations, consideration is given to such conditions as the following: the inability of the claimant to dress or undress himself or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; the frequent need of the adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid; the inability of the claimant to feed himself through loss of coordination of the upper extremities or through extreme weakness; the inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

"Bedridden" will be a proper basis for the aid and attendance determination and is defined as that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the claimant remain in bed.  The fact that the claimant has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater-or-lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice.  It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated above be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions that the claimant is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the claimant is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need.  Determinations that the Veteran is so helpless, as to be in need of regular aid and attendance will not be based solely on an opinion that the claimant's condition is such as would require him to be in bed.  They must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  The performance of the necessary aid and attendance service by a relative of the claimant or other member of his or her household will not prevent the granting of the additional allowance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(c).

At a September 2023 evaluation it was noted that the Veteran did not need assistance in preparing meals or feeding himself.  From time to time, the Veteran stated he needed help getting in and out of the shower or tub.  There was no requirement for at home care.  The Veteran had mental capacity to manage his benefit payments.  The evaluation did not reveal any restrictions related to his upper or lower extremities.  The Veteran complained of chronic back pain due to lumbar spine disability, which caused him to limit his activities and has affected his weight.  The evaluation also noted that the Veteran's major depressive disorder was the major factor of him not wanting to leave the premises of his home unless needed.  The Veteran also stated that he has multiple family members with agoraphobia, and he believes he has the same problem, and he only feels safe going to the VA, and clinics associated with the VA, noting he is able to socialize.  The Veteran stated that he goes out about twice a week with his brother who lives with him and help him with his activities of daily life.  The Veteran does not drive because of mental health issues which makes him afraid to be behind the wheels, and if he goes out with his brother, it is either a quick trip to the grocery or to get food from a restaurant. 

In the October 2023 rating decision, the RO found that the Veteran required aid and attendance, and needed help with acts of daily living (to include bathing and putting on socks and shoes), based on the May 2023 VA Form 21-2680.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  84 Fed. Reg. 138, 167 (Jan. 18, 2019) (to be codified at 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c)).

While the Veteran is not helpless or bedridden, the favorable finding from the October 2023 rating decision shows a factual need for aid and attendance.  Therefore, after review of the evidentiary record, the Board finds that entitlement to SMC is warranted because the criteria regarding aid and attendance have been met.

2. Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on housebound status

As an award of SMC based on aid and attendance is a greater benefit than SMC at the housebound rate, the issue of entitlement to the latter benefit is moot and therefore subject to dismissal.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.R. Montalvo, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.