Citation Nr: A25032837
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 220628-254936
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to the service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder with alcohol and opiod dependence, is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the U.S. Navy from August 2002 to August 2006.  

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.  See June 2022 Rating Decision.  

Later that month, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), in which he elected the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  See June 2022 VA Form 10182.  Five days later, in July 2022, the Veteran submitted a revised VA Form 10182 and elected the Direct Review docket.  In March 2025, the Board granted the Veteran's request to switch dockets and placed the appeal on the direct review docket.  See March 2025 Notification Letter.  Under direct review, no development may be undertaken; the Board considers the same record as the RO in rendering a decision, and there is no evidence submission or a hearing request.  Accordingly, the evidentiary record is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the June 2022 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to the service-connected PTSD and major depressive disorder with alcohol and opiod dependence, is remanded.

Unfortunately, the claim for service connection sleep apnea must be remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the June 2022 rating decision on appeal.  Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, it is necessary to ensure that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration.

The Veteran maintains that his diagnosed sleep apnea is related to his active-duty service or was caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric pathology.  See, e.g., March 2022 Veteran's Application for Disability Compensation (VA Form 21-526EZ) (reporting that, shortly after he returned from his deployment in the Southwest Asia theater of operations (in the waters of the Persian Gulf and Arabian Sea) aboard the U.S.S. George Washington, he began experiencing sleep problems, including snoring, which ultimately formed the basis of his sleep apnea diagnosis; and further indicating that his sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disorder).  

The Veteran was provided a VA sleep apnea examination in April 2022.  See April 2022 VA Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  Unfortunately, the accompanying medical opinion is inadequate to decide the claim.  In this regard, the examining VA clinician diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea with a date of onset of 2007 and further noted that the Veteran's symptoms of snoring, choking, coughing, and cessation of breathing during sleep began "shortly after he got out of the service."  See id.  As to etiology, the April 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was "less likely than not... proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected" PTSD and major depressive disorder with alcohol and opioid dependence.  See April 2022 VA Medical Opinion DBQ.  In support of this conclusion, the VA examiner explained that, while "[m]edical literature supports an increased prevalence of Obstructive Sleep Apnea in individuals with major depressive disorders and PTSD,... there has been no evidence or medical literature to conclude that Obstructive Sleep Apnea is caused by or secondary to PTSD and major depressive disorder with alcohol and opioid dependence."  See id.  As such, because the "medical literature does not support a causative relationship" between sleep apnea and the Veteran's psychiatric pathology, the examiner concluded that "a nexus has not been established."  Id. 

Importantly, although the April 2022 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder did not cause his sleep apnea, the examiner failed to address the whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric pathology.  See April 2022 VA Medical Opinion DBQ.  See also El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (finding that a VA opinion addressing secondary service connection was inadequate because the determination that the nonservice-connected disorder was "not related to" a service-connected disorder did not address the issue of aggravation); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (stating that establishing secondary service connection requires evidence showing that a current disability was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  

?

The Board notes that the AOJ obtained an addendum medical opinion in September 2022 addressing aggravation.  See September 2022 VA Medical Opinion DBQ (stating simply that there was "no objective evidence to support the PTSD has AGGRAVATED beyond a natural progression the OSA" without further explanation or rationale).  However, the Board may not consider this evidence, as it is outside of the applicable evidentiary window, which is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's June 2022 rating decision, as discussed above.  

The Board also finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to obtain a medical opinion addressing service connection on a direct basis, especially when considering the evidence indicating that the Veteran's symptoms of snoring, choking, coughing, and cessation of breathing during sleep, which were apparently attributed to obstructive sleep apnea by the April 2022 VA examiner, began shortly following the Veteran's discharge, and in light of the Veteran's service records indicating environmental exposures during his Southwest Asia deployment.  See, e.g., April 2022 VA Sleep Apnea DBQ (describing the history of the Veteran's diagnosed sleep apnea); January 2004 Post-Deployment Health Assessment (reflecting that the Veteran reported exposure to "Sand/dust" during his deployment in the Southwest Asia theater of operations (in the waters of the Persian Gulf and Arabian Sea) aboard the U.S.S. George Washington).  See also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006) (reflecting that VA will provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service or with another service connected disability, but the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim; and further finding that the threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one).  

?

Accordingly, in light of the foregoing, remand is required for a new VA examination and medical opinion that adequately addresses both direct and secondary service connection.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123-25 (2007) (VA's duty to assist includes providing an adequate examination when such an examination is indicated); 38 C.F.R. § 4.2 (stating that if the findings on an examination report do not contain sufficient detail, it is incumbent upon the rating board to return the report as inadequate for evaluation purposes).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule an appropriate VA examination to assist in determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed sleep apnea.  The examination should be scheduled with a clinician who has not already provided an opinion in this case, if possible, and may be conducted via telehealth or similar service if deemed necessary.

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner prior to the examination.  The examiner must note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file, including a complete copy of this REMAND, has been reviewed.

The examination should include any necessary diagnostic testing or evaluation.  All pertinent symptomatology should be reported in detail.  If possible, the appropriate Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) should be filled out for this purpose.  Additionally, the examiner must review the Veteran's full history by conducting a complete review of the claims file (including all available service medical records, VA examination reports, private and VA medical treatment records, and lay statements and submissions) and should document the Veteran's reports regarding his medical history in the examination report.

After eliciting a full history from the Veteran, conducting a complete review of the claims file (including all available service records, private and VA medical treatment records, and lay statements and submissions record), performing an examination of the Veteran, and completing any clinically indicated diagnostic testing, the examiner should diagnose and describe in detail all current sleep disorders found to be present.  In so doing, the examiner must consider and address the diagnoses of record.

As to each sleep disorder identified on examination or diagnosed during the pendency of the claim, to include obstructive sleep apnea, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed sleep disorder had its clinical onset during active service or is otherwise related to any in-service disease, event, or injury.

Additionally, if a direct relationship to service is not found, the examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed sleep disorder was either (a) caused by, or (b) aggravated by (any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence) any service-connected disability, to specifically include the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and major depressive disorder with alcohol and opiod dependence.  

?

NOTE: With respect to the question concerning aggravation, the examiner is advised that aggravation does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of the nonservice-connected disability.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019).

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report the onset and duration of his symptoms as well as his medical history.  Accordingly, the examiner is asked to consider and address, where appropriate, the lay and medical evidence of record concerning the onset and duration of the Veteran's symptoms.  The examiner should specifically consider and address the evidence, discussed in the body of the remand above, indicating that the Veteran's symptoms of snoring, choking, coughing, and cessation of breathing during sleep began shortly following his discharge from active service, as well as the service records indicating environmental exposures during his Southwest Asia deployment.  

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of any identified disability.  If the Veteran's reports regarding her history of symptoms of and treatment for any diagnosed disability are rejected, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

All examination findings, along with the complete explanation for all opinions expressed, must be set forth in the examination report. If the examiner is unable to answer any question without a resort to speculation, then he or she should so indicate and provide a rationale for why an answer could not be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. McCabe, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.