Citation Nr: A25032556
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-466073
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for common headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Preliminary Matters

The Veteran had active duty service in the U.S. Marine Corps from March 1992 to March 1998.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a May 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for common headaches is remanded.

On appeal, the Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for headaches which he attributes to active service. Specifically, he contends that his headaches are secondary to his service-connected PTSD. Alternatively, the Veteran has also asserted that his headaches are related to rhinitis, sinusitis, and temporomandibular disorder (claimed as TMJ). See August 2024 VA 10182 (Notice of Disagreement); January 2024 VA 21-526EZ.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran is service-connected for PTSD, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), allergic rhinitis, diabetes mellitus, tinnitus, hypertension associated with PTSD and erectile dysfunction associated with PTSD. See January 2024 Rating Codesheet.

As an initial matter, the current disability element of the Veteran's claim is not in dispute. In its August 2024 rating decision, the RO determined that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of common headaches. See August 2024 Rating Decision - Narrative, at 2. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

However, the Board cannot yet adjudicate the Veteran's claim because the record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to make a determination on the claim. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (explaining that the Board shall remand to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (explaining that any opinion obtained pursuant to VA's duty to assist must be adequate). 

The issue is remanded because the Board finds the AOJ erred in satisfying VA's duty to assist in obtaining a VA medical opinion necessary to make a determination on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  

In April 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his headaches. The VA examiner indicated that complete review of the Veteran's claims file and in-person examination were conducted. Here, the Veteran was diagnosed with common headaches. See April 2024 Headaches C&P, at 1. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran was claiming service connection for headaches due to PTSD and/or toxic exposure, but also thought it was due to his sleep apnea, teeth grinding, and/or medication he was on. Id., at 2. The Veteran stated that he often wakes up with headaches that sometime return in the afternoon. The Veteran reported history of grinding his teeth while sleeping and also has obstructive sleep apnea with use of CPAP. Id.

The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches are less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. As rationale, the VA examiner explained that "[t]he conditions of headaches and PTSD are not medically related. Headache is a separate entity entirely from the PTSD and unrelated to it. A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. A nexus has not been established. There is no history or evidence found in claims file, lay history, or evaluation of any correlation or nexus between the claimed condition and PTSD." See April 2024 Headaches Opinion, at 2.    

When the Secretary undertakes to provide a Veteran with a VA examination or medical opinion, it must be adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). 

The Board finds that the April 2024 opinion is inadequate because the VA examiner did not support the opinion with medical rationale. Here, the VA examiner indicated that "[h]eadaches are a separate entity entirely from PTSD and unrelated to it. A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship." While the Board appreciates the VA examiner's thorough review of medical literature, the opinion is nevertheless inadequate because there is no reasoned rationale connecting this Veteran's individual medical history to the studies referenced. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) (stating that a medical rationale based solely on general medical literature without discussing the specific facts pertaining to a veteran's condition or individual circumstances is inadequate). Also, the VA examiner noted a review of medical literature but failed to cite to any sources utilized in the rationale provided. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

The VA examiner was also asked to determine whether the Veteran's conceded toxic risk activity(ies) caused his headaches. Here, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches are less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic risk activity (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. As rationale, the VA examiner explained that "claimant's symptoms and timing of headaches reported and risk factors of OSA and/or lay statement of grinding of teeth far outweigh the toxic exposure history." See April 2024 TERA Opinion, at 3.

While the Board finds that this opinion is sufficient with regard to the Veteran's claimed TERA, the Board also finds that remand is necessary to obtain medical nexus opinion(s) based on other theories of service connection raised by the April 2024 VA examiner, the Veteran, and by the record. In particular, the April 2024 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's OSA and/or teeth grinding are a greater risk factor than his toxic exposure history. In addition, the Veteran contends that his headaches may be associated with other service-related conditions such as TMJ, hypertension, tinnitus, sinusitis and rhinitis. Notably, during an April 2023 VA hypertension examination, the Veteran stated that along with his hypertension, he has headaches, anxiety, depression, rapid heartbeat, and stress. Here, the April 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension is secondary to his service-connected PTSD. See April 2023 Hypertension C&P, at 2. A January 2024 dental record indicates that the Veteran reported teeth grinding during the night leading to TMJ pain, spasms of muscles and chronic headaches. See January 2024 MTR, at 1. In April 2024, during a VA temporomandibular disorders examination, the Veteran reported continued night teeth grinding, sore jaw in the morning with headaches that return in the afternoon. See April 2024 TMD C&P, at 2. The Board is unable to make a determination on these other theories at this time because no VA examiner has considered the theory of service connection as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected TMJ, hypertension, tinnitus, sinusitis, rhinitis and/or obstructive sleep apnea. 

Regrettably, the Board cannot yet adjudicate the Veteran's claim for headaches because the record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to make a determination on the claim and finds that remand for further development is necessary. See Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 120, 124 (1991).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain VA medical opinion(s) from a qualified examiner regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headaches, to include as secondary to his service-connected PTSD, TMJ, hypertension, sinusitis, rhinitis, OSA, and tinnitus. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner. 

The examiner is asked to then render an opinion, including rationale, addressing the following: 

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's headaches were incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness? 

The examiner must consider service treatment records (STRs) indicating that the Veteran complained of head pain/tingling and reported having hay fever upon service separation. See April 1996 STR, at 27, 79.

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that the Veteran's headaches are i) caused by; or ii) aggravated by (any incremental increase in severity) any of his service-connected conditions. 

In rendering the opinion, the examiner is asked to address i) causation and ii) aggravation separately for the service-connected condition(s) noted above. 

The examiner is asked to consider the April 2023 VA hypertension and April 2024 VA temporomandibular disorders examinations where the Veteran reported headaches as well as the January 2024 dental records noting chronic headaches as due to nighttime teeth grinding. See April 2024 TMD C&P, at 2; January 2024 MTR, at 1; April 2023 Hypertension C&P, at 2.

(c)	If the Veteran's headaches are determined to be unrelated to active service and/or a service-connected disability, provide the etiology considered more likely and explain why that is so.

In all opinions rendered, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms.

If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. The examiner should discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed, citing to specific evidence of record, as necessary. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Loy, T., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.