Citation Nr: A25032123
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230109-312291
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to readjudicate the claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Since the July 2015 rating decision that denied service connection for a psychiatric disability, VA received evidence that was not previously of record and is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection a psychiatric disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim of service connection for a psychiatric disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1987 to April 1991.

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 15, 2022 rating decision that determined new and relevant evidence had not been submitted to readjudicate the claim for entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review option. Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of June 15, 2022-the date of the rating decision on appeal. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after June 15, 2022, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

New and Relevant Evidence

New and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate the previously denied claim for entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

Here the Veteran contends that readjudication of his claims for entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability is warranted.

In July 2015, the RO issued a rating a decision that denied service connection for a psychiatric disability on the basis that the evidence did not show a current disability, an in-service event, to include a stressor, and the lack of medical link or nexus.

In March 2022, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim requesting review of the July 2015 rating decision and submitted evidence to VA. The RO issued a new rating decision in June 2022 that did not find new and relevant evidence and did not readjudicate this issue. It stated that VA treatment records did not prove or disprove a matter at issue within the claim. Following this rating decision, in January 2023, the Veteran initiated an appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement). He elected the Board's Direct Review docket. 

Evidence associated with the claim file prior to the June 2022 rating decision issued in this appeal, show VA treatment records from October 2017 indicating that the Veteran was admitted to VA care for depression with suicidal ideation (with no plan). This evidence is new as it was not before agency decision makers in July 2015 and it is relevant as due to providing information regarding a current diagnosed psychiatric disability which tends to prove a matter at issue.

Therefore, based on the finding that new and relevant evidence has been associated with the record and the issues of entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability must be readjudicated.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability.

In the June 2022 rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for a psychiatric disability. As noted above, the RO's denial was solely based on the Veteran's failure to submit new and relevant evidence, and it has not yet adjudicated the claims on the merits. Thus, a remand for initial adjudication on the merits is necessary, as the Board is prevented from doing so in the first instance. Indeed, the appellant has a procedural right to have one review of his appeal by the Secretary under 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a), and the AMA does not specifically revoke that right as provided by statute. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (2023) (stating that the Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim).

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Readjudicate the claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability on the merits (not on a new and relevant basis). If the benefits sought are not granted to the appellant's satisfaction, follow all notification procedures. 

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Dworkin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.