Citation Nr: A25032583
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241219-494967
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

A total rating for compensation purposes based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted.

Basic eligibility to Dependents' Education Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for right hand peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left hand peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right foot peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left foot peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Service connection has been established for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) rated as 50 percent disabling; right hand peripheral neuropathy rated as 40 percent disabling; left hand peripheral neuropathy rated as 20 percent disabling; right foot peripheral neuropathy rated as 20 percent disabling; left foot peripheral neuropathy rated as 20 percent disabling; and hypertension rated as noncompensable.  The Veteran has a combined service-connected rating of 90 percent.

2. In his April 2024 Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran reported that he had last worked on a full-time basis in January 1996 as a blackjack dealer.

3. The service-connected disabilities are of such severity as to preclude the Veteran from securing and following substantially gainful employment.

4. Basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is established.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

2. The criteria for basic eligibility to Dependents' Education Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 3501; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3021.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from August 1965 to August 1968.  He served in the Republic of Vietnam.

In May 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied a rating in excess of 40 percent for right hand peripheral neuropathy, a rating in excess of 20 percent for left hand peripheral neuropathy, a rating in excess of 20 percent for right foot peripheral neuropathy, a rating in excess of 10 percent for left foot peripheral neuropathy, and a TDIU.  In December 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the December 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued the decisions on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, as the Board is remanding the claims for increased ratings for right hand peripheral neuropathy, left hand peripheral neuropathy, right foot peripheral neuropathy, and left foot peripheral neuropathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

TDIU

The Veteran contends that entitlement to a TDIU is warranted as the service connected disabilities render him unable to secure and maintain any form of substantially gainful employment.

A request for a TDIU (whether expressly raised or implied by the record) is not a separate claim for benefits, but rather an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating, either as part of the initial adjudication of a claim or as part of a claim for an increased rating.  Where, as here, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is raised in connection with a claim for an increased rating, it is part of the claim for benefits for the underlying disability.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). 

Total ratings for compensation purposes may be assigned where the combined schedular rating for the service-connected disabilities is less than 100 percent when it is found that the service-connected disabilities are sufficient to make the veteran unemployable without regard to either advancing age or the presence of any nonservice connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341.

Total disability ratings for compensation purposes may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  If there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

Service connection has been established for PTSD rated as 50 percent disabling; right hand peripheral neuropathy rated as 40 percent disabling; left hand peripheral neuropathy rated as 20 percent disabling; right foot peripheral neuropathy rated as 20 percent disabling; left foot peripheral neuropathy rated as 20 percent disabling; and hypertension rated as noncompensable.  The Veteran has a combined service connected rating of 90 percent.  The Veteran has a combined service connected rating of 90 percent.  Therefore, the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for consideration of the assignment of a TDIU.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

In his April 2024 Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran reported that he had last worked on a full-time basis in January 1996 as a blackjack dealer.

In a February 2025 written statement, the Veteran reported that he experienced shakiness and intense pain in his hands; frequently dropped items; was unable to focus and to concentrate due to the pain; had constant numbness in his hands and feet; experienced sleep disturbance due to the pain; could only stand for 15 minutes at a time; had foot drop and tripped and fell; could only walk short distances with the use of a cane; and had to change sitting positions frequently.  He conveyed that "due to the severity of my peripheral neuropathy in my hands and feet, I have not been able to work since 1996."   

A March 2025 vocational assessment from Z. Fosberg, Certified Rehabilitation Counselor, states that the Veteran's medical records had been reviewed and the Veteran was interviewed.  Mr. Fosberg concluded that "the effects of [the Veteran]'s service-connected bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy of the hands and feet . . . create a greater impact on his ability to work than when these limitations are considered individually;" and "[t]he overall impact of the service-connected conditions and their associated symptoms cause such a negative vocational impact that the Veteran is left unable to secure or follow gainful employment."    

The Veteran meets the schedular criteria for assignment of a TDIU.  He reported that he had not worked on a full-time basis since 1996.  The Board finds that the service-connected disabilities render the Veteran unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment.  Accordingly, TDIU is granted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The Board has considered whether special monthly compensation at the housebound rate is warranted.  Entitlement to a TDIU based on the combined impact of the service-connected disabilities has been established.  The Veteran does not have a single service-connected disability rated as 100-percent disabling or a TDIU due to a single disability and an additional service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability.  Accordingly, an award of special monthly compensation at the housebound rate is not for assignment.

Basic Eligibility for Dependents' Education Assistance Benefits

Basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 exists where a Veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable and has a permanent and total service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 3501; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3021.  The Board has granted a TDIU.  Basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is therefore established.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for right hand peripheral neuropathy, a rating in excess of 20 percent for left hand peripheral neuropathy, a rating in excess of 20 percent for right foot peripheral neuropathy, and an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left foot peripheral neuropathy are remanded.

VA's duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991).  When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The report of a December 2023 peripheral nerves examination conducted for VA notes that the examining nurse practitioner assessed mild incomplete paralysis of the right median nerve; moderate incomplete paralysis of the right lower radicular group; and mild incomplete paralysis of the left lower radicular group.  All other upper extremity nerves and radicular groups were noted as normal.  The examiner assessed moderate incomplete paralysis of the right external popliteal, and mild incomplete paralysis of the left external popliteal.  All other lower extremity nerves were noted as normal.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not require the use of any assistive devices contrary to VA clinical documentation dated in February 2022 noting that the Veteran was prescribed a cane due to "issues with his balance."  Considering this omission, the Board finds the December 2023 VA examination report is of limited probative value. 

The report of an April 2024 peripheral nerves examination conducted for VA notes that the Veteran complained of an "increased burning sensation on bilateral 5th toes down to the lateral ankles, pain at the base of both big toes, hand tremors and numbness of the bilateral middle and ring fingers, and pain at the base of the thumbs."  On examination, the examining nurse practitioner assessed mild incomplete paralysis of the bilateral median nerves.  All other upper extremity nerves and radicular groups were noted as normal.  The examiner assessed moderate incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic nerves.  All other lower extremity nerves were noted as normal.  The examiner did not provide an explanation for the disparate nerve findings from the December 2023 VA examination.  The examiner also inconsistently stated that "there is evidence of worsening of [the Veteran's] service-connected disabilities," while also assessing less severe symptoms than the prior VA examiner found on examination less than 4 months prior.  Considering these deficiencies, the examination report is of little probative value.  Further VA neurological examination is required.  That is a pre decisional error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA neurological examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the severity of the service-connected right hand peripheral neuropathy, left hand peripheral neuropathy, right foot peripheral neuropathy, and left foot peripheral neuropathy.  The examination notice should be incorporated into the record.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.C., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.