Citation Nr: A25032261
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240518-441348
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is dismissed as moot.

Entitlement to a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, from May 23, 2019, is granted.

The untimely appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for a scars condition is dismissed.

The appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for a vaginal condition is moot.

The appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for a gynecological condition is moot.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's PTSD symptoms are subsumed in the already service-connected disorder described as major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder; thus, the appeal seeking service connection for PTSD is moot.

2. From May 23, 2019, the date of receipt of the intent-to-file, the evidence reflects that the Veteran's service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity; deficiencies in most areas or total social and occupational impairment are not shown.

3. The issue of service connection for a scars condition included in the May 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) was not timely filed and there is no basis to waive this mandatory claim-processing rule violation or otherwise decline to enforce the rule.

4. A June 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for atrophy of the vagina, claimed as vaginal condition and previously rated as gynecological condition.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal as to service connection for PTSD are met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. 

2. From May 23, 2019, the criteria for a disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes (DC) 9434-9435.

3. The criteria for dismissal of the untimely appeal of entitlement to service connection for a scars condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.

4. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for entitlement to service connection for a vaginal condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

5. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for entitlement to service connection for a gynecological condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2005 to September 2017 and in September 2021. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from April 2024 and April 2020 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The substance of the attempted appeal of the April 2020 rating decision will be discussed below. Any evidence submitted after the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

1. The appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for PTSD is dismissed as moot.

The Veteran seeks service-connection for PTSD. The Board finds the Veteran's PTSD symptoms are subsumed in the already service-connected psychiatric disorder characterized as major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder. 

In the April 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ, in pertinent part, denied entitlement to service connection for PTSD and denied a rating in excess of 30 percent disabling for major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder. 

The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided, as is the evaluation of the same manifestation under different diagnoses. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Amberman v. Shinseki, 570 F.3d 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Notwithstanding, service connection may be available for an additional disorder of the psychiatric system if the additional disorder has different symptoms from the service-connected disability.

In April 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA psychiatric examination for the claimed PTSD. The examiner found she did not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD. Her symptoms included depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood. She acknowledged feeling hopeless about the future but denied suicidal ideation.

The April 2024 examiner found that the Veteran did not meet diagnostic criteria for PTSD. Notably, the RO recharacterized the psychiatric disorder after the April 2024 exam to major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder. See April 2024 rating decision.

Where, as here, there is no evidence that there are symptoms of mental health manifestations separate from the already service-connected disability, service connection need not be discussed and, indeed, is moot. See Dollison v. Wilkie, 750 F. App'x 986, 989 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (dismissing, for lack of standing, an appeal from a Court affirmance of a Board decision that denied service connection for PTSD and granted service connection for MDD because the appellant did not "establish that he suffers from symptoms of PTSD that are not also symptoms of MDD or that a diagnosis of PTSD would result in some other greater benefit to" him).

Accordingly, as service connection has been granted for major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder, there remains no specific determination for the Board to consider and the appeal of service connection for PTSD. The claim is dismissed as moot. See 38 U.S.C. § 7105. 

2. Entitlement to a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder from May 23, 2019, is granted.

The Veteran asserts that her major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder has gotten worse. Specifically, she contends that her anxiety symptoms have increased. See May 2024 Notice of Disagreement.

The Veteran's service-connected major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder is rated as 30 percent disabling from May 23, 2019, to July 30, 2023, under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9435; and 30 percent disabling from July 31, 2023, under DC 9434. 

As relevant to this appeal, on May 23, 2019, VA received an intent-to-file. On January 17, 2020, VA received the Veteran's Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (DBQ) for depression.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 50 percent or higher.

The Board finds that a 50 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the entire  appellate period.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Service treatment records show that the Veteran received treatment for depressive symptoms in service in 2006, 2009, and between 2016 to 2017. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2020. The examiner found that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder resulted in symptoms such as depressed mood and anxiety. The Veteran denied any homicidal or suicidal ideation. The examiner found that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress.  

Socially, it was reported that the Veteran was in a "long term relationship and [that] they live together" with their daughter. She reported a strained relationship with her mother and a good relationship with her brother.

Occupationally, the Veteran reported was previously working as background investigator after discharge from active duty. She is in the Air Force Reserves.

Between January and March of 2023, the Veteran met with Hampton VA Medical center medical health providers for treatment, including attending psychoeducational groups and telephone care management. She was diagnosed with adjustment disorder and mixed anxiety and depressed mood.

In a November 2023 VA examination, her psychiatric symptoms included signs of depression and an increase in anxiety.  The examiner found her occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication. Her symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, and disturbances of motivation and mood. She denied suicidal ideation or feelings of hopelessness about the future. 

Occupationally, the Veteran worked as a forensic specialist with a local police department until she was administratively separated in 2022, when physical pain prevented her from performing her job duties. She obtained employment as a fraud investigative assistant, working remotely. She denied problems or discipline at either job. The Veteran reported an increase in anxiety associated with her employment in the Air Force Reserves and two motor vehicle accidents. The Veteran reported the motor vehicle accidents occurred while traveling to Air Force Reserve duty in September 2021, and while returning from reserve duty in August 2023.

Socially, she continued to live with her long-term partner and daughter. She described her relationships as "good," but reported difficulties completing shared household tasks due to low motivation and chronic physical health issues. She described herself as less social over the last few years and that irritability, impatience, and distrust were getting in the way of her ability to enjoy socializing with friends.

In April 2024 VA examination, the examiner indicated the Veteran experiences recurrent, moderate major depressive disorder with anxious distress, which causes occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of instability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The Veteran's diagnosis was amended in the April 2024 examination to include other specified trauma and stressor related disorder. The Veteran reported intrusive thoughts related to combat and exposure to human remains that contributed to her negative emotional state and mood. She reported that her anxiety while driving and going to military reserve drills had increased. The examiner reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, suspiciousness and chronic sleep impairment. She acknowledged feeling hopeless about the future but denied suicidal ideation.

Occupationally, the Veteran retained employment full time as a health insurance investigator and a reservist in the Air Force. She reported positive work performance in her civilian job and no loss of work efficiency. As reservist, she reported bullying in her unit and that it was an "unbearable [...] hostile work environment," that caused her depressive symptoms and anxiety to worsen. 

Socially, the Veteran reported continuing to live with her partner and daughter.   

VA treatment records, the April 2024 VA examination, and the Veteran's lay statements show that the Veteran's major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating including anxiety and chronic sleep impairment, and symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating including disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, particularly in her reserve unit. The Veteran also had symptoms that are not listed with a specific rating, such as anhedonia, irritability, involuntary and intrusive thoughts/memories of traumatic events, loss of motivation, persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others or the world (feeling "paranoid," distrustful, and unsafe), hypervigilance, markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all or almost all activities most of the day, significant weight change and insomnia, feeling keyed up or tense, and fearing that something awful might happen. 

Additional treatment records in the Veteran's file do not reflect the presence of symptomology any worse, during the appellate period, than what has been discussed. 

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence demonstrates that Veteran's overall disability picture is consistent with a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for the appellate period. The Board finds that the totality of the evidence, to include the Veteran's statements, as well as her treatment records and examination reports, show that the frequency and severity of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms resulted in social and occupational impairment that more nearly approximates the criteria for the 50 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  

In arriving to this conclusion, the Board notes that the Veteran has consistently reported, and VA treatment records and examinations have reflected disturbances of motivation and mood and decreases in work efficiency. The Board finds that these symptoms and the social and occupational effects related thereto support a 50 percent evaluation for this period. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

In rendering this determination, the Board acknowledges that there is evidence of record that does not support an increased rating. In particular, the April 2024 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The Board finds the narratives contained in the treatment records, lay statements, and the VA examiner's description of symptoms to be the most probative evidence of the Veteran's psychological symptomatology. 

The Board further finds that an evaluation in excess of 50 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's major depressive disorder with anxious distress and other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder at any point during the appellate period. A higher rating would be warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. In this regard, the weight of the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher during this period. The above-referenced evidence does not show that the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms resulted in social and occupational impairment that more nearly approximates the criteria for a 70 percent or higher rating. The evidence demonstrates that the Veteran is capable of social interaction and occupational functioning. The Veteran has consistently denied any suicidal ideation or intent. She has maintained a relationship with her family and has not been noted to have complete social isolation. Although she had physical difficulties with her employment, she has been able to maintain employment and work in duties that she could complete.  

Overall, the Veteran has not demonstrated symptoms consistent with or approximating the general level of impairment warranting a 70 percent or more evaluation or akin to the symptoms as found in the rating criteria. Mauerhan, supra.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the entire appellate period. 

3. The untimely appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for a scar condition is dismissed.

The Veteran requested that the Board review her claim for service connection for a scar condition initially filed on January 17, 2020, DBQ and denied in an April 2020 rating decision.

Governing law and regulations for AMA appeals provide claimants with one year following the date of mailing of notification of a decision by the AOJ in which to contest the decision via a notice of disagreement. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1); 38 C.F.R 20.203(b). An extension for the filing period may be granted for good cause. 38 C.F.R. §20.203(c).

The Board has jurisdiction over claims it has docketed but may dismiss appeals due to procedural defects, such as noncompliance with claims processing rules. See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2021), While the one-year deadline in 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b) to file a notice of disagreement is not a jurisdictional bar to the Board's review of a claim, "it is an important and mandatory claim-processing rule. See Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262, 269 (2024). A question as to timeliness or adequacy of the notice of disagreement shall be decided by the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(C).

In this case, the Veteran submitted her Notice of Disagreement on May 18, 2024, more than a year after the mailing of the April 2020 rating decision which denied service connection for a scars condition. There was no subsequent rating decision with respect to service connection for scar condition. To date, the Veteran has not moved for an extension of time to file a Notice of Disagreement for scars condition, nor has she shown good cause for granting an extended filing period. As such, the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, as to the claim for service connection for a scar condition only, was untimely and must be dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(C); 38 C.F.R § 20.203(b).

The Board considered the applicability of any waiver that would permit extending the filing period but finds there is no such evidence. See generally, Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262 (2024); see also Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 332 (2022) (regulatory claims-processing rules may be waived without affecting jurisdiction to adjudicate appeal); Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37, 45 (2009) (VA may implicitly or explicitly waive any issue of timeliness in the filing of a Substantive Appeal).

In particular, the Board has considered whether it waived its right to enforce the filing deadline by virtue of docketing the appeal. As noted above, the Veteran filed her Notice of Disagreement on May 18, 2024, and soon afterward, on June 3, 2024, the Office of the Clerk of the Board sent a letter acknowledging receipt of the Notice of Disagreement and placement of the appeal on the direct docket, consistent with her choice on the VA Form 10182. The Board finds that this letter acknowledging receipt and the mere administrative act of assigning the attempted appeal a docket in and of itself does not constitute a waiver of timeliness. Whether the Board has waived any objection to the timeliness of a notice of disagreement should be based on all facts and circumstances of that case. Cf. Percy, 23 Vet. App. at 46 (discussing VA's actions in that case in finding VA had treated the substantive appeal as timely filed). Furthermore, there were no further communications, no hearing held, and no action in which the Veteran would be under the impression that the Veteran's service connection claim for her scar condition was being substantively developed. Thus, the Board finds that the automatic administrative action of the June 3, 2024, docketing letter did not constitute a waiver of the timeliness of the May 18, 2024, Notice of Disagreement for a scar condition.

For the above reasons, the Veteran's May 18, 2024, Notice of Disagreement was untimely as to appeal of service-connection for the scar condition, and there is no basis to waive this claim-processing rule violation or otherwise address these claims on the merits. Thus, the appeal from the denial of the claim for entitlement to service connection for a scar condition must be dismissed.

4. The appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for a gynecological condition is moot.

See discussion in paragraph 5.

5. The appeal for the issue of entitlement to service connection for a vaginal condition is moot.

The Veteran is service-connected for atrophy of the vagina, currently evaluated as 30 percent disabling from February 1, 2024. For the foregoing reason, the Board finds the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for a vaginal condition and a gynecological condition is moot and thus, dismissed. 

Initially, the Board notes that the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement attempting to appeal the April 2020 rating decision was an impermissible concurrent election. At the time, the Veteran had already appealed the April 2020 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for both a vaginal condition and a gynecological condition to the Board in an April 2, 2021, Notice of Disagreement, electing the evidence lane. The appeal was docketed as Docket No. 210402-150309 and was adjudicated by the Board in a July 19, 2024, decision.

In the July 2024 decision, the Board found that a case or controversy ceases to exist, and a case becomes moot "when the issues presented are no longer 'live' or the parties lack a legally cognizable interest in the outcome." Godsey v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 207, 218 (2019). Here, the same is true of the attempted appeal of service connection for a vaginal condition and a gynecological condition from an April 2020 rating decision. 

Accordingly, as service connection has been granted for atrophy of the vagina, there remains no specific determination for the Board to consider and the appeal is dismissed as moot. 38 U.S.C. § 7105.

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marron, Sara C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.