Citation Nr: A25032926
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241002-480287
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

The appeal regarding entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 2003 to June 2011.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a November 2023 rating decision by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran submitted VA Form 10182 in October 2024, electing the direct Board review option.  The Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision.  

The Veteran maintains that symptoms of OSA first began during active service.  See January 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  He also maintains that his symptoms persisted and worsened over the years.  Id.  He has a diagnosis of OSA.  See April 2024 VA examination report.  

During the pendency of this appeal, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), was enacted. Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  The PACT Act adds new examination requirements where a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is implicated.  VA is now required to provide a disability examination and/or obtain a medical opinion when a Veteran submits a claim for compensation and has: (1) evidence of a disability, and (2) participation in a TERA, but the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  38 U.S.C. ยง 1168(a).

Here, the record reflects that the Veteran's service as an aviation boatswain's mate included exposure to various fuels.  See October 2023 VA TERA Memorandum.  

In November 2023, a clinician reviewed the record and concluded that the Veteran's OSA was not related to his participation in a TERA.  She cited to various literature regarding the etiology and pathophysiology of OSA, but did not include an explanation of the medical principles underlying her conclusion that a nexus was not established in this case.  This renders this opinion inadequate and leaves the Board without sufficient information to make a determination in the Veteran's claim.  As such, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate opinion and correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The Board additionally notes that on VA examination in April 2023, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA was not related to service.  He stated that while some of the Veteran's reported symptoms during service could occur with OSA, it would be mere speculation to state that the Veteran had sleep apnea in service.  He did not provide a complete explanation for why an opinion could not be rendered, to include whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion was the result of a need for additional information, or that he had exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to the question regarding etiology of OSA.  On this basis, the Board also finds that this opinion is inadequate, and that the opinion obtained on remand must address the question of a direct relationship to service in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his OSA.  

The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  The examination report must include a notation that this record review took place.

The examiner should also elicit a complete history from the Veteran.

Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all pertinent symptomatology and findings must be reported in detail.

After the record review and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that OSA was incurred in or is otherwise related to active service.

The examiner should also provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that there is a nexus between the Veteran's OSA and his TERA during service.  

In providing the opinion regarding the relationship of the Veteran's OSA to his toxic exposure during service, the examiner is asked to consider (1) the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military duties; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.  

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history.  Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.

The complete rationale for all opinions should be set forth, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the examiner must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

 

DONNIE R. HACHEY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Barone, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.