Citation Nr: A25032602
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241204-491020
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

A separate 80 percent rating for left lower extremity neurological impairment, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

A separate 80 percent rating for right lower extremity neurological impairment, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

A separate 40 percent rating for left upper extremity neurological impairment, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

A separate 50 percent rating for right upper extremity neurological impairment, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

A separate 30 percent rating for orthostatic hypotension, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

A separate 10 percent rating for loss of sense of smell, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

A separate 30 percent rating for speech changes, as a residual of Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

Special monthly compensation (SMC) pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (r)(2) is granted for accrued benefits purposes, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary award.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's Parkinson's disease manifestation of bradykinesia with tremor, muscle rigidity and radiculopathy of the left lower extremity has been most closely approximated by complete paralysis of the left sciatic nerve.

2. The Veteran's Parkinson's disease manifestation of bradykinesia with tremor, muscle rigidity and radiculopathy of the right lower extremity has been most closely approximated by complete paralysis of the right sciatic nerve.

3. The Veteran's Parkinson's disease manifestation of bradykinesia with tremor, muscle rigidity and radiculopathy of the left upper extremity has been most closely approximated by severe incomplete paralysis of the left radial nerve.

4. The Veteran's Parkinson's disease manifestation of bradykinesia with tremor, muscle rigidity and radiculopathy of the right upper extremity has been most closely approximated by severe incomplete paralysis of the right radial nerve.

5. The Veteran's Parkinson's disease caused orthostatic hypotension, which manifested in symptoms most comparable to dizziness and occasional staggering.

6. The Veteran had complete loss of sense of smell associated with Parkinson's disease.

7. The Veteran's speech changes associated with Parkinson's disease approximated no more than mild hoarseness of the larynx; there is no evidence of hoarseness with thickening or nodules of cords, polyps, submucous infiltration, or pre-malignant changes on biopsy.

8. During the appeal period, the Veteran was in need of a higher level of care for aid and attendance due to his need for in-home personal health-care services.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating more than 80 percent for the Veteran's bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity of the left lower extremity associated with Parkinson's disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 8520.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating more than 80 percent for the Veteran's bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity of the right lower extremity associated with Parkinson's disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 8520.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating more than 40 percent for the Veteran's bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity of the left upper extremity associated with Parkinson's disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 8514.

4. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating more than 50 percent for the Veteran's bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity of the right upper extremity associated with Parkinson's disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 8514.

5. The criteria for entitlement to a separate rating of 30 percent for orthostatic hypotension as a Parkinson's disease residual have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.400, 4.3, 4.7, 4.21, 4.87, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 6204.

6. The criteria for a 10 percent disability rating percent for loss of sense of smell associated with Parkinson's disease are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.87a, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 6275.

7. The criteria for a 10 percent disability rating for speech changes associated with Parkinson's disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Codes 8004, 6516.

8. The criteria for SMC at the R-2 level, for accrued benefits purposes, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1952 to June 1955. He passed away in March 2016 and the appellant is his surviving spouse. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in October and November 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), which performed a higher level review of December 2022 and August 2024 rating decisions. In this regard, while this case originated in the legacy system, the decisions on appeal constitute initial decisions under the AMA, collectively assigning initial ratings on the downstream issues of Parkinson's residuals and SMC for the purposes of accrued benefits. In December 2024, the appellant timely appealed such rating decisions by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 AOJ decision with respect to the Parkinson's residual ratings and the August 2024 decision with respect to the rate of SMC assigned, as these decisions were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302 (a). If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decisions which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the appellant and her representative have specifically limited this appeal to the assignment of separate ratings for all Parkinson's residuals, and the award of SMC at the (r)(2) rate, both for accrued benefits purposes. See December 2024 VA Form 10182 and February 2023 VA Form 20-0996 (specifically requesting higher-level review with respect to the issues of entitlement to a separate rating for Parkinson's residuals of "orthostatic blood pressure problems with dizziness and vertigo," "bilateral lower extremity severe weakness and loss of use," and other enumerated residuals, which have been granted in full in subsequent rating decisions).

1. Entitlement to a separate rating for left lower extremity neurological impairment, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

2. Entitlement to a separate rating for right lower extremity neurological impairment, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

3. Entitlement to a separate rating for left upper extremity neurological impairment, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

4. Entitlement to a separate rating for right upper extremity neurological impairment, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

5. Entitlement to a separate rating for orthostatic hypotension, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

6. Entitlement to a separate rating for loss of sense of smell, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

7. Entitlement to a separate rating for speech changes, as secondary to service-connected Parkinson's disease and for accrued benefits purposes.

In the appellant's February 2023 request for higher-level review, she argued that not all of the Veteran's separate Parkinson's disease residuals had been separately rated according to the applicable rating criteria, to specifically include radiculopathy of the extremities and orthostatic hypotension. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, the Board agrees and also finds that the Veteran's bilateral lower and upper extremity residuals, orthostatic hypotension, loss of sense of smell, and speech changes should have been separately rated, as such is reflected in the medical evidence of record.

In this regard, disability evaluations are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptoms with the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based upon average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

A disability rating may require re-evaluation in accordance with changes in a veteran's condition. Thus, it is essential that the disability be considered in the context of the entire recorded history when determining the level of current impairment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

When a claimant is awarded service connection and assigned an initial disability rating, separate disability ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time in accordance with the facts found. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). Where the veteran is appealing the rating for an already established service-connected condition, the present level of disability is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Veteran's disabilities discussed herein were all identifiable residuals of his service-connected neurodegenerative disorder, which has been labeled interchangeably as both Parkinson's disease and multiple systems atrophy. The Board notes that the distinction is not pertinent to the issues addressed herein, as residuals of such are addressed under the same diagnostic code pertinent to Parkinson's disease. In this regard, identifiable residuals of Parkinson's disease are to be rated under a separate diagnostic code if the combined disability rating resulting from those residuals exceeds the 30 percent rating assigned for Parkinson's disease under Diagnostic Code 8004. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. The combined ratings of the Veteran's residuals of Parkinson's disease exceed 30 percent. As such, the Board will determine whether a higher rating is warranted for the identifiable residuals. 

As a final note, the Board recognizes that the regulations preclude the assignment of separate ratings for the same manifestations under different diagnoses. The critical element is that none of the symptomatology for any of the conditions is duplicative of or overlapping with symptomatology of the other conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259 (1995). Accordingly, the Board has been cognizant of the possibility of pyramiding while assigning these separate ratings.

Neurological impairment of the bilateral upper and lower extremities

The appellant argues and the Board agrees that the Veteran's bilateral upper and lower extremities manifested Parkinson's disease residual symptoms, to include tremors, bradykinesia, muscle rigidity and radiculopathy. The term bradykinesia is defined as "abnormally slow or sluggish motor activity and responses, which is a classic finding in Parkinson's disease and parkinsonian syndromes." See bradykinesia. (n.d.) Segen's Medical Dictionary. (2011). Retrieved May 16, 2024, from https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary. com/bradykinesia. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's upper extremity Parkinson's residuals may be rated as analogous to impairment of the radial nerve in each upper extremity under Diagnostic Code 8514, 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. 38 C.F.R. § 4.20. In this regard, the appellant has not identified a more appropriate diagnostic code or argued for the specific assignment of any code. Additionally, the Board finds that a radial nerve impairment is most closely analogous to the Veteran's upper extremity tremors, bradykinesia, and muscle rigidity and radiculopathy in terms of symptomatology, a resulting disability picture, and anatomical location. Diagnostic Code 8514 rates based on motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances, and these parameters also cover the functional deficits caused by the Veteran's Parkinson's disease upper extremity manifestations, including tremors, bradykinesia, and muscle rigidity and radiculopathy. Moreover, Diagnostic Code 8514 rates based on nerve impairment in the arm, forearm, wrist, and hand, which is the same anatomical location impacted by the Veteran's pertinent Parkinson's disease manifestations.

With regard to the Veteran's lower extremity Parkinson's symptoms, such may be rated as analogous to impairment of the sciatic nerve in each lower extremity under Diagnostic Code 8520, 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. 38 C.F.R. § 4.20. Again, the appellant has not specifically argued for the assignment of any particular diagnostic code with which to rate such disabilities. Additionally, the Board finds that a sciatic nerve impairment is most closely analogous to the Veteran's lower extremity bradykinesia in terms of symptomatology, a resulting disability picture, and anatomical location. Diagnostic Code 8520 rates based on motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances, and these parameters also cover the functional deficits caused by the Veteran's Parkinson's disease lower extremity bradykinesia. Moreover, Diagnostic Code 8520 rates based on nerve impairment in the legs, which is the same anatomical location impacted by the Veteran's lower extremity bradykinesia.

Diagnostic Code 8514 provides ratings for both the "major" and the "minor" extremity. In this context, "major" and "minor" refer to the dominant and nondominant side, respectively. Here, the Veteran's major extremity (dominant) was the right upper extremity, and the minor extremity was the left upper extremity.

Under Diagnostic Code 8514, a 20 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve in the major extremity and the minor extremity. A 20 percent rating is also warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve in the minor extremity. A 30 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve in the major extremity. A 40 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis of radial nerve in the minor extremity. A 50 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve in the major extremity. A 60 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the radial nerve in the minor extremity. A 70 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of radial nerve in the major extremity.

Complete paralysis of the radial nerve is manifested by dropping of the hand and fingers; the wrist and fingers being perpetually flexed; thumb adduction falling within the line of the outer border of the index finger; an inability to extend the hand at the wrist, extend the proximal phalanges of the fingers, extend the thumb, or make lateral movements of the wrist; supination of the hand; weakened extension and flexion of the elbow; the loss of synergic motion of the extensors seriously impairing hand grip; or total paralysis of the triceps occurring only as the greatest rarity.

Diagnostic Code 8520 provides a 10 percent rating for mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve; a 20 percent rating for moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve; a 40 percent rating for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve; a 60 percent rating for severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve with marked muscular atrophy; or an 80 percent rating for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve (where the foot dangles and drops, there is no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, or flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost). In addition, in rating peripheral nerve injuries and their residuals, attention should be given to the site and character of the injury, the relative impairment and motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120.

Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe." Spellers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 211, 219 (2018) ("[Diagnostic Code] 8520 does not define 'mild,' 'moderate,' 'moderately severe,' or 'severe,' or generally associate those terms with specific symptoms"). Although the Board has at times attempted to define these terms using dictionary definitions, those definitions are problematic because they "do little to explain the Board's understanding of these terms and do not 'disclos[e] what benchmark it employed to reach [its] conclusion.'" Casey v. McDonough, No. 21-7569, slip op. at 3 (Vet. App. Jan. 24, 2023) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (quoting Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 255 (2018)) (discussing the Board's attempt to define the terms slight, mild, moderate, and severe in Diagnostic Code 8515); see also Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

Moreover, although 38 C.F.R. § 4.120, 4.123, and 4.124 are "helpful in framing the analysis, [they] are not alone sufficient to explain the Board's decision absent an articulated connection to specific evidence." Lemon v. McDonough, No. 21-3949, 2022 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1998, *7 (Dec. 16, 2022) (mem dec) (Toth, J.). As explained in Lemon, these regulations leave gaps in defining the relevant terms that are filled by VA's Adjudication Manual, M21-1.

The Board "is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases," Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018). Clearly relevant to this case are M21-1 provisions regarding evaluations of paralysis of the sciatic and radial nerves. The M21-1 describes mild incomplete paralysis as a disability "limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a smaller area." See M21-1, Part V, sbpt. iii, ch. 12, sec. A.2.c. Moderate incomplete paralysis, per the M21-1, should be "reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment," where the sensory involvement covers "a larger area in the nerve distribution." Id. M21-1 examples of a moderate disability include "motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate." Id. The M21-1 provides that a moderately severe evaluation (that is, a 40 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8520) is available when there is "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability." Id. Atrophy may, but need not, be present for a moderately severe rating. A severe rating is warranted where there is "motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Id.

As concluded by the Court in Lemon, given the relevance of these provisions to rating disabilities of the peripheral nerves (and disabilities analogous to impairment of the peripheral nerves), "the Board's failure to mention the M21-1's relevant guidance in this area constitutes clear error." Lemon, at *7-*8; see also Bethea, 2 Vet. App. at 254. The Board will therefore mention, and apply, these definitions in the instant case. See also Boothe v. McDonough, No. 21-4488, 2023 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 121, *2 (Jan. 27, 2023) (Nonprecedential Panel Order) (granting a Joint Motion for Remand in which the parties "agree[d] that the Board erred when it refused to consider relevant portions of the VA Adjudication Procedures Manual").

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration, and when the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a; see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.123 (indicating neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating, is to be rated with a maximum equal to severe, incomplete paralysis); 38 C.F.R. § 4.124 (indicating neuralgia characterized by a dull and intermittent pain, of typical distribution so as to identify the nerve, is to be rated with a maximum equal to moderate incomplete paralysis).

With the relevant regulatory criteria established, the Board turns to the evidence and the analysis of the claims.

In January 2014, the Veteran's private treating physician provided a neurological consultation report, which recognized that the Veteran experienced difficulty using his right hand, with very mild right hand tremor at rest. He was noted to shuffle and experience difficulty walking, with muscle tone revealing muscle rigidity in the upper and lower extremity which was more pronounced on the left. Mild bradykinesia on finger tapping was noted, again more significant on the right. At that time, his strength was noted to be 5 out of 5 in the upper and lower extremities bilaterally. Muscle stretch reflexes were 1+ in the upper extremities at the biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, 2+ at the right patella, and 1+ at the left patella, with no ankle jerks found on either side. Sensation to light touch was found present in all four extremities, with no ataxia on finger-to-nose testing. Gait was noted to be wide-based, slow, and cautious, with mildly stooped posture. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran's stooped posture is already separately rated under DC 8004-8211, bilaterally.

Thereafter, VA medical records document an immediate decline in the Veteran's neurological impairment of all four extremities. Specifically, records from early 2014 document that he was still able to participate in some of his activities of daily living and could still ambulate around the house, but only with assistance. In this regard, April 2014 records also document the addition of a wheelchair for assistance in moving around outside the home. A June 4, 2014, record documents the Veteran's ability to ambulate with a cane, only for a limited distance. A November 2014 record documents no drift or tremor of the Veteran's hands when outstretched, though tremor returned to the right hand upon rest. However, it was also noted that, while the Veteran was able to stand and walk with definite ataxia, he could not balance at all on one foot. He was further noted to require a wheelchair. The following February, another VA treatment record documents that the Veteran had fallen 16 times in the last 6 months and required a walker to ambulate even short distances. His gait was noted to be unsteady and weak. He was further noted to be unable to rise from his bed unassisted. A July 2015 record documents hospitalization following a fall, during which the Veteran broke his ribs when he experienced difficulty ambulating and catching himself with his upper extremities. 

Unfortunately, that is the extent of the evidence of record relevant to rating the Veteran's bilateral upper and lower extremity neurological impairment. Accordingly, while the January 2014 neurological consult did not reveal symptoms constituting severe incomplete paralysis of the upper extremities, the remainder of the medical evidence of record suggests that such level of disability was nonetheless present at that time or soon after. In this regard, the Veteran was noted to require assistance for most activities of daily living and experienced other upper extremity symptoms, including bradykinesia, tremor, and muscle rigidity. However, the available medical evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran experienced complete paralysis of either upper extremity at any point. Accordingly, the Board assigns a 40 percent rating for the left upper extremity neurological impairment, which is the minor extremity, and a 50 percent rating for the right major upper extremity neurological impairment under Diagnostic Code 8004-8514. 

With regard to the lower extremity impairment, the Board affords the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and assigns 80 percent ratings, respectively, under Diagnostic Code 8004-8520 for the functional equivalent of complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, bilaterally. In this regard, while the Veteran was found to have some limited function and movement in his legs, attempts to ambulate resulted in extremely frequent and increasingly dangerous falls. 

Orthostatic hypotension

The Veteran's orthostatic hypotension was not separated rated as a Parkinson's disease residual; however, the Board finds that the medical evidence of record indicates that is was, in fact, an early symptom of the Veteran's neurodegenerative disorder. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's orthostatic hypotension must be rated by analogy under the diagnostic code for a related disease in which the functions affected and symptomology are closely analogous, as no specific Diagnostic Code pertains to orthostatic hypotension. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.20. In this case, the Veteran's hypotension caused dizziness, lightheadedness, and balance problems with falls and loss of consciousness. The Board finds that such functional loss and symptomology is most closely related to that described under 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6204, which relates to peripheral vestibular disorders.

Under Diagnostic Code 6204, a 10 percent rating is warranted for occasional dizziness. A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for dizziness with occasional staggering. In this regard, medical records since January 2014 document orthostatic hypotension as one of the first obvious manifestations of the Veteran's neurodegenerative disorder. A November 2014 record specifically noted that such caused the Veteran to frequently black out when standing. Accordingly, the Board finds that such symptoms are most comparable to dizziness and occasional staggering under Diagnostic Code 6204. As such, a schedular maximum 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6204 is warranted.

Loss of sense of smell

After a review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran experienced loss of his sense of smell as a symptom of his Parkinson's disease. Specifically, such was noted in a January 2014 private neurological consultation report. The applicable rating code, Diagnostic Code 6275, provides a single and maximum 10 percent rating for complete loss of sense of smell. 38 C.F.R. § 4.87a, Diagnostic Code 6275 (Emphasis added). No other diagnostic codes may be considered. See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336-37 (2015) (Where a condition is listed in the schedule, rating by analogy is not appropriate).

Under Diagnostic Code 6275, a compensable rating is available only for complete loss in the sense of smell. 38 C.F.R. § 4.87a. As such is reflected in the medical evidence of record, the Board finds that a separate rating for this residual is also warranted.

Speech changes

After a review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran experienced speech changes associated with Parkinson's disease, and that such should have been separately rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6516 (laryngitis, chronic). Under Diagnostic Code 6516, a 10 percent rating is warranted for hoarseness, with inflammation of cords or mucous membrane. A 30 percent rating is warranted for hoarseness, with thickening or nodules of cords, polyps, submucous infiltration, or pre-malignant changes on biopsy.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a January 2014 private neurological consult noted that the Veteran demonstrated pronounced hypophonia and difficulty speaking. Accordingly, the Board finds that such symptoms arguably are consistent with a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6516. However, the Board finds that a rating more than 10 percent is not warranted as there is no objective evidence of hoarseness, with thickening or nodules of cords, polyps, submucous infiltration, or pre-malignant changes on biopsy which is required for a higher 30 percent rating.

Other considerations

In reaching its conclusions, the Board acknowledges the appellant's belief that the Veteran's symptoms related to his Parkinson's residuals may have been more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned ratings. The Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that, while the appellant is competent to describe her husband's symptomatology as she observed it, she is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). The Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran in regard to the foregoing disabilities, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his or the appellant's own reports regarding the severity of such disabilities.

The Board has also considered whether additional staged ratings under Hart, supra, and Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's Parkinson's residuals; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology remained stable throughout each period on appeal. Therefore, assigning additional staged ratings for such disabilities is not warranted. Further, neither the appellant nor her representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased and initial rating claims adjudicated herein. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching the foregoing determinations, the Board has considered the benefit of the doubt doctrine, which resulted in the award of separate ratings for the Veteran's Parkinson's residuals of bilateral lower extremity and upper extremity neurological impairment, orthostatic hypotension, loss of sense of smell, and speech changes. However, as the weight of the probative evidence is otherwise against the assignment of higher ratings for such, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

8. Entitlement to SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (r)(2) for accrued benefits purposes.

The appellant contends that the Veteran was entitled to higher level of SMC benefit, specifically at the (r)(2) rate, due to his service-connected disabilities prior to his passing.

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran was in receipt of SMC under various rates. Specifically, entitlement to SMC(l) was awarded effective December 10, 2013, and entitlement to SMC(p) was awarded effective the same date. 

To be awarded the SMC rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (r)(1), the Veteran must be entitled to SMC at the rate authorized under subsection (o), the maximum rate authorized under subsection (p), or at the intermediate rate authorized between the rates authorized under subsections (n) and (o) and at the rate authorized under subsection (k). The Veteran must also be in need of regular aid and attendance. See 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (r); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (h), 3.352.

SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (r)(2) is subject to the same criteria as 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(1), but there must also be evidence that the Veteran is in need of a "higher level of care."

The need for a higher level of care shall be considered to be need for personal health care services provided on a daily basis in the Veteran's home by a person who is licensed to provide such services or who provides such services under the regular supervision of a licensed health-care professional. Personal health-care services include (but are not limited to) such services as physical therapy, administration of injections, placement of indwelling catheters, and the changing of sterile dressings, or like functions which require professional health-care training or the regular supervision of a trained health-care professional to perform. A licensed health-care professional includes (but is not limited to) a Doctor of Medicine or osteopathy, a registered nurse, a licensed practical nurse, or a physical therapist licensed to practice by a State or political subdivision thereof. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (b)(3).

The term "under the regular supervision of a licensed health-care professional," means that an unlicensed person performing personal health-care services is following a regimen of personal health-care services prescribed by a health-care professional, and that the health-care professional consults with the unlicensed person providing the health-care services at least once each month to monitor the prescribed regimen. The consultation need not be in person; a telephone call will suffice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (b)(4).

The performance of the necessary aid and attendance service by a relative of the beneficiary or other member of his or her household will not prevent the granting of the additional allowance. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (c).

The requirements for establishing the need for a higher level of care are to be strictly construed and allowance is to be granted only when the Veteran's need is clearly established, and the services required by the Veteran on a daily basis is substantial. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (b)(ii)(6).

After a review of the evidence of record and the applicable regulations, he Board finds that an award of entitlement to SMC at the R-2 level was warranted.

The medical evidence of record indicates that the Veteran was housebound and had difficulty ambulating around the house, especially during the nighttime. While VA medical records from 2014 and 2015 show that the Veteran was able to move around for a few steps, with a walker, they also show that he required assistance with all activities of daily living and was, otherwise, confined to a wheelchair. Records from early 2015 indicate that the Veteran had injured himself falling, and further demonstrate the need for a catheter. The Veteran was noted to be unable to rise from his bed unassisted and perform any activities of daily living. While the Veteran was receiving frequent home health care from licensed providers, it was also discussed that he still might need to go to a nursing home due to his complete need for regular aid and attendance. Records from July 2015 document ongoing problems requiring a higher level of aid and assistance, to include bed sores, incontinence, and frequent falls. Finally, at the end of 2015, the Veteran's wife was assisted in caring for her husband by in-home hospice care. 

The Board finds that the evidence of record shows that the appellant cared for the Veteran at home on a daily basis and the Veteran additionally received ongoing care from a VA primary care team. The record further reflects that the Veteran received in-home treatment from his health-care providers, to include physical therapy, occupational therapy, and RN services.

Due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, he was completely dependent on the appellant and his home health-care providers for day-to-day care to include, but not limited to, ambulation to his wheelchair, eating, drinking, dressing, and hygiene. Additionally, the evidence of record indicates that the appellant was acting under the advice and supervision of the Veteran's health-care providers, following a regimen of health-care services, and that absent the daily care the appellant and health-care providers provided, the Veteran would have required inpatient or residential care at a hospital or nursing home. Accordingly, entitlement to SMC at the R-2 level for a higher level of special aid and attendance was warranted. The appeal is granted.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Breckenridge

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.