Citation Nr: A25032986
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 220915-277246
DATE: April 9, 2025

ISSUE

Whether the appointment of Sterling Case Management & Fiduciaries of Arizona (Sterling) as the fiduciary to manage the Veteran's Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits replacing his nephew, P.W. was proper.

REMANDED

The matter of whether the appointment of Sterling as the fiduciary to manage the Veteran's VA pension benefits replacing his nephew P.W. was proper is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June to November 1974.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2021 decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Fiduciary Intake Center (FIC). 

In the September 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

Whether the appointment of Sterling as the fiduciary to manage the Veteran's VA pension benefits instead of his nephew, P.W. was proper

The Veteran requests that his nephew, P.W. manage his VA funds as his fiduciary.  See September 2022. 

Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5502, VA has the authority to appoint a fiduciary when it appears to be in the interests of a VA beneficiary. Where it appears to the Secretary that the interest of the beneficiary would be served thereby, payment of benefits under any law administered by the Secretary may be made directly to the beneficiary or to a relative or some other fiduciary for the use and benefit of the beneficiary, regardless of any legal disability on the part of the beneficiary. Where, in the opinion of the Secretary, any fiduciary receiving funds on behalf of a Department beneficiary is acting in such a number of cases as to make it impracticable to conserve properly the estates or to supervise the persons of the beneficiaries, the Secretary may refuse to make future payments in such cases as the Secretary may deem proper. The provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5507 contain the standards for VA to follow when certifying an individual as a qualified fiduciary and there are several steps in that process.

38 C.F.R. § 13.55 provides that the Veterans Service Center Manager is authorized to select and appoint (or in the case of a court appointed fiduciary, to recommend for appointment) the person or legal entity best suited to receive VA benefits in a fiduciary capacity for a beneficiary who is ill (incompetent) or under legal disability by reason of minority or court action, and beneficiary's dependents.

38 C.F.R. § 13.100 further provides for fiduciary appointments.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 13.100 (a) Authority: Except as prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section, the Hub Manager will appoint a fiduciary for a beneficiary who: (1) Has been rated by VA as being unable to manage his or her VA benefits; (2) Has been determined by a court with jurisdiction as being unable to manage his or her financial affairs, or (3) Has not reached age of majority. There are exceptions which are inapplicable in this case.

The regulation provides the following for the Initial appointment under section (d). In appointing a fiduciary, the Hub Manager will make every effort to appoint the person, agency, organization, or institution that will best serve the interest of the beneficiary. The Hub Manager will consider the results of a field examination, which will include a face-to-face meeting with the beneficiary and the beneficiary's dependents at their residence when practicable, and will conduct the investigation prescribed in paragraph (f) of this section. The Hub Manager will also consider whether: (1) VA benefits can be paid directly to the beneficiary with limited and temporary supervision by VA, as prescribed in § 13.110; (2) The circumstances require appointment of a temporary fiduciary under paragraph (h) of this section; and (3) The proposed fiduciary is complying with the responsibilities of a fiduciary prescribed in § 13.140 with respect to all beneficiaries in the fiduciary program currently being served by the proposed fiduciary and whether the proposed fiduciary can handle an additional appointment without degrading service for any other beneficiary. Under (e), there is an order of preference in appointing a fiduciary.

The Hub Manager will consider individuals and entities for appointment in the following order of preference, provided that the proposed fiduciary is qualified and willing to serve, and the appointment would serve the beneficiary's interest:

(1) The preference stated by the beneficiary in the fiduciary program, if the beneficiary has the capacity to state such a preference. If the beneficiary has a legal guardian appointed to handle his or her affairs, the Hub Manager will presume that the beneficiary does not have the capacity to state a preference and will consider individuals and entities in the order of preference prescribed in paragraphs (e)(2) through (10) of this section;

(2) The beneficiary's spouse;

(3) A relative who has care or custody of the beneficiary or his or her funds;

(4) Any other relative of the beneficiary;

(5) Any friend, acquaintance, or other person who is willing to serve as fiduciary

for the beneficiary without a fee;

(6) The chief officer of a public or private institution in which the beneficiary

receives care or which has custody of the beneficiary;

(7) The bonded officer of an Indian reservation, if applicable;

(8) An individual or entity who has been appointed by a court with jurisdiction to handle the beneficiary's affairs;

(9) An individual or entity who is not willing to serve without a fee; or

(10) A temporary fiduciary, if necessary.

Section(f) provides guidance for the investigation of a proposed fiduciary; (g) provides for expedited appointment; and (h) provides for temporary fiduciary appointments.

The pertinent regulation provides, as noted, for the investigation of a proposed fiduciary. 38 C.F.R. § 13.100 (f). Except as prescribed in paragraph (f)(3) of this section, before appointing a fiduciary for a beneficiary in the fiduciary program, the Hub Manager will conduct an investigation regarding the proposed fiduciary's qualifications.

(1) The investigation will include:

(i) To the extent practicable, a face-to-face interview of the proposed fiduciary;

(ii) A review of a credit report on the proposed fiduciary issued by a credit reporting agency no more than 30 days prior to the date of the proposed appointment;

(iii) A criminal background check to determine whether the proposed fiduciary has been convicted of any offense which would be a bar to serving as a fiduciary under § 13.130 or which the Hub Manager may consider and weigh under the totality of the circumstances regarding the proposed fiduciary's qualifications;

(iv) Obtaining proof of the proposed fiduciary's identity and relationship to the beneficiary, if any; and

(v) A determination regarding the need for surety bond under § 13.230 and the proposed fiduciary's ability to obtain such a bond.

A June 1981 rating decision found the Veteran incompetent to handle disbursement of VA funds.

In a February 20210 VA Form 21-555 (Certificate of Legal Capacity), P.W. was appointed as the Veteran's fiduciary. 

In a July 2021 VA Form 21-4138, A.H., social worker, contended that there were concerns about financial mismanagement/abuse by the Veteran's fiduciary.  She attached VA medical treatment records which noted that in 2008, the State of Wisconsin had appointed P.W. as the Veteran's successor guardian.  A July 2021 note indicates that there was a concern for financial mistreatment.  

A July 2021 letter is addressed to the Veteran's fiduciary - Sterling.  A July 2021 VA Form 21-555 appoints Sterling as the Veteran's VA fiduciary. 

In this case, no investigation, commonly called a field examination, by the Hub Manager is of record.  An August 2021 VA Form 27-0820 (Report of General Information) indicates that there was a "clear report" that showed there was a charge of disorderly conduct against the fiduciary - which was later dropped.  A VA employee spoke to P.W., but there was no communication regarding discontinuation of P.W. as the Veteran's VA fiduciary.  No further reports are of record. 

The Board must remand cases where there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error or correction of any error by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), other than a duty to assist error, in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). Here, the failure of the AOJ to follow the order of preference for the appointment of a fiduciary under 38 C.F.R. § 13.100 - without supporting documentation as to its reasoning - constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error which requires remand.  The record shows that P.W. was the Veteran's fiduciary and then Sterling became the Veteran's fiduciary - without any explanation as to how this conclusion was reached. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Undertake the necessary development pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 13.100 to determine whether the Veteran's nephew, P.W. is a suitable fiduciary.

The AOJ should associate with the Veteran's electronic claims folder any reports - including field or others.  

An August 2021 VA Form 27-0820 (Report of General Information) indicates that there was a "clear report" that showed there was a charge of disorderly conduct against the fiduciary - which was later dropped.  This report is not of record. 

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Baskerville, L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.