Citation Nr: A25032009
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-449428
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

From January 4, 2021, entitlement to 70 percent, but not higher, initial evaluation for other specified depressive disorder is granted, subject to the law and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits. 

FINDING OF FACT

From January 4, 2021, the Veteran other specified depressive disorder manifested in symptoms causing occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

From January 4, 2021, the criteria for entitlement to a 70 percent, but not higher, evaluation for other specified depressive disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 4.1, 4.7, 4.130.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1986 to December 1991.

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal of a June 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veteran's Affairs (VA) Regional Office of the Veteran's Benefits Administration, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In June 2024, the Veteran elected to appeal this issue to the Board submitting a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and selecting the direct review docket.   As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed on the date of the prior AMA decision on June 23, 2023.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

1. From January 4, 2021, entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 50 percent for other specified depressive disorder

An October 2021 rating decision granted service connection for other specified depressive disorder and assigned an evaluation of 50 percent from January 4, 2021, the date VA received the Veteran's claim.  The Veteran filed a Request for Higher-Level Review in October 2022.  A January 2023 higher level review decision continued the 50 percent evaluation.  The Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim seeking a higher evaluation on March 2, 2023.  The Veteran filed a claim for increased evaluation on March 2, 2023, and March 15, 2023.  The Veteran has therefore continuously pursued his appeal of the rating of this disability since the initial date of service connection such that the period on appeal is from January 4, 2021.

Increased Rating Criteria 

Disability evaluations are determined by application of the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  An evaluation of the level of disability present must also include consideration of the functional impairment of the Veteran's ability to engage in ordinary activities, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  The Veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). 

Where entitlement to compensation has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Where an appeal is based on an initial rating for a disability, however, evidence contemporaneous with the claim and the initial rating decision are most probative of the degree of disability existing when the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an original rating on appeal was erroneous."  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  In either case, if later evidence indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, staged ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time.  Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126; Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007) (noting that staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct time periods in which a disability exhibits symptoms that warrant different ratings).  When adjudicating a claim for an increased initial evaluation, the relevant time period is from the date of the claim.  Moore v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 211, 215 (2007), rev'd in irrelevant part, Moore v. Shinseki, 555 F.3d 1369 (2009).  When adjudicating an increased rating claim, the relevant time period for consideration is the time period one year before the claim was filed.  Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 509.

Psychiatric disabilities are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under the general rating formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships..

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such an unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Analysis

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2021.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has been married to his second wife for 14 years.  The marriage is "rocky, she yells at me because I can't do a lot" secondary to his knee and back pain.  "She has to cut my toenails."  He described his relationship with his children as "alright, would be better if I could play with them."  Due to his back and knee pain, he is unable to be active with them.  He does not identify any close supports.  He is not social because, "I don't feel like getting out of the house" due to the pain.  They live in a 2 story home and has to take the stairs several times a day which is painful.  He stated, "my knee hurts so bad and my back."  He uses a cane.  His hygiene has suffered secondary to a decrease in motivation.  He will drive short distances only because of the pain in his knee.  He served in the Army from July 1986 to December 1991.  He was a MP Investigator without combat deployments.  He reported  that his knees and back were injured during service.  Military records indicate that he failed 2 APFT (Army Physical Fitness Test) after his injuries at which time his command noted that he exhibited "apathetic attitude" and "clearly lacks motivation."  Post-military, the Veteran worked for CVS for a few years, but the job was too physical which aggravated his pain.  He went into Finance because "it was less toll on the body."  He worked for investment companies for 17 years until he was laid off.  He has been working for 6 years remotely making cold calls to companies that might be interested in IT projects.  He reported good attendance.  During the day, he is tired and will take a nap during lunch.  He denied interpersonal problems at work since he spends the day talking to people that he does not know by phone.  The Veteran has never sought mental health treatment due to the cost.  He has never taken psychotropic medication.  He denied interpersonal violence.  The Veteran will drink one to two times per week and have approximately 10 beers at each sitting.  His wife has complained about his drinking.  He describes mood as "depressing" with onset described as "years, sick of my knee and back pain, can't do anything.  I have debilitating arthritis pain in my back and full blown arthritis in my right knee.  There is no fluid in my knee."  He endorsed decreased motivation.  He stated, "I am always worried about money, bills, I can only do jobs that allow me to sit down and work remotely."  He has had panic attacks "heart racing, sweaty" during very stressful events such as a plumbing issue.  He also endorsed suicidal ideation that occurs a couple of times a year and denied homicidal ideation.  He reported 3-5 hours broken sleep, "restlessness due to the pain in my back and knee."  He described concentration as "fair" can be hard to focus.  The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  These symptoms cause occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  The examiner stated that the Veteran evidences no serious mental status abnormalities.  His appearance, dress, and grooming are unremarkable and age appropriate.  He exhibits flat affect.  His speech is normal in rate, volume and articulation.  His language skills are intact.  Current suicidal and self-injurious ideas or intentions are convincingly denied.  Current assaultive or homicidal ideas or intentions are also convincingly denied.  Hallucinations and delusions are not evident and his behavior is generally appropriate.  Associations are intact, thinking is basically logical, and thought content is appropriate.  Obsessions and compulsions are denied.  There are no signs of cognitive difficulty based on vocabulary and fund of knowledge.  Memory is intact for recent and remote events, and he is oriented x4 (person, place, time and purpose).  There are no overt signs of excessive anxiety.  A normal attention span is in evidence and there are no signs of hyperactivity.  Judgment and insight appear to be intact.  The examiner noted decreased motivation, decreased focus.  This DBQ was completed via Tele-C&P through the use of HIPAA-compliant video conferencing. 

The examiner opined that the Veteran's other specified depressive disorder is at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.  The rationale was that the Veteran's reported symptoms meet criteria for Other Specified Depressive Disorder.  His symptoms do not meet criteria for any DSM5 Anxiety Disorder.  Based upon his self-report, his depressive symptoms are secondary to the pain and limitations associated with his knee and back conditions.  A review of his military records indicate that he failed two APFTs following his injuries, at which time his command noted that he exhibited "apathetic attitude" and "clearly lacks motivation."  These comments suggest the presence of depressive symptoms at the time.  Although there is no direct evidence of a linkage between his injuries in service and failing the APFTs, Veteran did demonstrate symptoms of depression during service.  These same symptoms continue to manifest and meet criteria for other specified depressive disorder.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination on May 16, 2023.  The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; disturbances of motivation and mood without suicidal/homicidal ideation.  The examiner found that these symptoms cause occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  The Veteran described the relationship with his spouse of 16 years as strained due to him not being physically active and irritable.  He described the relationship with his children (21, 15, 13) as good.  The Veteran denied having any social interactions with friend and family outside of his wife and children.  Veteran stated that he does not do anything for fun.  He reported being unemployed since March 2023.  He noted having previous work for seven years and was laid off from this job due to downsizing.  He reported problems on the job that include missing work due to his physical health.  He denied ever being fired from a job.  The Veteran noted currently being followed at the South Charlotte, VA for medication management.  He reported currently taking olanzapine daily.  He denied regularly missing dosages or significant side effects.  He noted ongoing depressive symptoms secondary to managing his chronic pain to include depressed mood (8 hours, 4-5 days), anxiety, and irritability.  There is no change in the service connected diagnosis and no additional diagnoses have been rendered.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023.  The Veteran reported that his family life is "alright, not bad."  He indicated some difficulty doing things with family though tends to have good relationships.  He reported, "I'm not working anymore, they dissolved the company."  He has been out of work since March 2023.  He is looking for work.  He reported that he is working with a psychiatrist at the VA and that he is prescribed olanzapine 10mg.  The Veteran reported intermittent periods of depressed mood with some anxiety since losing his job.  He reported that he has had periods of decline in motivation and mood.  He denied suicidal ideation, denied homicidal ideation, denied hallucinations, did not endorse delusional thoughts/beliefs, and was oriented x 4.  The Veteran was dressed and groomed appropriately, made good eye contact, speech was within normal range, thought process was linear, mood was stable, and affect was congruent.  Short-term and long-term memory was intact.  Judgement and insight was good.  The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; disturbances of motivation and mood.  His symptoms cause occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  For the VA established diagnosis of other specified depressive disorder there is no change in the diagnosis.

With the Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran's representative submitted argument that the July 2021 VA examination on which the October 2021 rating decision was based indicated severe symptomatology and impairment that supported an initial 70-percent evaluation.  The examination notes state that the Veteran isolates himself socially and "doesn't want to leave the house due to pain," his hygiene has suffered secondary to a decrease in his motivation, he drinks 10 beers in one sitting one to two times per week, and he has difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances and difficulties with focus.  Of particular significance, the Veteran reported at the examination that he experiences suicidal ideation "a couple of times a year," without a plan or intent. 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) has held that suicidal ideation generally rises to the level contemplated in a 70 percent rating.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 20 (2017).  More specifically, the Court held that the VA regulations do not differentiate between active and passive ideation; there are no descriptors, modifiers, or indicators in the regulation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  That is, the language of 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 "indicates that the presence of suicidal ideation alone, that is, a veteran's thoughts of his or her own death or thoughts of engaging in suicide-related behavior, may cause occupational and social impairment in most areas."  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 20 (2017).  In Bankhead, the Court held that the measure of the severity of suicidal ideation should not be conflated with risk of self-harm; risk of harm is expressed in the criteria for a 100 percent rating as "persistent danger of hurting oneself or others."

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; associated impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in the General Rating Formula demonstrates that the symptoms after the phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  The focus is on the severity of the symptoms and the level of impairment to occupational and social function.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  

The Board finds that the evidence of record, including the July 2021 VA examination and medical opinion, and the Veteran's lay statements, more closely approximate a 70 percent rating from January 4, 2021.  The evidence shows suicidal ideation; alcohol use two to three times a week with 10 beers at each sitting to an extent that his wife complained about it; panic attacks during "very stressful events" identifying a plumbing issue triggering a panic attack as a very stressful event.  The Veteran described depressing mood and low motivation, which symptoms began during service due to his service-connected injuries; neglect of personal hygiene; poor sleep and requiring naps during the workday.  The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms of depressed mood; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, in conjunction with his suicidal ideation, warrant a 70 percent rating for other specified depressive disorder.

A 100 percent rating is not warranted in the absence of such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  The Board further notes that the record does not support a finding of total occupational and social impairment as the Veteran is making an effort to find employment following his recent layoff in March 2023 and although he denies social relationships outside of his family and children, he describes his familial relations as good and that he tends to be housebound due to physical pain, which the Board does not find to be consistent with total social impairment.

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mcloughlin, Debra

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.