Citation Nr: A25032657
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-446094
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on ears, to include as due to toxin exposure, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include valvular heart disease, cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, and automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD) (claimed as excruciating pain in the heart & chest, loss of breath & fainting spells, pain in lungs and trouble breathing), to include as due to toxin exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema (claimed as sores, rash, swelling, skin pealing and flaking), to include as due to toxin exposure, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

At no time during, or prior to, the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of an ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on his ears.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on ears, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1982 to February 1986.  The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2023.  In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a heart disability and eczema, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board must discuss all theories of entitlement raised by the Veteran or by the evidence of record.  Robinson v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 545 (2008).

Accordingly, the Board has recharacterized the claims as indicated above to afford the Veteran the broadest possible scope of review.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009).

Service Connection Claim 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) [(table)].

Where a Veteran served for at least 90 days during a period of war or after December 31, 1946, and manifests certain chronic diseases to a degree of 10 percent within one year, from the date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Alternatively, when a disease at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) is not shown to be chronic during service or the one-year presumptive period, service connection may also be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b).  However, the use of continuity of symptoms to establish service connection is limited only to those diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) and does not apply to other disabilities which might be considered chronic from a medical standpoint.  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), effective from August 10, 2022, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  A Veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; or, if VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim, or the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure.  Other ways to claim or establish participation in a TERA include, when a Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is associated with toxic exposure; when medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard such as VHA exposure screening; or, with any other relevant evidence of record to include garrison exposures.

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).  The requirement of a current disability is satisfied when the Veteran has a disability at the time he files his service connection claim or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  However, when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of the diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).  Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292 (1991).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

Entitlement to service connection for an ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on ears, to include as due to toxin exposure, is denied.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from an ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts, as a result of his active-duty service.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he developed painful cysts during his service after being exposed to ionizing radiation and that such have continued ever since. 

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect one report of painful cysts on both ears in January 1984.  However, the remainder of the Veteran's records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to an ear disability, to include knots or cysts.  Furthermore, the Veteran's January 1986 separation examination reflected that the Veteran's skin and ears were normal.  Post-service treatment records are also silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to an ear disability, to include painful knots or cysts.  However, a March 2023 TERA Memorandum indicated that the Veteran was likely exposed to ionizing radiation during his service in Germany. 

Here, while the Veteran has reported symptoms which he believes began in or were caused by his service, the evidence of record does not support the Veteran's claim. There are simply no indications of any symptoms or diagnoses related to chronic ear disabilities either during or after the Veteran's active service. The Board notes that the Veteran's service records do reflect an instance of bilateral ear cysts, however such appear to have resolved prior to his discharge without sequelae and therefore are considered transient.  Consequently, the Board finds that VA is under no obligation to provide the Veteran with an examination in connection with his claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Despite the lack of obligation, the AOJ provided the Veteran with a Skin Conditions examination and a TERA medical opinion in April 2023. 

As noted in April 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA Skin Conditions examination with an accompanying disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ).  While the examiner found that the Veteran did have eczema, he found no diagnosis for the Veteran's claimed sores (painful knots/cysts).  The examiner stated that there was no diagnosis as there were no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis.  The examiner further found that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not caused by his indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's records indicated that he was exposed to ionizing radiation while stationed in Germany, however the examiner found "no pathology to warrant a diagnosis or condition that can be related to the claimed toxic exposure."  The Board finds that as the April 2023 examiner provided adequate reasons and medical rationales for his findings and opinion, his conclusion is highly probative.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  

Throughout the appeal, the Veteran has submitted lay statements in support of his claim.  Alleging not only that he suffers from a chronic disability, but that such was caused by or began during his active service.

After a thorough review of the record, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted for the Veteran's claimed ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on his ears, as the probative evidence of record fails to demonstrate a current disability related to the Veteran's military service.

In the instant case, the probative evidence of record fails to demonstrate a current diagnosis of a chronic ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on the ears.  While the Board has also considered the Court's holding in Romanowsky, supra, there is also no probative evidence of a recent diagnosis of a chronic ear disability prior to the Veteran's claim.  While the Veteran's service treatment records reflect one instance of cysts on the Veteran's ears, as previously noted such appeared to resolve without sequelae.  Furthermore, post-service treatment records are entirely silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a chronic ear disability.  In addition, the April 2023 VA examiner specifically found that in regard to the Veteran's claimed sores (i.e. knots/cysts), there were no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis.  Finally, the Board notes that it has found the April 2023 examination probative, and as there are no contrary opinions of record, it is also dispositive on the issue of a diagnosis.    

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (the Board's categorical statement that 'a valid medical opinion' was required to establish nexus, and that a layperson was 'not competent' to provide testimony as to nexus because she was a layperson, conflicts with Jandreau).

However, the matter of medical diagnosis for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of issue here, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-38 (1994). Specifically, the diagnosis of a chronic ear disability involves medical subjects concerning internal physical processes extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and requires the administration and interpretation of specialized testing.  In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has had any medical training.  Therefore, as the Veteran does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently self-diagnose a chronic ear disability, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007) (although the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions).

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.30, 3.310.  Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnosis of a chronic ear disability for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer, supra.

Therefore, service connection is not warranted for the Veteran's claimed ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on the ears as the probative evidence of record fails to demonstrate a current chronic disability related to the Veteran's military service.

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence of record is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for an ear disability, to include large, painful, hard knots/cysts on the ears, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and his claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Although the Board regrets the delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's remaining claims so that he is afforded every possible consideration.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

The Board finds that the issues, to include entitlement to service connection for a heart disability and eczema must be remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the July 2023 rating decision on appeal.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include valvular heart disease, cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, and AICD (claimed as excruciating pain in the heart & chest, loss of breath & fainting spells, pain in lungs and trouble breathing), and eczema (claimed as sores, rash, swelling, skin pealing and flaking), both to include as due to toxin exposure, are remanded.

The Veteran alleges that he suffers from a heart disability and eczema as a result of his active-duty service.  Specifically, he contends that his disabilities were not only caused by his service, to include his exposure to ionizing radiation, but began during his service. 

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect the Veteran's reports of a rash in 1985 and chest pain in 1986.  Post-service treatment records reflect the Veteran's reports of painful rashes as well as chest pain and difficulty breathing.  The Veteran was subsequently diagnosed with and treated for eczema, congestive heart failure, valvular heart disease, and cardiomyopathy.  In 2023 the Veteran had a defibrillator placed as his heart function had decreased despite his prescribed continuous medication.  Finally, a March 2023 TERA Memorandum conceded that the Veteran was likely exposed to ionizing radiation during his service in Germany.  

VA's duty to assist includes a duty to provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion where it is deemed necessary to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § § 5103A (d); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.159 (c)(4); Duenas v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 512 (2004); Robinette v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 69 (1995); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 79.  In addition, once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The Board notes that while the Veteran has undergone examinations for his claimed disabilities, for the below noted reasons, the Board finds that addendum opinions are necessary to determine the nature and etiology of his disabilities.

In April 2023 the Veteran underwent VA Skin and Heart Conditions examinations with accompanying DBQs.  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of eczema, and congestive heart failure, ACID, valvular heart disease, and cardiomyopathy.  The Veteran reported that his symptoms, to include a rash and chest pain began in 1985 while stationed in Germany.  He stated that after guarding an area "full of chemical/biological agents," he developed a full body rash which was red, raised, itchy, and flakey as well as chest pain and shortness of breath. He reported that that he was seen by medics while in Germany and prescribed penicillin and calamine lotion.  In addition, a scan was conducted that identified "black spots on his lungs."  Following his discharge, he stated that he was seen by a dermatologist who again prescribed him calamine lotion and antibiotics.  He reported that he developed additional cardiac issues and after an EKG, stress test, and echocardiogram, he was placed on medication and in 2023 had a defibrillator implanted. 

The examiner opined that the Veteran's eczema and heart disabilities were less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with dermatitis/eczema, cardiomyopathy, implanted AICD, congestive heart failure, and aortic/mitral regurgitation.  In addition, he noted that the Veteran's indicated TERA included exposure to ionizing radiation in Germany from January 1984 to February 1984. The examiner provided the rationale that after a review of the accepted medical literature, he failed to find any articles indicating a statistically significant or causal relationship between the Veteran's conditions and his in-service exposure.  He noted that while several articles showed that patients developed skin and/or cardiac conditions following radiation therapy, the dosage during therapy was far higher than that to which the Veteran was exposed.  Therefore, the articles and their findings were inapplicable in the Veteran's case.  Furthermore, the examiner noted that the Veteran had a history of hypertension, BMI of 31.7, aortic/mitral regurgitation, a history of smoking, advanced age, and chronic alcoholism.  Therefore, the examiner found that in light of the lack of medical literature supporting a causal connection, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's eczema and/or heart disabilities were caused by his indicated TERA.  Furthermore, the examiner found that the Veteran's outside risk factors were more likely the causes of his heart disabilities.  

Unfortunately, while the April 2023 examiner discussed what impact, if any, the Veteran's in-service TERA had on his claimed disabilities, the examiner failed to discuss when the Veteran's disabilities onset/were incurred.  Here, the Veteran has alleged that his disabilities are directly related to his service, to include that they were incurred during his service and/or caused by his in-service radiation exposure.  Therefore, the Board finds that to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors, adequate addendum opinions must be obtained which fully address the Veteran's allegations of direct service connection, to include whether his disabilities were incurred/had their onset during his service.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Provide the Veteran with an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed eczema.  Based on the examination, review of the record, and any tests or studies deemed necessary, the examiner should provide opinions responding to the following:

a) Identify all manifestations of the Veteran's eczema and/or any other relevant skin disabilities.

b)  For any diagnosed eczema and/or other relevant skin disabilities, is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability), that such disability had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to such service, to include in-service toxic exposures?  The examiner must discuss the noted in-service reports of a rash in January 1985.

A detailed explanation (rationale) MUST be provided for ALL opinions rendered.  (By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation.  Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested). 

2.  Provide the Veteran with an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed heart disability.  Based on the examination, review of the record, and any tests or studies deemed necessary, the examiner should provide opinions responding to the following:

a)  Identify all manifestations of the Veteran's heart disability, to include cardiomyopathy, implanted AICD, congestive heart failure, and aortic/mitral regurgitation.

b)  For any diagnosed heart disability, is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability), that such disability had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to such service, to include in-service toxic exposures?  The examiner must discuss the noted in-service reports of chest pain in 1986.

A detailed explanation (rationale) MUST be provided for ALL opinions rendered.

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Unger, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.