Citation Nr: A25032538
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-438769
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and paranoid schizophrenia, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the U.S. Navy from March 1979 to March 1981.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and paranoid schizophrenia, is remanded.

The Board finds that remand is necessary to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

First, the Veteran's VA treatment records indicate that he has been under psychiatric treatment since at least 1988.  See, e.g., May 2008 VA Treatment Record.  However, there are no medical records from VA or any private treatment providers dated prior to December 2000 associated with the Veteran's claims file.  Further, there is no indication that VA attempted to obtain these records and learned they were unavailable.  On remand, the AOJ should attempt to obtain copies of any outstanding treatment records and make note of all such attempts in the claims file.  

Second, the March 2024 and April 2024 VA negative nexus opinions are inadequate for appellate review.  The March 2024 opinion states that there are no identifiable precipitating events that occurred in service relating to the Veteran's psychiatric disability.  However, this opinion ignores the Veteran's competent lay statements regarding his fears around working with missiles and his duties as a Boatswain while onboard the U.S.S. Peterson during the Iranian Hostage Crisis.  See, e.g., September 2023 Statement in Support of Claim; November 2021 Statement in Support of Claim; Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner relied solely on the absence of evidence in the Veteran's treatment records and ignored the Veteran's report of an in-service injury).  The April 2024 VA opinion concludes that it is less likely not the Veteran's psychiatric disability is related to service because the Veteran did not seek treatment for his symptoms or request a transfer while in service.  However, it is well established that an opinion that relies on the absence of evidence is inadequate.  See, e.g., Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015) (VA examiners may not generally rely on the absence of evidence as negative evidence).  On remand, the AOJ should obtain a new VA opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric disability.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Associate any outstanding VA treatment records with the Veteran's claims file. 

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any private treatment providers.  Make two requests for the authorized records from any private treatment providers identified by the Veteran, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. After items 1 and 2 are completed, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician regarding the nature and etiology of his psychiatric disability.  A complete copy of the claims file, including a copy of this Remand, should be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is the Veteran's psychiatric disability at least as likely as not related to service, including his duties as a Boatswain on the U.S.S. Peterson during the Iranian Hostage Crisis (see September 2023 Statement in Support of Claim), his fears around working with missiles while in service (see November 2021 Statement in Support of Claim)?  The examiner should also discuss VA treatment notes indicating that the Veteran has been receiving psychiatric treatment since at least 1988 (see May 2008 VA Treatment Record).    

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

A complete, detailed rationale should be provided in support of all requested opinions.   

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zimmerman, K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.