Citation Nr: A25032502
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240111-407535
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased evaluation for service-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in excess of 30 percent disabling is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the U.S. Army from July 1982 to May 2008.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) Rating Decision, which granted an increased 30 percent disability evaluation for service-connected GERD for the entire rating period on appeal (i.e. the date service connection was established).  Of note, the Veteran was granted service connection for GERD in November 2021, in which the Veteran was assigned an initial evaluation of 10 percent disabling, effective August 16, 2021.  The Veteran contested this 10 percent disability evaluation within a November 2021 Supplemental Claim. In a June 2022 decision, the 10 percent evaluation was confirmed and continued.  In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, and requested review of a June 2022 rating decision.  In April 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the initial June 2022 rating decision.

In the April 2023 VA Form 10182 - Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review of his claim on appeal; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the initial June 2022 rating decision.  

Entitlement to an increased evaluation in excess of 30 percent disabling for service-connected GERD.

Unfortunately, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and remand is necessary to cure this defect prior to adjudicating the claim on appeal. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.).

The Veteran is in receipt of a 30 percent disability rating for service-connected GERD under Diagnostic Code 7346.  In assigning a rating under Diagnostic Code 7346, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  Here, the record includes a September 2021 statement in which the Veteran reported taking over-the-counter antacids two-to-three times a week to help control heartburn, a detail that was also noted within the November 2021 and June 2022 VA medical opinions of record.  These VA medical opinions of record did not address the severity of the Veteran's GERD without the ameliorative effects of taking over-the-counter medication.  Accordingly, remand for a new VA medical opinion is required to cure the pre-decisional duty to assist error prior to appellate adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion to determine the current severity of the service-connected GERD, without considering the ameliorative effects of medication.  The need for an additional VA examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, must be made available for review by the examiner, and such review should be noted in the examination report.

The examiner should opine as to the severity of the Veteran's GERD symptoms as of August 16, 2021, without considering the ameliorative effects of over-the-counter antacids used to treat GERD.  More specifically, the examiner is to opine as to whether, when not considering the ameliorative effects of medication, service-connected GERD would have been productive of:

(a) Persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; or,

(b) Symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

The Board directs the VA examiner's attention to, but not limiting review to, the Veteran's September 2021 statement, in which the Veteran reports taking over-the-counter Tums two-to-three times a week to control heartburn.  In addition, the examiner should consider May 2022 opinion from C.M.B. which indicates that the Veteran's condition would be severe without any medication.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale for the proffered opinion.  The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion.  The examiner should cite to documents within the record and any relevant medical literature in formulating their opinion.

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training. As appropriate, the AOJ should conduct additional development or supplement the record.

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. R. Woodarek

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.