Citation Nr: A25032898
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240918-475564
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2012 to June 2016.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for eczema, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Finally, as an introductory matter, the Board notes that also in the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran requested that the Board review his claims for service connection for a right knee strain, anxiety condition, and bilateral hearing loss, which were denied by the AOJ in rating decisions issued in September 2017, February 2018, and March 2018, respectively.  A properly completed Notice of Disagreement with a decision by the AOJ must be filed within one year from the date that the agency mails the notice of the decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b).  Here, the September 2024 VA Form 10182 is not timely filed as to the September 2017, February 2018, or March 2018 rating decisions.  Moreover, these rating decisions were issued under VA's legacy appeals system and thus the modernized review system is inapplicable to those rating decisions.  As the Veteran's claims for service connection for a right knee strain, anxiety condition, and bilateral hearing loss were not properly or timely appealed to the Board, the Board will only address the service connection claim for eczema.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection for eczema is warranted because prior to service he only experienced minor rashes associated with seasonal allergies, usually on the inside of elbows and behind knees, and the skin condition was easily treated with cortisone cream.  Following service, however, his skin condition has worsened such that he now has "huge inflamed blotches" around his face, neck, back, arms, legs, and hands, which bleed and crack.  He attempts to reduce this inflammation with Prednisone.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  To support his claim, the Veteran also submitted photographs showing skin rashes on his face, back, and hands.

In an October 2023 VA Memorandum, it was determined that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) while in service based on his military occupational specialty (MOS) as an Abrams Tank System Maintainer.  Based on this TERA, the Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in November 2023.  However, the Veteran failed to appear without explanation.

Despite the Veteran's failure to attend the scheduled VA examination in November 2023, a review of his VA treatment records shows that he has a current diagnosis of eczema and receives treatment for such.  See, e.g., September 2023 VA treatment record (noting an active problem of eczema and that the Veteran has a history of eczema diagnosed 10-12 years ago).  

In light of the Veteran's VA treatment records, which contain information related to the nature of the claimed disability, the Board finds that an in-person examination was not necessary for a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the claimed disability.  An in-person examination is only required when deemed necessary by the VA examiner.  Accordingly, in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error, remand is warranted to procure a VA medical opinion in this matter.  The Veteran is advised, however, that if the VA examiner subsequently determines an in-person examination is necessary and he is scheduled for such, he should appear and participate in the scheduled VA examination, as failure to do so may result in a decision based solely on the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's eczema. An in-person examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the examiner. The claims file (including a copy of this remand) must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's eczema had its onset in or is it otherwise related to active duty service, to include a discussion of conceded TERA exposure during his military service.

A complete rationale for all requested opinions shall be provided. The rationale must include a discussion of the underlying medical principles specific to the facts of this case and not simply reference generic medical literature. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they shall provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Churchwell, Kate

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.