Citation Nr: A25032763
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-463532
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 30 percent evaluation, and no higher, for service-connected chronic urticaria is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected chronic urticaria is manifested by yearly flare ups of hives with symptoms including inflammation, discoloration, itchiness, and a burning sensation, and the use of oral Benadryl and topical cortisone cream.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial 30 percent evaluation for service-connected chronic urticaria have been met.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.321, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 8878-7825 (2023).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1985 to November 1993. 

In August 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (the Appeals Modernization Act or AMA), Pub. Law 115-55, which created a new claims and appeals process for pursuing VA benefits.  

In an August 21, 2023, rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted service connection for chronic urticaria (hives) (claimed as skin condition) and assigned a 0 percent evaluation, effective March 2, 2023.  On August 13, 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), appealing the August 2023 rating decision.  He requested the "Direct Review" lane, indicating that he did not want a Board hearing and would not submit any additional evidence in support of the appeal.  In an August 20, 2024, letter, the Board acknowledged the Veteran's appeal request and informed her that the appeal had been placed on the Direct Review docket.

Under the AMA, when a claimant seeks appellate review through the Board's Direct Review docket, the Board only may consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., as of the August 21, 2023, rating decision).  38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Moreover, the Board is bound by any favorable findings in the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Board notes that additional medical records pertinent to the claim on appeal have not been associated with the claims file since the August 2023 rating decision.  If the Veteran has new evidence that he wishes to submit, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Veteran's representative submitted a brief on August 13, 2024, along with the VA Form 10182.  New evidence submitted with a VA Form 10182 on which the Direct Review option is selected creates uncertainty as to which Board review option the claimant intended, triggering the Board's duty to seek clarification under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (f).  See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  However, the Board finds that there is no prejudice in proceeding with the appeal without requesting clarification, as this statement was argument in support of the appeal, not new evidence.

VA regulations provide that, "[u]pon request, a claimant is entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim . . . before VA issues notice of a decision on an initial or supplemental claim."  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(1).  That regulation does not indicate that the claimant is entitled to pre-decisional notice of this optional hearing.  In fact, 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1) provides that, following a decision, "[c]laimants and their representatives are entitled to notice of any decision made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or the granting of relief . . . [including] the right to a hearing on any issue involved in the claim as provided in paragraph (d) of this section ...."  Read together with § 3.103(d), the only notice § 3.103(b) requires is that a claimant be provided notice of the right for a hearing with notification of the decision (by definition, a post-decisional notice).  In November 2022, VA amended VA Form 21-526EZ and in May 2024 VA amended VA Form 20-0995 to inform claimants of the right to a hearing at any time during the claims process.  The claim in this appeal was submitted on the amended November 2022 version of the VA Form 21-526EZ.  Regardless, the Board finds that any error in the failure to inform the Veteran of the right to a pre-decisional hearing before the RO was harmless error.  

In Bowen, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) found that when a claimant is denied a hearing before the RO, there is no due process violation if he is subsequently offered the opportunity for a hearing before the Board, even if a hearing was not requested or conducted, as long as there is no violation of due process concerning the Board hearing opportunity.  Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253-4 (2012).  The facts in the case can be differentiated on several levels, to include that the Veteran did not actually request an RO hearing and the issue in Bowen was not one of notice.  Regardless, the Board cannot find a basis to conclude that the underlying holding and logic of the Bowen case would not lead to the same finding of no prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.  The August 2023 notification letter informing the Veteran of the rating decision included a VA Form 20-0998, Your Right to Seek Review of Our Decision, outlining the Veteran's appeal options, to include a hearing before the Board.  Additionally, in the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran was provided with an option to request a hearing with a Veterans Law Judge.  The Veteran instead selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge, and the form explicitly states that by choosing this option, the Veteran does not want a Board hearing.  Because the Veteran was provided with notice of the right to appeal to the Board, as well as the right to a Board hearing, there was no due process violation in the processing of the claim or any suggestion that the Veteran was prejudiced by the failure of VA to provide a hearing at the Regional Office (RO) level.  See Bowen. 

The Board has thoroughly reviewed all evidence in the claims file.  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence and on what this evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim, and the Board's reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the Veteran.  The Veteran must not assume the Board has overlooked evidence not explicitly discussed herein.  Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any issues not addressed herein, to include regarding the duty to notify or the duty to assist, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects the ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If two disability ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran's disabilities in reaching its decision.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

Entitlement to an initial 30 percent evaluation for service-connected chronic urticaria is granted.

In an August 2023 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for chronic urticaria and assigned a 0 percent evaluation, effective March 2, 2023, under Diagnostic Codes 8878-7825.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27 (2023).  The Veteran is seeking a higher rating.

Under Diagnostic Code 7825, chronic urticaria is defined as continuous urticaria at least twice per week, off treatment, for a period of six weeks or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7825.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for chronic urticaria that requires first line treatment (antihistamines) for control.  Id.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for chronic urticaria that requires second line treatment (e.g., corticosteroids, sympathomimetics, leukotriene inhibitors, neutrophil inhibitors, thyroid hormone) for control.  Id.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for chronic refractory urticaria that requires third line treatment for control (e.g., plasmapheresis, immunotherapy, immunosuppressives) due to ineffectiveness with first- and second-line treatments.  Id.

The Board notes that the Veteran underwent a pertinent VA examination in May 2023, at which he was noted as having chronic urticaria.  The Veteran reported that, during deployment, he started experiencing hives that covered his chest, stomach, abdomen, back, buttocks, genitals, and head.  He suffered flareups yearly.  During flare-ups, symptoms include inflammation, discoloration, itchiness, and a burning sensation.  He reported that his condition has stayed the same since onset.  The examiner noted that no symptoms were evident during the visit, but the condition had not resolved.  He had used topical cortisone cream and oral Benadryl for a duration of less than 6 weeks in the past 12 months.  He reported that he had not experienced symptoms at least twice for 6 weeks or more.  His skin condition did not cause scarring or impact his ability to work. 

In a March 21, 2023, statement, the Veteran rated his skin symptoms as a 0 out of 10 when his symptoms are at their best and a 10 out of 10 when his symptoms are the worst.  He reported that his symptoms are worsened with doing anything that makes him sweat and with wearing any tight clothing.  

With regard to assigning an increased evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7825, the Board finds that an initial 30 percent rating is warranted under this diagnostic code.  Specifically, Diagnostic Code 7825 allows for a 30 percent rating for chronic urticaria that requires second line treatment (e.g., corticosteroids, sympathomimetics, leukotriene inhibitors, neutrophil inhibitors, thyroid hormone) for control.  The Veteran clearly reported that he treats the flare ups of his condition with oral Benadryl and topical cortisone cream.  A "corticosteroid" is "any of various steroid hormones (such as cortisol, cortisone, or aldosterone) that are produced by the adrenal cortex...from cholesterol" and "any of various synthetic derivatives (such as prednisone or dexamethasone) of these steroid hormones that are used as drugs".  Corticosteroid, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/corticosteroid, Medical definition, (last visited Apr. 5, 2025).  As such, the Board finds that an initial 30 percent evaluation must be assigned for this disability under Diagnostic Code 7825 for the Veteran's used of cortisone cream or a corticosteroid. 

The Board has considering assigning an evaluation in excess of 30 percent.  However, there is no medical or lay evidence of record reflecting that the Veteran's chronic urticaria has manifested with chronic refractory urticaria that requires third line treatment for control (e.g., plasmapheresis, immunotherapy, immunosuppressives) due to ineffectiveness with first- and second-line treatments.  As such, an evaluation in excess of 30 percent is not warranted for this service-connected disability under Diagnostic Code 7825 for any period of time on appeal. 

The Board has reviewed the remaining diagnostic codes relating to the skin.  However, the Board finds that the symptoms related to the Veteran's service-connected chronic urticaria are most appropriately compensated under Diagnostic Code 7825, which evaluates chronic urticaria.  As such, an increased rating is not warranted under an alternative diagnostic code.

In summary, for the reasons and bases set forth above, the Board finds that an initial 30 percent evaluation is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected chronic urticaria under Diagnostic Code 7825.  The preponderance of the evidence is against the claim for an evaluation in excess of 30 percent, and the benefit of the doubt rule enunciated in 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b) is not for application.

Finally, the Board finds that a claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is not reasonably raised by the record.  In this regard, the Board notes that there is no medical or lay evidence suggesting that the Veteran's service-connected disability impacts his employment in any way.  As such, the Board finds that TDIU is not part of this appeal.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  If his employment situation changes in the future, he is advised to file for TDIU. 

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Durham, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.