Citation Nr: A25032212
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-433198
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from May 1975 to May 1979.  He was awarded a Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, a Rifle Expert Badge (5th Award), and a Pistol Sharpshooter Badge.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2023 rating decision.  

When appealing the matter to the Board the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, electing the Direct Review Docket.  As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the May 2023 decision on appeal.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182).  38?C.F.R. §?20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this opinion.  38 C.F.R. §?20.300.  However, as a remand of this matter is warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

As the claim was submitted January 2023 and the Veteran elected Direct Review of the May 2023 rating decision, the applicable evidentiary window is from January 2023 to May 2023, a modest amount of evidence the Board is permitted to consider herein.  

On review of the record, the first time a claim for TDIU was raised by the record explicitly was in January 2023, when the Veteran submitted his formal application for TDIU.  As such the question before the Board is whether the Veteran is unable to secure employment due solely to his service-connected disabilities, at any time as of January 2023.

Unfortunately, the Board is not able to assess whether TDIU is warranted as it is unclear as to whether the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, and if so whether that inability is due solely to his service-connected disabilities.  As such, development should have been completed prior to the issuance of the May 2023 denial and failure to do so constitutes pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

In January 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation based on Unemployability and a Statement in Support of Claim.  The date he listed that he last worked full time is September 30, 2013.  He was employed as a Canine Enforcement Officer prior.  He left his employment because of his disability.  He completed his freshman year of college.  After he became too disabled to work, he took accounting education/training from January 1981 to May 1981.  In both his application and statement in support of claim he listed each of his service-connected disabilities.  He submitted an additional Statement in Support of Claim, also in January 2023.  In that statement he wrote that he left his employment in September 2013 due to pain.  "I won't get into the specifics of my disability symptoms as the VA has well documented them and assigned disability rating percentages according to these symptoms."  "Thus, I am requesting TDIU, which would relieve a financial burden for me, which has been overwhelming."

A Veteran will be entitled to a TDIU upon establishing that he is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due solely to impairment resulting from his service-connected disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.15, 4.16.

Total disability ratings for compensation based on individual unemployability may be assigned when the combined schedular rating for the service-connected disabilities is less than 100 percent and when it is found that the service-connected disabilities are sufficient to produce unemployability without regard to advancing age, provided that, if there is only one such disability, this disability is ratable at 60 percent or more, or, if there are two or more disabilities, there is at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and additional disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38C.F.R. §§3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

In January 2023 a VA Back Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) was performed.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's service-connected low back disability impacts his ability to perform occupational tasks.  "The functional impact of the claimed condition on social and occupation tasks is reduced."  Under the Remarks section of the report the examiner highlighted that "this is an IU evaluation."  "The veteran's back condition adversely impacts his ability to function in the occupational sector by causing decreased ability to stand, walk and perform weight bearing activities.  The veteran worked with customs as a K-9 enforcement officer for many years; however, eventually could no longer tolerate the associated pain and required level of ambulation/weight bearing activities (at times taking up to 13 aspirins a day to get through the workday).  The claimant is unable to run and is unable to perform physical activities while standing, without frequent periodic rest breaks.  The veteran experiences difficulty carrying heavy objects greater than 15-20lbs, difficulty rising from a seated position and walking greater than a few feet."  

While the January 2023 VA opinion assists in the TDIU claim as the examiner details the functional impact the Veteran's low back disability has on his ability to engage in occupational tasks, it alone does not demonstrate that the Veteran is incapable of securing or follow a substantially gainful occupation due solely to impairment resulting from his service-connected disabilities.  

In January 2023 the Veteran submitted an eight-page medical opinion, authored by a private physician assistant-certified (PA-C).  The examiner opined that it is more likely than not that the service-connected disability renders him unable to perform gainful employment.  The rationale provided was conclusory, just restating the same opinion that the service-connected disability, chronic and progressive in nature renders him incapable of performing substantially gainful employment, presently and in the future in his usual vocation.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran is not capable of full-time work within other vocations.  The examiner also concluded that the Veteran should be considered permanently and totally disabled related to his current service-connected multiple disabilities.  He "does meet the criteria as outlined by the Department of Veterans Affairs regulation of 38 CFR, § 4.16 Total disability ratings for compensation based on unemployability of the individual."

These opinions are inadequate as it is conclusory with no rationale to support the conclusions.  Additionally, despite the examiner obviously authoring these opinions in support of the TDIU claim, it is not helpful for the examiner to provide legal conclusions, such as the Veteran meets the regulations under C.F.R. § 4.16.  In other words, TDIU is a finding of fact and not a medical finding.  In order for the Board to properly evaluate whether TDIU is warranted the Board needs to know the functional impairments caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  

The Board recognizes that the examiner listed out the specific symptoms related to hearing loss, lumbar spine, radiculopathy of the lower extremities, and tinnitus when noting the functional deficits.  That notwithstanding, these statements are not sufficient itself to adequately demonstrate that the functional impairments of the service-connected disabilities were so severe to not only preclude employment, but that any inability to find employment is due solely due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  Of note, the Veteran is not service connected for Meniere's Syndrome or migraine headaches, and on review of the record, to include all information made part of the file prior to May 2023, the Veteran has consistently reported how impactful his headaches have been to his daily living to include his employment.  

Development should have been performed prior to the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision.  Specifically, the Veteran should have been afforded VA examinations and adequate medical opinions regarding the functional impairment of his service-connected disabilities should have been obtained.  

The Veteran is service-connected for lumbosacral sprain with degenerative disc disease and degenerative spondylolisthesis, radiculopathy of the left leg of the sciatic nerve and of the femoral nerve, radiculopathy of the right leg of the sciatic nerve, radiculopathy of the right lower extremity of the femoral nerve, hearing loss of the left ear, and bilateral tinnitus.  His combined schedular rating is 80 percent.  Therefore, the Veteran meets the schedular rating criteria for TDIU for the entire period on appeal.  38C.F.R. §§4.16(a).  Despite meeting schedular, as detailed above, a remand is required to obtain VA examinations and medical opinions.  

In January 2023 VA sent the Veteran a letter requesting information about his former employer, and to date the Veteran has not provided a VA Form 21-4192, responsive to VA's request.  As the matter is being remanded, the Veteran will again be requested to provide information regarding his former employer.  Of note, at present, there is no information aside from the Veteran's reporting to demonstrate when he ceased working full time.  

The Board takes this opportunity to advise the Veteran that his cooperation in VA's efforts to develop his claim, including responding to VA's development letters and reporting for any subsequently scheduled VA examination, is critical.  Importantly, the Veteran has a duty to assist and cooperate with VA in developing evidence; the duty to assist is not a one-way street.  See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991); see also Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 68 (1993) (VA's duty to assist is not a one-way street; if a veteran wishes help, [she] cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where [her] own actions are essential in obtaining the putative evidence).  The Veteran is also advised that failure to cooperate will result in his claim being denied or decided based on the evidence of record.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with VA Form 21-8940, in connection with the claim for entitlement to TDIU, and request that he provide clarification regarding his former employers, providing detail regarding the dates of employment, to include the day, month and year for all full time and part time employment.  

2. Take all appropriate actions to obtain VA Form 21-4192 from the Veteran's former employers, to include any employer where the Veteran worked as a K-9 officer/Canine Officer.  

3. Inform the Veteran that a failure to provide additional evidence regarding his TDIU claim, including submitting an accurate VA Form 21-8940 or corroborating information regarding dates of his employment, may result in his TDIU claim being denied.

4. Schedule VA examinations of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, in particular his low back disabilities, radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities, hearing loss of the left ear, and tinnitus.  The examiner should assess the frequency and severity of his symptomatology associated with these disabilities throughout the appeal period (since January 2023).  

5. The examiner should indicate all functional limitations with employment that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would cause, particularly with regards to the Veteran's capability of performing the duties of a K-9 officer/Canine Officer.  

To the extent possible, the examiner is requested to provide retroactive opinions, specifically assess all functional limitations as of September 2013 (the date the Veteran contends that he ceased working full time) with employment that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would cause, particularly with regards to the Veteran's capability of performing the duties of a K-9 officer/Canine Officer.  

To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the low back disabilities alone and discuss the effect of the Veteran's low back disabilities on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living.

To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities alone and discuss the effect of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living.

To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the hearing loss of the left ear and bilateral tinnitus alone and discuss the effect of the Veteran's hearing loss of the left ear and bilateral tinnitus on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Talamantes, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.