Citation Nr: A25032215
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210302-144445
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

A higher rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1969 to September 1971.

The case is on appeal from a February 2021 rating decision.

In the March 2021 notice disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  In October 2023, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2021 RO decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or attorney representative, within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  See 38 C.F.R.§§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

A higher rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran seeks a higher rating in excess of 10 percent for hearing loss for worsening hearing symptoms.

The Veteran's post-service VA treatment records show ongoing hearing loss treatment. 

In October 2020, the Veteran submitted a private audio examination.  The private audiologist noted that the pure tone audiometry revealed "mild to profound" sensorineural hearing loss. 

A January 2021 VA 21-2507 Request for Physical Examination shows that a VA examination was requested and cancelled, noting "Exam Requested at a Different Location."  An examination request shows that the Veteran did not need to report for a hearing loss VA examination.  A VA 21-0820 Report of General Information shows he called to inform VA personnel that he received information regarding a VA examination for hearing loss.  The report noted that the "exam request states that" he did not have to report to the examination.  Also, the report shows he reported that the did not "mind going to another exam, but asks that it be closer to him."  A later examination request form shows that the Veteran refused the hearing loss VA examination so it was cancelled.  

In the February 2021 rating decision, the RO increased the Veteran's hearing loss disability rating from a noncompensable to 10 percent.  

The Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, the RO did not afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination or obtain a medical opinion addressing the severity of the Veteran's hearing loss.  In this regard, a review of the record shows that a VA examination or opinion were not properly scheduled or requested.  The Veteran indicated that he would attend a VA examination as long it was closer to him.  Also, VA informed the Veteran that he did not have to report to an examination.  However, the examination request was cancelled.  Then, the cancellation was improperly attributed to refusal of the Veteran.  The instructions to the Veteran were confusing as to whether he had to report.  Even if the Veteran did not have to report for an examination, the RO did not forward the claims file for an adequate assessment of the severity of the Veteran's hearing loss.  As such a remand is warranted to correct the deficiencies stated above.

The claim is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination to assess the severity of the Veteran's hearing loss in accordance with the rating criteria.  Ensure such examination can be scheduled close to the Veteran address of record, or at least to a location accessible to him.  If an examination is not feasible, an opinion should be obtained.  The examiner should review the claims and a copy of this remand. 

The examiner should review, address, and discuss the Veteran's lay reports of symptomatology, the October 2020 private examination report, and VA treatment records.

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nevarez-Myrick, Nancy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.