Citation Nr: A25032148
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240522-469687
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The discontinuance of specially adapted housing was proper; restoration is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has not lost the use of both lower extremities, both hands, or one upper and one lower extremity which affect the functions of balance or propulsion, nor does he have a permanent and total disability due to such loss of use.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The discontinuance of SAH was proper. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.809.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty from August 2004 to May 2008 and from May 2008 to April 2015. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The discontinuance of specially adapted housing was proper; restoration is denied.

In March 2022, the Veteran was awarded eligibility to specially adapted housing. See March 2022 rating decision. A November 2023 rating decision proposed to terminate that benefit, and a January 2024 rating decision implemented the termination. The Veteran contends he should retain his eligibility. See December 2023 VA Form 26-4555 Veteran's Application in Acquiring Specially Adapted Housing or Special Home Adaptation Grant ("I am reapplying for the SAH grant because I do not have ALS. I have fibromyalgia, left and right knee degenerative arthritis, right hip strain, lumbosacral strain, and degenerative disc and joint disease with history of neural foraminal stenosis. In addition, I just had two hernia surgeries. I live in a single-family house that has four floors.").

At the outset, the Board notes that the issue was incorrectly characterized by the AOJ as severance. Severance, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d), applies to service connection and requires a standard of clear and unmistakable evidence. The proper characterization of the issue before the Board is restoration. See Dugan v. McDonough, No. 20-4585, 2021 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1187 (Vet. App. June 30, 2021), Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

By way of history, the Veteran's original grant of specially adapted housing was "based on th[e] level of impairment which is caused by the service-connected condition of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)." Five months later, the Veteran reported that he does not have ALS. See August 2022 VA Form 27-0820, Report of General Information. In November 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination that confirmed that "the ALS diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous." The January 2024 rating decision also severed service connection for ALS.

Precise procedural requirements must be followed by the AOJ in order to properly inform the Veteran of the proposed termination. Specifically, a rating decision proposing termination is to be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The Veteran must be notified at his latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons. He must be given 60 days for response and presentation of additional evidence to show that the benefit in question should be maintained. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (b)(2), 3.105(d). The Veteran may also request a predetermination hearing within 30 days of the proposed notice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i). If no hearing is requested, and additional evidence is not received, a final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. Ibid.

The AOJ satisfied the due process notification requirements. In other words, the termination was at least procedurally proper. Specifically, after the proposed termination in a November 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was given 60 days to present additional evidence and was notified at his address of record. The Veteran did not request a predetermination hearing. Subsequently, the final determination was issued in a January 2024 rating decision. The effective date of the termination of the special home adaptation award was April 1, 2024, which was the last day of the month after expiration of the 60-day period from the date of notice of the January 2024 final rating action, as set forth in the applicable VA regulation. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d), (i). Thus, all procedural requirements were met. Importantly, neither the Veteran nor his attorney has disputed the fact that all procedural requirements for termination were met in the present case.

Accordingly, the central issue in this case is whether the termination itself was proper in a substantive sense, in accordance with the applicable VA law and regulations. Thus, the Board will focus on the propriety of the AOJ's decision to discontinue his specially adapted housing eligibility.

The Veteran is service-connected for the following issues: posttraumatic stress disorder (rated 70 percent from May 2020), migraine headaches (rated 50 percent from April 2015), fibromyalgia (rated 40 percent from August 2022), lumbosacral strain (rated 20 percent from April 2015), radiculopathy of the left upper extremity (rated 20 percent from April 2015), radiculopathy of the right upper extremity (rated 20 percent from April 2015 and rated 100 percent from April 2017 to June 2017), right shoulder impingement syndrome with degenerative arthritis (rated 10 percent from April 2015), right knee strain with degenerative arthritis (rated 10 percent from April 2015), left knee strain with degenerative arthritis (rated 10 percent from April 2015), left shoulder strain with degenerative arthritis (rated 10 percent from April 2015), degenerative disc and joint disease (rated 10 percent from April 2015), right hip strain (rated 10 percent from April 2015), tinnitus (rated 10 percent from October 2019), erectile dysfunction (rated noncompensable), and right shoulder scarring (rated noncompensable), with a total evaluation of 100 percent. The Veteran contends, and the evidence shows, that the Veteran does have disabilities effecting his extremities. The Veteran does not have any service-connected burn injuries, inhalation injuries, or eye disabilities. Such will therefore not be discussed herein. 

38 C.F.R. §3.809 provides: in order for a certificate of eligibility for assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing . . . to be extended to a veteran, one of the following requirements must be met: a permanent and total disability due to the loss or loss of use of both lower extremities, such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair (38 C.F.R. §3.809(b)(1); a permanent and total disability due to the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair (Id. at b(4)); a permanent and total disability due to the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbow (38 C.F.R. §3.809(b)(5)). 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b), (d).

Specially adapted housing may also be available to a veteran who served on or after September 11, 2001, who has a permanent disability that was incurred during such service, and which results in loss or loss of use of one or more extremities which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude ambulating without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair. See 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a)(2)(C). Additionally, a special home adaptation grant is available for a veteran that has a permanent and total disability which includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b).

Generally, an eligible veteran will be provided one-time only assistance with a special home adaptation grant or specially adapted housing. However, issuance of a special home adaptation grant before a veteran becomes eligible for specially adapted housing under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 does not preclude a later grant for specially adapted housing. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(a).

"Loss of use" is not specifically defined under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809 or 3.809a. Regulations pertaining to special monthly compensation for loss of use of a hand or foot state that loss of use is held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. The determination should be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability to grasp, manipulate objects, balance, or propel oneself forward. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a)(2), 4.63.

In claims for specially adapted housing based on loss of use of a lower extremity, consideration is to be given to whether the Veteran's loss of use precludes locomotion without the aid of assistive devices. The term "preclude locomotion" means the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches or canes as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c). The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims found that a "loss of use" exists when there is "deprivation of the ability to avail oneself" of that extremity, and functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination. See Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).

The probative medical evidence of record persuasively demonstrates that the Veteran does not have loss of use of his extremities due to a service-connected disorder. In his VA examinations from April 2015, the examiner observed that the Veteran occasionally uses a brace for his knee conditions, that he experiences pain in his hip while walking, and that his knees hurt if he sits for more than an hour, and that he experiences pain lifting and turning. In March 2016, the Veteran was provided a VA examination for his back. That examiner stated that the Veteran cannot lift and carry heavy objects and cannot repeatedly bend or twist at the waist.

In April 2018 the Veteran was afforded additional VA examinations. That examiner stated that the Veteran employs constant use of a cane due to pain in his knees and that the Veteran reported pain with sitting /standing for long periods, walking, getting in and out of seated positions. 

In July 2022 a VA occupational therapist determined the Veteran had a "slight disability" in that he is "unable to carry out all previous activities but able to look after own affairs without assistance." 

In August 2022 the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for fibromyalgia. That examiner reported the Veteran employs regular use of a cane for his bilateral knee condition and fibromyalgia. 

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent another occupational therapy examination. There, the therapist determined that the Veteran had "no significant disability despite symptoms." The therapist also reported that the Veteran stated he lives in a 4-level home and that "Occasionally, during a flare of pain, his wife will help him with donning socks/shoes, but this is not the norm. Veteran has a home gym and finds pain relief to some degree in his home sauna." The therapist reported that the Veteran uses a cane and is able to negotiate stairs, though this is getting harder.

Regarding upper extremities, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2015. That examiner reported that the Veteran stated his shoulders are "in pain a lot, always on the computer, and [the Veteran] has to take a break."

While the Veteran may have decreased stamina which makes walking, carrying objects, bending, and twisting painful, the evidence shows that the Veteran is able to independently ambulate short distances and hold and carry items in the Veteran's hand, and has not at any time had loss of use of his lower extremities, such to be precluded from all locomotion without the aid of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or cane. Indeed, the Veteran does not allege that he has lost the use of both lower extremities, both hands, or one upper and one lower extremity. The Board assigns great weight to the medical evidence and notes that it is the Board's responsibility, not the evaluating medical professionals, to determine whether "loss of use" exists. Tucker v. West, 11 Vet. App. 369 (1998). The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in a loss of use such that it precludes locomotion without the use of an assistive device.

The Board further notes that the Veteran has not experienced loss of use of both hands, in that he can utilize a cane, work on a computer, and carry light objects. 

The Board has considered the lay statements of the Veteran regarding problems with navigating stairs and the desirability for a single-story home. The Board does not doubt those assertions, as the Veteran is competent to report experiencing difficulty walking and climbing stairs. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Those statements are credible and consistent with the medical evidence of record. These statements, however, are insufficient to establish to establish that the Veteran has loss of use of both lower extremities, both hands, or one lower extremity and one upper extremity which affect the functions of balance or propulsion. The Veteran's lay statements do not outweigh the medical evidence that demonstrates that the claimant does not meet any of the required criteria under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809 or 3.809a. 

The Veteran has asserted that a one-story home would be more suited to his disabilities than his current four-story home. This assertion is likely true, but the Veteran does not qualify for a specially adapted housing or home adaptation grant under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809 or 3.809a, and grants for home alterations cannot be made under these VA regulatory provisions. 

The Board recommends that the Veteran work with the VA Prosthetics and Sensory Aids Service through a VA care facility, which can assist in obtaining prosthetic devices and mobility modifications for the home. The Veteran should also discuss with VA care providers whether the Veteran should apply for a Home Improvements and Structural Alterations (HISA) grant, which provides grants for medically necessary home improvements and structural alterations, including ramps to allow entrance into the home, allowing accessibility into the kitchen or bathroom, and creating an accessible bathroom and shower.

In sum, the competent and probative medical evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet any of the criteria under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809 or 3.809a, and the claim is denied.

Finally, the Board notes the Veteran's attorney alleges that VA has not satisfied its duty to assist. She correctly notes "[i]n July 2024, the AOJ informed [the Veteran] that it was going to obtain records from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) regarding the specially adapted housing decision. In September 2024, Mr. Gordon's May 2024 appeal was docketed at the Board, despite no records from VHA being obtained." See March 2025 correspondence from N.B.S., Esq., citing July 2024 BVA pre-docketing letter and September 2024 BVA docketing letter.

However, the pre-docketing letter states "[o]nce the Board receives your records, we will determine whether we can docket your appeal for the decision relating to Education Division benefits, listed on the May 22, 2024, VA Form 10182." This letter incorrectly refers to the benefit on appeal as education benefits. In fact, the issue on appeal is whether the Veteran's previous grant for specially adapted housing should be restored. There is nothing in the record that suggests the file is incomplete or that evidence is missing.  

If the Veteran disagrees, and would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Devin White

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.