Citation Nr: A25032290
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458979
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent but no higher for anxiety disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent but no higher for anxiety disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9425.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1996 to February 2002.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities, which are based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  The Board will also consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claims when the disabilities may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claims on appeal.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In evaluating the evidence, the Board has been charged with the duty to assess the credibility and weight given to evidence.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F. 3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Indeed, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to do so.  Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000).  In doing so, the Board is free to favor one medical opinion over another, provided it offers an adequate basis for doing so.  Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under the laws administered by VA.  VA shall consider all information and medical and lay evidence of record.  Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent but no higher for anxiety disorder is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 70 percent disability rating for anxiety disorder, for which he has a 50 percent rating under DC 9425, effective November 17, 2022.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182, attached Brief.  The Veteran filed the July 2023 Supplemental Claim, from which this appeal stems, within one year of the March 2023 rating decision that assigned an initial rating for his service-connected anxiety disorder.  Therefore, the Veteran has continuously pursued a higher initial rating, as such, the period on review is from November 17, 2022 until September 21, 2023. 

Law

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Evidence

In the November 2022 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran stated that his service-connected disabilities caused him to have daily difficulties and limited his ability to be active and participate in everyday activities due to his worsening cough; he was no longer able to exercise normally, but only performed slow and controlled exercises without overexertion; at work, he failed to complete his tasks to standard, which made him less productive; he could not enjoy former hobbies, such as running and high-impact activities, which made him feel down; he often felt down, sad, and unmotivated; he sometimes withdrew from people due to his feelings and would tend to want to be alone; he would get overwhelmed and feel anxious sometimes; at times, he felt his career was in jeopardy; he had sleep problems, typically sleeping 4 hours per night; he had a hard time falling and staying asleep; he would wake in the night, coughing, hacking, and feeling short of breath; coughing fits kept him awake, which would make him feel tired during the day and make it hard to be productive; his disabilities also weighed on his relationships, such as with his wife; he would get frustrated and angry easily, causing arguments with people close to him; he would move away from people, especially his wife, because he had to cough constantly and knew if affected her; he could not play with his children because he could not keep up with them; his family was embarrassed by his chronic cough; his friendships were affected because he would get anxious in public knowing that he would cough, which caused people to look at him; and his scars caused a lack of self-confidence when he took off his shirt at the pool or beach.

During the December 2022 VA examination, the Veteran described his relationship with his wife as "OK," he had very good relationships with his children, good relationships with his family, and enjoyed cooking, playing pool, and woodworking; he had been a construction electrician for 12 years; his coughing caused everyday difficulties, such as not being able to exercise regularly or engage in other hobbies, sleep difficulties, anxiety in public due to everyone watching him when he coughed, increased irritability, depressed mood, decreased motivation, and isolation; his scars caused him anxiety when he had to remove his shirt; the examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment; he arrived on time to the appointment, his appearance and grooming were unremarkable, he indicated an understanding of the reason for the examination, he was alert and oriented to time, person, and place, he showed anxious mood and affect, his statements were logical, coherent, rational, and organized, and psychotic symptoms were neither observed nor reported.

A July 2023 private mental health evaluation that was based on the Veteran's November 2022 Statement in Support of Claim noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, occupational and social impairment with decreased work efficiency and periods of inability to perform occupational tasks; chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, decreased participation in physical/social activities, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, and relationship problems.

The September 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran had been married for 27 years, his homelife was busy but good, his children had moved out for college, he and his wife had a handful of friends, and he played pool twice per week; he was an operations engineer; he did not drink alcohol to excess but had argued with his wife about his alcohol consumption; he had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including a work or work-like setting; he arrived on time for the examination, his speech was clear and of normal tone, volume, and was goal-directed, there was no evidence of psychotic thought processes in form or content, he denied suicidal/homicidal ideation, plan, or intent, his mood was neutral, and his affect was congruent.

Analysis

The Veteran's lay statements, VA examinations, and a private mental health evaluation showed that the Veteran's anxiety disorder was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating (depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment), 50 percent rating (disturbances in motivation and mood and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships), and 70 percent rating (difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting)), and no symptoms associated with a 100 percent rating.  The Veteran also had symptoms that are not listed with a specific rating, such as fatigability and social isolation. 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 30 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by higher ratings.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  The unlisted symptoms are similar to chronic sleep impairment, depressed mood, and anxiety, which are contemplated by a 30 percent rating.

The Board finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a 70 percent rating.  The Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  Due to the Veteran's coughing and insecurity with his appearance, he had limited sleep, decreased interactions with his children, a reduction in hobbies and exercise, increased social anxiety, and decreased work productivity.

The Veteran did not experience symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating, and he did not have total occupational and social impairment.  The September 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran had been married for 27 years, his homelife was busy but good, his children had moved out for college, he and his wife had a handful of friends, he played pool twice per week, and he was an operations engineer.  Additionally, during the December 2022 and September 2023 VA examinations, the Veteran arrived on time for the examinations, his speech was clear, had normal tone and volume, and was goal-directed, and his statements were logical, coherent, rational, and organized, although he was anxious during the December 2022 VA examination.

The Board has considered whether the Veteran's claim raised the issue of unemployability.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).  However, as the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran has been consistently employed as an operations engineer throughout the period on review.  As such, the issue has not been raised by the record. 

Conclusion

In conclusion, the Board finds that after resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, a disability rating of 70 percent but no higher for anxiety disorder is warranted.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a higher rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Shealy, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.