Citation Nr: A25032720
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240429-436538
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis based on obesity as an intermediate step is remanded.

Service connection for hypertension as secondary to bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis based on obesity as an intermediate step is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1970 to March 1972.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which was later reviewed and continued in an April 2024 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.  The Veteran appealed the decision in an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for OSA as secondary to bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis based on obesity as an intermediate step is remanded.

2. Service connection for hypertension as secondary to bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis based on obesity as an intermediate step is remanded.

The only theory of entitlement raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record in this case is that his OSA and hypertension are secondary to bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis based on obesity as an intermediate step.  Upon review, the Board finds remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors by ensuring adequate VA opinions are obtained to resolve these claims and outstanding pre-decisional Social Security Administration (SSA) records are obtained.

While obesity in and of itself is not a disability that can be service connected, it may qualify as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability where a claimant establishes that the obesity was caused by a service-connected disability and caused his or her the current disability.  See VA OGC Prec. Op. 1-2017; see also Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 350 (2020) (holding that obesity may also service an intermediate step predicated on secondary aggravation).  Upon review, the evidence of record regarding obesity as an intermediate step is insufficient to resolve these claims.  While the record contains VA opinions addressing whether the Veteran's obesity was caused by his service-connected disability, the record lacks an adequate opinion addressing aggravation specifically.  Cf. Walsh, 32 Vet. App. 350.  The Board acknowledges the pre-decisional record contains an August 2022 nonVA provider opinion addressing obesity; however, the provider did not address a baseline level of severity.  Thus, the AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion addressing aggravation specifically, a duty to assist error.

Additionally, the pre-decisional record reflects the Veteran is in receipt of SSA benefits.  While it is otherwise unclear from the record why the Veteran is in receipt of SSA benefits, the records may be relevant to these claims.  As such, the AOJ should have obtained the Veteran's outstanding SSA records, a duty to assist error.

Accordingly, these claims are remanded for corrective action.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's SSA records associated with his disability award, to include clinical and medical records supporting that award, and associate them with the claims file.  All efforts to obtain said records should be documented in the claims file along with all responses received from attempts to obtain the records.

2. After the above development, return the entire claims file and this remand to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA and hypertension.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the clinician's discretion.  The clinician is asked to completely review the claims file, and to render an addendum opinion, including rationale, addressing whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis, including medication taken for treatment thereof, aggravated his obesity and, if so:

(a.) Whether the aggravated obesity was a substantial factor in causing OSA and/or hypertension; and, if so,

(b.) Whether his OSA and/or hypertension would not have occurred but for the obesity aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis, including medication taken for treatment thereof.

NOTE: If the clinician determines that the claimed condition(s) was aggravated by a service-connected disability with an intermediate step of obesity, the clinician must provide the baseline level of severity of OSA and/or hypertension established by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of OSA and/or hypertension.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

3. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Allen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.