Citation Nr: A25032938
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-456127
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1974 to May 1976.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in March 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office denying the Veteran's June 2023 claim for entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss and bilateral plantar fasciitis, under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In June 2024, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.  Based on the Veteran's election, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued this decision, the Board did not consider such evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss and bilateral plantar fasciitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis.

The Veteran contends his current, diagnosed bilateral hearing loss and bilateral plantar fasciitis disabilities are related to his active service.  

Under the AMA, the Board's jurisdiction to remand is limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here, the Board finds the medical opinions upon which the March 2024 rating decision was based are inadequate for adjudication of the Veteran's claims.  Each of these constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and therefore remand is warranted to correct such errors.

As an initial matter, in the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has current disabilities of both bilateral hearing loss and bilateral plantar fasciitis.  Specifically, the AOJ favorably found that a February 23, 2024 VA examination shows a diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis and a November 21, 2023 VA examination indicates a diagnosis of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  Moreover, with respect to bilateral hearing loss, the AOJ also favorably found that the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service in that his military occupational specialty (MOS) as an infantryman has a high probability of noise exposure.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).     

VA thus has conceded both in-service noise exposure for the purpose of service connection for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss as well as the presence of a current disability of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  At issue, therefore, is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current diagnosed bilateral hearing loss and the conceded in-service noise exposure.

With respect to a current disability, impaired hearing will be considered to be a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

The above-noted November 2023 VA examination reflects a current disability of both right and left ear sensorineural hearing loss, with auditory findings in accordance with the above-noted criteria.  The examination reports that the Veteran had exposure to noise during service from machine guns, grenades, and helicopters in connection with his MOS as an infantryman, and his DD214 lists marksman (rifle M-16) and sharpshooter (hand grenade) badges.  The examination further indicates he had no pre- or post-military noise exposure.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss was not at least as likely as not caused by or the result of an event in military service.  In the opinion's rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran maintained normal hearing sensitivity during military service and no positive significant threshold shifts were noted in either ear from enlistment to separation exam.  The examiner further stated that there were no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for hearing loss located in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) or otherwise prior to the time of his claim.  The examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's MOS of infantryman had a high probability for hazardous noise exposure and that the Veteran reported military noise exposure, but that the examiner was "[u]nable to link veteran's current hearing loss with noise exposure from 40+ years prior.  It is the provider's opinion that the veteran's hearing loss is less likely than not related to military service."  The Board finds this opinion insufficient for the purpose of determining entitlement to service connection.  Despite the concession that the Veteran had a high probability for hazardous noise exposure in service, and noting no other pre- or post-military noise exposure, the VA examiner concluded there was no nexus between such in-service noise and the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disability.  The examiner's reliance on the absence of reports of any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses referable to hearing loss in the Veteran's STR's or during the post-service period prior to the filing of his claim is improper and for that reason alone, the negative nexus opinion is inadequate.  Furthermore, the examiner also failed to consider or address the issue of whether the Veteran's hearing loss had a delayed onset after separation from service that was nevertheless related to his in-service noise exposure and did not explain why that issue was not considered.  Therefore, for at least the foregoing reasons, the Board finds the VA examiner's opinion with respect to the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss inadequate.  

Turning to the issue of the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis, the Board observes that with his June 2023 claim, the Veteran indicated the disability related to his wearing of combat boots in service, citing an approximate date of 1974 when the disability began or worsened.  In the February 2024 VA examination in connection with this disability, the examiner indicated a diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis and noted the Veteran experienced sharp pain in both feet, with burning and swelling that impacts his walking and other activities, beginning in 2020.  The examiner also noted post-service private and VA treatment records show complaints of a painful corn under the plantar of the great right toe, in February 2017.  The examiner proceeded to provide an opinion stating that the Veteran's current bilateral plantar fasciitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In the opinion's rationale, the examiner stated, in total, that "the claimant is diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis.  There is a lack of evidence in the provided STRs to indicate that the claimant suffered from a foot condition to include plantar fasciitis during military service.  Therefore, a nexus cannot be established." 

The Board similarly finds this opinion insufficient for the purpose of determining entitlement to service connection.  The examiner's rationale relies solely on the absence of reports of any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses referable to plantar fasciitis in the Veteran's STR's and contains no medical rationale or reasoning whatsoever underlying its conclusions.  For these reasons alone, the negative nexus opinion is inadequate.  Furthermore, the examiner also failed to address the Veteran's contention, provided on his claim, that his foot disability began in approximately 1974 and was related to his wearing of combat boots, which the Board finds is consistent with the duties associated with his MOS as an infantryman.  

For at least the foregoing reasons, therefore, the Board finds both the November 2023 VA examiner's opinion relating to the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and the February 2024 VA examiner's opinion relating to his bilateral plantar fasciitis to be inadequate and thus cannot rely on them when determining whether entitlement to service connection is warranted for either disorder.  Consequently, the Board finds a remand is necessary to obtain addendum opinions on these issues. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the complete record, to include a copy of this Remand, to a qualified clinician or clinicians to provide responses to the following:

(a) Provide an opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss.  The clinician is requested to opine as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's conceded bilateral hearing loss disability had its onset in or is otherwise related to his military service, to include his conceded in-service noise exposure coincident with his duties during active service.  The clinician also should consider the remarks in the November 2023 VA examination indicating there was no other apparent noise exposure either prior to or following his service.  In providing the opinion, the clinician should review and discuss the medical and lay evidence, including any statements regarding the onset and course of the Veteran's hearing loss in service and following separation.  

The clinician's opinion also should address whether the Veteran's hearing loss may have had a delayed onset after separation from service that was related to his conceded in-service noise exposure.

(b) Provide an opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis.  The clinician is requested to opine as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's conceded plantar fasciitis disability had its onset in or is otherwise related to his military service.  In providing the opinion, the clinician should review and discuss the medical and lay evidence, including any statements regarding the onset and course of his plantar fasciitis in service and following separation.  The clinician should specifically address the Veteran's contentions that his plantar fasciitis had an onset in approximately 1974, related to his wearing of combat boots as well as any other statements by the Veteran relating to the onset of foot pain or other symptoms.  The clinician should attempt to reconcile or seek clarification with the Veteran regarding any inconsistencies in dates or other assertions of onset, as necessary.  

In providing the requested opinions, the clinician(s) also are reminded that an absence of documented hearing loss or plantar fasciitis in service or at separation is not a categorical bar to entitlement to service connection for such disabilities and is further advised that the sole basis of a negative opinion may not be the fact that the Veteran's service and/or post-service treatment records are silent as to any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses referable to these conditions.  

2. A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the clinician must indicate why this is the case and what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion. 

The need for any further examination of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the clinicians selected to write the opinions. 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Skacel, Patrick T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.