Citation Nr: A25032571
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240906-470926
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to the service-connected unspecified depressive disorder disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1983 to February 1992 and January 1994 to April 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the January 2024 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In September 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363 (U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024), due to the possibility of a docket switch, the Board cannot adjudicate an appeal until after one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later. Although the Veteran's period of time to request a docket switch has not expired, the instant decision is a full grant of benefits and thus there is no due process concern or prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the appeal. See September 5, 2024, VA 20-8993 notification letter and September 6, 2024, VA 10182 notice of disagreement.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected disabilities, specifically his mental health conditions and mental health medications are causing his sleep apnea, which include symptoms of loud snoring, awakening with a dry mouth, difficulty staying asleep, difficulty paying attention while awake and irritability, daytime drowsiness, frequent nightmares and early morning headaches.  Further the Veteran reports that his service-connected mental health disability and antidepressant medications have caused him to gain weight and become obese which has caused or aggravated his sleep apnea disability.  The Veteran reports having to use a CPAP machine nightly.

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as substantiated by a sleep study, and the Veteran is service connected for an unspecified depressive disorder disability. See April 2013 sleep study and private medical opinion, and September 2024 rating decision.

In determining whether a disability is to be granted secondary service connection the VA must find (1) that there is a current disability that is not service connected; (2) that there is at least one service-connected disability; and (3) evidence that the non-service-connected disability is either, (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Although obesity is not considered a disability for VA compensation purposes, it may act as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis. When considering a claim based on obesity as an intermediate step, VA adjudicators must address (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the claimant to become obese or aggravated the claimant's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity or aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; See VAOPGCPREC No. 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017).

The Board notes that the RO made favorable findings that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a sleep apnea disability and is service connected for an unspecified depressive disorder disability. See September 2024 rating decision. The Board is bound by these favorable findings absent a finding of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) reflect that the Veteran was diagnosed with depression and was psychiatrically hospitalized in March 1999 and was prescribed antidepressant medications during service.  The Veteran was also treated for excessive weight gain during service.  See March 1999 and July 1991 service treatment records.  Additionally, the Veteran's enlistment and annual physical medical histories reported no trouble sleeping. See November 1982 and February 2001 reports of medical history.  

The record contains a March 2023 private medical report. The medical doctor opined that it is more likely than not (greater than a 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to and aggravated by his psychiatric condition of major depressive disorder, which was first diagnosed and treated during service.  Further the medical doctor opined that the Veteran's OSA was secondary to and aggravated by obesity which first manifested during service and was the result of the Veteran's prescribed psychiatric medications.  The medical doctor noted the Veteran's 2013 diagnosis for OSA and provided a detailed opinion regarding the Veteran's prescribed medications and their affects and connections to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his OSA disability. The examiner cited medical literature and studies, the Veteran's lay statements and noted that the "Veteran's weight began ballooning after he was prescribed psychiatric medications" and obesity was later diagnosed in September 1999 during service.  The medical doctor provided a detailed rationale for the opinions regarding the connection between the Veteran's service-connected mental health disabilities, the Veteran's progressive weight gain and his OSA disability. The examiner provided a detailed rationale connecting the Veteran's progressive weight gain during service after being diagnosed with a mental health condition and being prescribed psychiatric medication by opining that the Veteran's obesity was an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected mental health disabilities and medications and his OSA disability. In formulating the opinions, the medical doctor reviewed the Veteran's military service medical records and personnel records, Veteran lay statements, prior examinations and provided extensive analysis from current medical literature and studies to support the medical doctor's opinions and rationale.

In April 2023, the Veteran was afforded a sleep apnea VA examination. During the examination the Veteran stated that he suffers from loud snoring, gasping for air during sleep, morning headaches, dry mouth, persistent daytime hypersomnolence and that his sleep apnea affects his physical activity like walking, yard work and concentration. The Veteran reported the onset of his sleep disorder disability in early 2000, indicated that he did not seek treatment until 2013 and stated that his depression contributed to his sleep apnea.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's treatment records, service records, along with examining the Veteran and diagnosed the Veteran with a sleep apnea disability and noted the use of a CPAP machine.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected depression. The examiner's rationale for the negative nexus opinion was that obesity and gender were stronger risk factors for OSA compared to depression.  The Board finds this opinion conclusionary and lacking a detailed rationale.

In August 2023, the Veteran was afforded a sleep apnea VA examination. During the examination the Veteran stated that he suffers from a long history of snoring and witnessed apneic episodes. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's treatment records, service records, along with interviewing the Veteran and cited the Veteran's 2013 diagnosis for OSA and noted use of a CPAP machine.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected hypertension, unspecified depressive disorder, right leg strain, and limitation flexion disabilities. The examiner provided limited rationales for the negative nexus opinions regarding hypertension, right leg strain and musculoskeletal conditions, and did not provide a detailed rationale regarding the negative nexus opinion that the Veteran's OSA disability was not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder, with the examiner simply stating that OSA does not cause central nervous system issues like depression, but central apnea does.  The examiner did not explain the difference between central apnea and the Veteran's OSA disability.  The Board finds this opinion conclusionary and lacking a detailed rationale.

In December 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for sleep apnea disability. The exam was conducted by the same August 2023 examiner with almost identical reporting and opinions as the August 2023 examination.  The Board also finds this opinion conclusionary and lacking a detailed rationale.

In December 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination for sleep apnea disability. A January 2024 addendum opinion followed. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder, medications, leg pain, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and erectile dysfunction. The examiner's rationale focused on the lack of medical evidence in the record to support the Veteran's depression disorder directly causing the Veteran to become obese or that the Veteran's obesity directly resulted from any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  However, the examiner did not consider the March 2023 private medical opinion or the numerous lay statements in the record by the Veteran. The Board finds these opinions to be of limited probative value.

In a June 2024, DBQ medical opinion for sleep apnea the examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder, right gastrocnemius muscle strain with painful motion, and GERD to include irritable bowel syndrome. The examiner's rationale was limited to a review of the medical literature and the Veteran's electronic claims' file.  The examiner did not examine or interview the Veteran, did not consider the March 2023 private medical opinion, and did not consider the numerous lay statements in the record by the Veteran. Additionally, the examiner opined that the medical literature does not support a causal relationship between obesity and the Veteran's sleep apnea disability without explaining why.  The Board finds these opinions of no probative value.

The Board finds that the March 2023 private medical opinion to be of probative value given the medical doctor's thorough review of the Veteran's claims file, lay statements, STR's and reported medical history. The medical doctor also relied on their own medical expertise, medical research, and training in providing detailed rationale behind the opinions that the Veteran's OSA is related to his service-connected major depressive disorder disability.  The medical doctor provided a detailed rationale based on the Veteran's STR's reflecting that obesity first manifested during service and was a result of the prescribed medication that the Veteran was given to treat his service-connected major depressive disorder and was an intermediate step in causing and aggravating the Veteran's OSA disability. 

For these reasons, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected unspecified depressive disorder is granted. Accordingly, the Board finds that the approximate balance of the evidence is for the claim, and entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Feldmann, Charles E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.