Citation Nr: A25032043
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241031-488855
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran did not have any service-connected disabilities during his lifetime, and the Veteran's died from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), due to or a consequence of smoking; there are no other primary or contributory causes of the Veteran's death.  

2.  The competent medical evidence does not show a diagnosis of bladder cancer prior to the Veteran's death

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have not been met.  38 U.S.C § 1110, 1131, 1310, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from September 1956 to July 1960 and the United States Army from December 1960 to December 1976.  The Veteran died in January 2022 and the appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 supplemental claim rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The November 2023 rating decision denied service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  

Although the appellant initially requested a higher-level review when submitting a July 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the higher-level reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the supplemental claim decision review option for additional development, after which, the AOJ issued the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant disagreed with the denial of service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death and elected the Evidence Submission docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  Here, the appellant submitted evidence with the October 2024 VA Form 10182 pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death

Prior to his death, the Veteran asserted that he had bladder cancer as a result of in-service exposure to herbicide agents.  See January 2022 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.  The appellant contends that the Veteran's bladder cancer was a contributing cause of the Veteran's death.  See December 2022 VA Form 21-4138.  The appellant also asserts that a March 2023 VA medical opinion is incomplete as it did not consider the October 2022 private medical opinion, which VA received and added to the Veteran's claims file in December 2022, prior to the March 2023 VA medical opinion being rendered.  See July 2023 VA Form 20-0996.

The Veteran's Certificate of Death indicates that he passed away in January 2022 with the immediate cause of death listed as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), due to, or as a consequence of smoking (listed on the Certificate of Death as the underlying cause).  There are no other contributory causes listed.  

When a veteran dies as a result of a service-connected disability, the veteran's surviving spouse is eligible for dependency and indemnity compensation.  38 U.S.C § 1310; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.5(a), 3.312.  A veteran's death will be considered as having been due to a service-connected disability where the evidence of record demonstrates that such disability was either the principal, or a contributory cause of, death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(a).

A principal cause of death is one which, singularly or jointly with some other condition, was the immediate or underlying cause of death, or was etiologically related thereto.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(b).  A contributory cause of death is one that contributed substantially or materially to death, combined to cause death, and aided or lent assistance to the production of death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(c).  It is not sufficient to show that a disability casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection between the two.  Id. Generally, in order to establish service connection for the cause of death, there must be (1) evidence of death; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and death.  See Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999).

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Service connection may also be established on a presumptive basis for certain diseases if a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service.  A veteran will be presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent during such service, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service, if the veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975.  38 U.S.C. § 1116(c)-(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii).  For veterans who are entitled to the presumption of in-service herbicide exposure due to such covered active military, naval, or air service, there is a presumption of service connection for certain diseases enumerated under 38 U.S.C § 1116(a)(2), including bladder cancer, provided that the disease manifests to the required degree at any time after service.  

Here, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran did not have any service-connected disabilities at the time of his death.  As such, the following analysis is limited to whether service connection is warranted for a primary or contributory cause of the Veteran's death.  

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's death certificate lists his immediate cause of death as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with smoking as an underlying cause of death.  The death certificate does not list any "other contributing conditions."  

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) shows that he denied having shortness of breath, pain or pressure in his chest, or a chronic cough on his December 1962, March 1965, November 1968, and September 1976 Reports of Medical History.  Additionally, a review of the Veteran's December 1962, March 1965, November 1968, and September 1976 Reports of Medical Examination did not reveal any abnormalities in his lungs or chest.  

A January 2006 post-service private treatment record shows the Veteran's physician suspected that the Veteran was developing COPD at that time.  A July 2007 private treatment note shows the Veteran's sought treatment for a cough and exhibited symptoms of "chest tightness," "greenish-yellow expectorant," and "malaise."  The July 2007 private treatment record also notes the Veteran had an "in depth discussion" with his physician regarding COPD, his lung problems, and bronchitis, all of which the physician concluded were secondary to the Veteran's "long standing history of smoking."  A March 2010 private radiology report shows that "examination suggests there is COPD."  However, the Veteran's first documented diagnosis of COPD was not until January 2011.  See January 2011 private progress note.  

Based on the evidence of record, service connection is not warranted for the Veteran's primary cause of death, COPD, as the competent and probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's COPD began during active service or that it was otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.  Prior to his death, the Veteran was diagnosed with COPD.  His death certificate shows that COPD was the Veteran's primary cause of death, and that smoking was an underlying cause of death; no contributing causes of death were listed on the death certificate.  A review of the Veteran's in-service medical examination and history reports shows that the Veteran denied having shortness of breath, pain or pressure in his chest, or chronic cough throughout his active duty or at separation.  The Veteran's post-service medical records also show that he was not formally diagnosed with COPD until 2011 and did not begin to exhibit signs of COPD until 2006, approximately thirty years following his separation from active duty.  Although the Veteran did not receive a VA medical examination for COPD prior to his death (and no posthumous VA medical opinion has been obtained), there is no evidence establishing that the Veteran's COPD began during active service or indicating that the Veteran's COPD could have been associated with an event, injury, or disease in service.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  In contrast, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran's COPD was related to his long-standing history of smoking.  As such, even the low threshold under McLendon has not been satisfied in the present case, and VA's duty to provide a posthumous opinion has not been triggered.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 3.326; McLendon, supra.  In this regard, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.300, service connection may not be granted for a disability or death that resulted from injury or disease attributable to the use of tobacco products during service, such as COPD that was caused by smoking.  Accordingly, service connection is not warranted for the Veteran's primary cause of death, COPD, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (where there is an "approximate balance" of positive and negative evidence to support a claim, the claimant will receive the "benefit of the doubt").

As noted above, the appellant contends that the Veteran had bladder cancer at the time of his death, which was a contributing cause of the Veteran's death, such that service connection is warranted.  Notably, the Veteran did file a claim of service connection for bladder cancer just four days prior to his death, which was pending at the time of his death, wherein he asserted he developed bladder cancer due to in-service herbicide exposure.  see January 2022 VA Form 21-4138.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii) the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent in service as he served on active duty in the Republic of Vietnam from February 1969 to February 1970.  See December 1976 Department of Defense (DD) Form 214; see also Military Personnel Records: Oversea Service Record.  In addition, under 38 U.S.C § 1116(a)(2), bladder cancer is presumed to be associated with exposure to herbicide agents.  However, as discussed in further detail below, the competent and probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran was diagnosed with bladder cancer at the time of his death nor does the evidence of record establish that bladder cancer was a principal or contributory cause of the Veteran's death. 

A review of the Veteran's private treatment records shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with a prostate nodule as well as irritative and obstructive voiding symptoms in July 1999.  A July 1999 flexible cystoscopy did not reveal any neoplasm or inflammation in the Veteran's bladder.  See July 1999 private urology procedure report.  A July 2000 post-operative report shows the Veteran was diagnosed with benign prostatic hypertrophy and bladder outlet obstructive symptoms following a transurethral microwave thermal therapy procedure.  The Veteran was also diagnosed with benign prostatic hypertrophy at the time of his death.  See January 14, 2022, private nursing facility note.

A November 4, 2021, private progress note by the Veteran's treating physician, Dr. DB, shows the Veteran was experiencing hematuria at that time and was determined to have a higher risk for urologic malignancy due to his history of smoking.  Following a November 2021 computed tomography (CT) urogram, which did not reveal any malignancy and only indicated that the Veteran had unspecified hematuria, Dr. DB recommended that the Veteran undergo a cytoscopy with urology, but the Veteran declined.  

A January 3, 2022, private hospital admission note shows the Veteran presented to a private emergency room with chest discomfort that was "sharp and stabbing in nature" and was "worse with deep breath."  The Veteran's past medical history included diagnoses of benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) without urinary obstruction, COPD, COPD with acute exacerbation, tobacco dependence, pulmonary emphysema, and hypertension, as well as other diagnoses.  Following admission to the private hospital, the Veteran was diagnosed as having a "large right pleural effusion as well as a small apical right pneumothorax;" the Veteran was also "found to have mild acute hypoxic respiratory failure."  See January 14, 2022, private nursing facility note.  Upon being transferred to hospice care, the Veteran was noted to have "end-stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD] with ongoing tobacco dependence along with sigmoid diverticulosis, benign prostatic hypertrophy, hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux disease [GERD] and hyperlipidemia."  Id.  A review of the Veteran's private records from hospice care did not reveal a diagnosis of bladder cancer at the time of his death.

In January 2022, Dr. DB opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran had bladder cancer.  In support of his opinion, Dr. DB noted the Veteran served in the military and was exposed to an herbicide agent (agent orange).  Dr. DB also explained that the Veteran was experiencing "protein calorie malnutrition, weakness, fatigue, [and] persistent hematuria."  Even though the Veteran did not have a full "work-up" for the hematuria and Dr. DB was unable to determine if the Veteran did in fact have bladder malignancy because the Veteran declined to have a cystoscopy, Dr. DB nonetheless concluded the Veteran had a high risk for bladder cancer.  While Dr. DB's opinion contains sufficient rationale for why the Veteran was at a heightened risk for bladder cancer, the opinion does not explain why, the Veteran's hematuria, protein calorie malnutrition, weakness, and fatigue would be attributed to bladder cancer as opposed to the Veteran's end-stage COPD, especially given the lack of evidence of malignancy on the Veteran's November 2021 CT urogram and the Veteran's twenty-year history of benign prostatic hypertrophy.  As the January 2022 private opinion from Dr. DB does not contain any supporting medical evidence, it is not persuasive, and it is not accorded probative value, particularly because medical testing for bladder cancer was negative, and his symptoms were attributed to other causes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 ("A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"). See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) ("An opinion is adequate where it is based upon consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and examinations and also describes the disability, if any, in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one") (internal citations omitted).  

In October 2022, the appellant obtained an additional medical opinion from Dr. MZ regarding whether the Veteran had an undiagnosed bladder malignancy at the end of his life that contributed to his death.  In his report, Dr. MZ notes that his opinion was based on a review 114 pages of the Veteran's CentraCare Health records from August 2020 to January 2022, which were printed on June 13, 2022.  Dr. MZ opined that it was more likely than not that the Veteran had an undiagnosed malignancy at the time of his death due to an elevated plasma d-dimer and that the undiagnosed malignancy was most likely lymphoproliferative or urothelial in origin.  As a rationale, Dr. MZ explained that the Veteran had a "prolonged marked elevation of plasma d-dimer" and that a marked increase in "plasma d-dimer is associated with several conditions including thromboembolism, systemic inflammation, surgery/trauma, liver disease, kidney disease, vascular disorders such as vascular malformations or sickle cell disease, malignancy, and thrombolytic therapy."  According to Dr. MZ, because the Veteran's medical records do not contain a history of "thromboembolism, systemic inflammation, surgery/trauma, liver disease, kidney disease, vascular disorders, or thrombolytic therapy," it is more likely than not that the cause of the Veteran's elevated plasma d-dimer was due to an undiagnosed malignancy.  Additionally, Dr. MZ opined that the Veterans' malignancy was most likely lymphoproliferative or urothelial due to the Veteran's hematuria, tobacco dependence, chronic anemia, herbicide agent exposure and prolonged hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy.  Based on the above rationale, Dr. MZ ultimately concluded that the Veteran, more likely than not, had an undiagnosed malignancy that was present at the time of, and contributed to, his death.  

At the outset, Dr. MZ's medical opinion is not persuasive.  First, Dr. MZ;s review was limited to records generated between August 2020 to January 2022.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 297 ("The Board... must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion") (citing Stefl, supra).  More importantly, Dr. MZ's opinion regarding the likelihood of the presence of an undiagnosed malignancy at the time of the Veteran's death is speculative at best.  See, generally, Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999); see also Polovick v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 48, 54 (2009) (pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, the "Board may not award benefits when the award would be based upon pure speculation").  Accordingly, the October 2022 private opinion from Dr. MZ regarding whether or not the Veteran had undiagnosed bladder cancer at the time of his death is of little probative value.  Even assuming arguendo, that the Veteran had a urothelial malignancy at the time of his death, Dr. MZ's opinion that the malignancy was a contributory cause of the Veterans' death is nonetheless inadequate as it is completely void of any supporting rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 301.  

Dr. MZ ultimately concludes that the Veteran more likely than not had one of two types of malignancies at the time of his death, but also acknowledged that such levels of "plasma d-dimer" can result from many different non-cancerous causes, including smoking.  Additionally, a suspicion of malignancy based on a single marker (plasma d-dimer), without a diagnosis of a malignancy, while also noting several other potential causes of the plasma d-dimer, is not persuasive.  Moreover, the evidence of record prior to the Veteran's death affirmatively shows that the Veteran had urinary dysfunction as a result of benign prostatic hypertrophy.  The record also shows that in a May 2008 private urology note, the Veteran had a benign tumor growth affecting the prostate and protruding into the bladder lumen.  The Veteran subsequently underwent a transurethral resection of the prostate.  This too was causing poor stream, frequency, nocturia, and urgency of urination.  Bladder cancer was neither discovered nor diagnosed.  

Notably, Dr. MZ did not indicate why a potentially undiagnosed malignancy was more likely a result of the plasma d-dimer, than the Veteran's approximately 60 years of smoking.  The record is clear that the Veteran was a tobacco dependent and had no intention of quitting.  A review of CentraCare records shows, for example, an April 2008 private treatment record notes tobacco abuse with a 50 pack year history.  A December 2019 private family medicine record indicates that the Veteran, "Emphatically declines to discuss stop smoking."  Additionally, the Veteran indicated that at his age, he has no intention nor ability to stop smoking, and that he is not interested in having a conversation about it.  A February 2020 private office visit provides an active problem list, which includes "COPD with acute exacerbation (HCC) - "Still smoking - no interest in stopping."  Although the Veteran's years of smoking were well-documented, Dr. MZ provided no explanation as to why there was no consideration regarding the smoking when Dr. MZ indicated that smoking is one reason for Plasma d-dimer.  For these reasons, the Board does not find the private opinions persuasive, and they are assigned little to no probative value.

In a December 2022 VA Form 21-4138, the appellant asserts that the Veteran had ongoing medical issues at the time of death, one of which was an active malignancy.  The appellant further asserts that the Veteran was told by his treating physician (Dr. DB) that he likely had bladder cancer, but the Veteran chose not to have a biopsy in order to maintain his quality of life at the end of his life.  The appellant also asserts that when bladder cancer was not listed on the Veteran's death certificate, and she learned the death certificate could not be amended, she contacted Dr. DB for an additional medical statement, but he was unwilling to review the situation further.  While a November 18, 2021, private progress note by Dr. DB shows the appellant is a nurse, and she may be competent to provide a diagnosis of bladder cancer, her assertion alone that the Veteran had an undiagnosed malignancy without any supporting rationale and absent a biopsy result or any other objective measure, is insufficient to show that the Veteran had an active malignancy at the time of his death.  Moreover, as discussed above, the January 2022 opinion by Dr. DB is of little probative value given it also lacks a complete rationale.  

In March 2023 VA obtained a medical opinion concerning the service connection claim for the cause of the Veteran's death.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's principal cause of death, COPD due to smoking, was less likely than not related to the Veteran's hypertension and bladder cancer because neither condition has a direct etiological relationship in the development of COPD because it is due to smoking.  The VA examiner also opined that hypertension and bladder cancer [did] not render the [V]eteran less capable of resisting the effects of COPD as these conditions affect other organs of the body."  There is no reason to question this rationale.  

VA provided the appellant with an additional medical opinion in September 2023.  Based on the relevant and competent medical evidence in the claims file, which the VA examiner indicated reviewing prior to rendering the medical opinion (as shown in the September 2023 VA medical opinion report), the VA examiner concluded that "there [was] no clinical objective evidence" or "diagnostic evidence" that the Veteran had a urothelial malignancy.  The VA examiner explained the Veteran had a history of two prostate procedures due to benign prostatic hypertrophy with obstruction as well as a CT urogram due to hematuria, which was negative for malignancy.  In addition, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had a past medical history that included a lump on the proximal scrotum that was "a little tender," hypertension, tobacco dependence (for more than 60 years), peripheral edema and centrilobular emphysema.  The VA examiner also opined that a causal association did not exist between "a suspected non-metastatic urothelial malignancy" and hypoxic respiratory failure, which was the direct cause of the Veteran's death.  In support of these opinions, the VA examiner noted that in January 2022, the Veteran presented to the emergency room with chest discomfort due to hypoxic respiratory failure.  The VA examiner further noted that after being admitted to the hospital, the Veteran was placed on a do not resuscitate/comfort care order (DNR/CC) and transferred to hospice care.  The VA examiner also explained that the proximate cause of the Veteran's death was COPD as the Veteran's hypoxic respiratory failure was caused by his COPD.  The September 2023 VA medical opinion adequately evaluates whether the Veteran had an undiagnosed urothelial malignancy at the time of his death, and whether it is at least as likely as not that a causal connection existed between an undiagnosed urothelial malignancy and the Veteran's death.  The September 2023 VA medical opinion is persuasive and is entitled to significant probative weight as it contains sufficient rationale based on the competent medical evidence of record as well as the Veteran's medical history, and because the examiner reiterated that despite a suspicion of a malignancy, the medical evidence simply does not support that the Veteran had bladder cancer at the time of his death.  

As noted above, the appellant asserts that the March 2023 VA medical opinion is incomplete as it does not address the October 2022 private opinion.  The appellant further asserts that the January 2022 and October 2022 private opinions, when read together, satisfy the criteria for entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death.  See July 2023 VA Form 20-0996.  While the March 2023 VA medical opinion does not address the October 2022 private opinion, it is nonetheless probative when read in the context of the entire record.  Notably, the March 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's primary cause of death, COPD, was due to smoking, as opposed to bladder cancer.  This opinion is supported by the evidence of record and stands uncontradicted by any other competent evidence of record.  See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 104 (2008) (holding that examination reports are adequate when they sufficiently inform the Board of a medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion).  Furthermore, as discussed above, the September 2023 VA medical opinion is extremely probative and persuasive because it contains a complete rationale based on sound medical principles, medical research, the VA examiner's own expertise, and an extensive review of the file.  In contrast, the private opinions, even when read together, are less persuasive as both private opinions presume that the Veteran actually had a bladder malignancy which, was affirmatively ruled out by the November 2021 CT urogram that found no evidence of a malignancy.  Likewise, there is no evidence of malignancy between the time of the November 2021 CT and his January 2022 death.  As such, the January 2022 and October 2022 private opinions lack probative value.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Based on the foregoing, service connection is not warranted for the primary or a contributing cause of the Veteran's death.  As discussed in detail above, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that service connection is warranted for the Veteran's primary cause of death, COPD.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.300.  Additionally, the competent and probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran had bladder cancer or a urothelial malignancy at the time of his death, such that service connection is warranted.  Even assuming, arguendo, that the Veteran had bladder cancer at the time of his death, the evidence of record does not establish that bladder cancer, or a urothelial malignancy, was a contributory cause of the Veteran's death as the Veteran's death certificate does not list any additional contributory causes of death and the September 2023 VA medical examiner opined that a causal connection did not exist between the Veteran's respiratory failure and a "suspected" urothelial malignancy.  Given there is no other competent evidence or opinion of record that contradicts or otherwise diminishes the probative value of the September 2023 VA medical opinion, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran had bladder cancer that contributed substantially or materially to, or combined to cause, the Veteran's death.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.312(c).  

Accordingly, service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is not warranted, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jenkins Moody, Morgan B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.