Citation Nr: A25032845
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250326-521830
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected severe obstructive apnea, central sleep apnea and sleep related hypoxemia (hereinafter sleep apnea) is denied.

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities since January 9, 2020, but no earlier, is granted.

3. Entitlement to basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 since January 9, 2020, but no earlier, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's sleep apnea required use of a breathing assistance device but did not result in chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale or require tracheostomy.

2. A claim for TDIU was received in July 1994 and a November 1994 rating decision denied entitlement to a TDIU; the Veteran was notified the decision and of his appellate rights in a letter dated December 5, 1994.  

3. On December 29, 1994, the Veteran submitted a request to reopen his claim for a TDIU and pursuant to a January 1995 rating decision, the AOJ declined to reopen the claim for a TDIU; the Veteran was notified the decision and of his appellate rights in a letter dated January 12, 1995.  

4. The Veteran did not perfect an appeal, and the November 1994 and January 1995 rating decisions became final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.

5. The Veteran submitted his intent to file a claim for compensation on January 9, 2020 followed by a completed application for service connection for sleep apnea in December 2020.

6. Pursuant to the April 2024 decision, the Board determined that the Veteran's claim for a TDIU was part and parcel of his January 9, 2020 initial claim for service connection for sleep apnea pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453 (2009).

7. Prior to January 9, 2020, there were no pending and unadjudicated claims for a TDIU.

8. Prior to January 9, 2020, the Veteran did not meet the schedular criteria for TDIU.

9. Since January 9, 2020, the Veteran was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected disabilities.

10. Given that the Board has awarded a TDIU from January 9, 2020, the Veteran meets the minimum threshold requirement to be considered for basic eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 since January 9, 2020.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected severe obstructive apnea, central sleep apnea and sleep related hypoxemia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847.

2. The criteria for an earlier effective date of January 9, 2020, but no earlier, for the grant of a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 3.400, 4.16.

3. The criteria for an earlier effective date of January 9, 2020, but no earlier, for basic eligibility to DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3500, 3501, 3510, 3511, 3512, 5107, 5110, 5113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 21.3041, 21.4131(d)(1).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1965 to August 1991.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2025 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The decision was issued on March 4, 2025.  

In response to the March 2025 rating decision, in March 2025, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) where he selected the Direct Review docket.  Under that docket, the Board considers the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the March 2025 rating decision.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2), an Appellant may modify a NOD to change the Board docket being requested.  The time limit for such modification is within one year from the date that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) notification of the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date that the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  "The Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up."  Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  In this case, accompanying his March 2025 VA Form 10182, the Veteran included a waiver of any remaining time to select a different Board review option and requested his appeal be reviewed as soon as possible.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran has validly waived the time period to select a different Board review option, and the Board will proceed with adjudication.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating Claim

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected severe obstructive apnea, central sleep apnea and sleep related hypoxemia is denied.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule of Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Other applicable general policy considerations are: interpreting reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating many accurately reflect the elements of disability; resolving any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability in favor of the claimant; where there is a questions as to which of two evaluations apply, assigning a higher of the two where the disability pictures more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating; and, evaluating functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness, and the effects of the disability upon the person's ordinary activity.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10; see also Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). 

A claimant may also experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Thus, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

As an initial matter, the Veteran filed his intent to file a claim on January 9, 2020 and a completed application for compensation on December 14, 2020, requesting service connection for sleep apnea.  Service connection for sleep apnea was ultimately granted pursuant to an April 2023 rating decision and a 50 percent disability rating was assigned, effective from January 9, 2020 (date VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim for compensation).  In April 2024, the Veteran submitted his VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review as to the issue of the initial disability rating and effective date assigned for his service-connected sleep apnea.  A July 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision continued the initial 50 percent disability rating for the Veteran's sleep apnea and denied assigning an earlier effective date prior to January 9, 2020.  On October 14, 2024, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for an increased initial disability rating for his sleep apnea.  Pursuant to the March 2025 rating decision, which is the subject of this appeal, the RO continued the initial 50 percent disability rating for the Veteran's sleep apnea.  In response, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182 in March 2025, disagreeing with the initial 50 percent disability assigned for his sleep apnea.

The Board finds that the Veteran has successfully preserved his January 9, 2020 date of claim by continuous pursuit.  In this regard, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a claim can be continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the decision was issued.  For purposes of determining the effective date of an award, the date of application shall be considered the date of the filing of the initial application for a benefit if the claim is continuously pursued by filing, as relevant here, a higher-level review request and supplemental claim, followed by his VA Form 10182 appeal to the Board within one year in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issues a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 5110(a)(2)(A)-(C).  If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)-(h).  

Here, as noted, in November 2023, AOJ granted service connection for sleep apnea pursuant to an April 2023 rating decision and a 50 percent disability rating was assigned, effective from January 9, 2020 (date VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim for compensation).  Within one year of the issuance of the AOJ's decision, the Veteran filed an appropriate AMA review option request.  Specifically, he filed his VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review, received by VA on April 4, 2024, as to the issues of an earlier effective date and increased initial disability rating for his sleep apnea.  In October 2024, within one year of the July 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision, he filed a supplemental claim as to the initial disability rating assigned for his sleep apnea.  In March 2025, within one year of the March 2025 supplemental rating decision, he sought review by the Board via VA Form 10182 and selected the direct review docket.  Given that the Veteran has continuously appealed the initial 50 percent disability rating assigned for his service-connected sleep apnea, the period on appeal begins from January 9, 2020.

The Veteran's sleep apnea is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847, which contains the rating criteria for sleep apnea syndromes (obstructive, central, or mixed).  

Under Diagnostic Code 6847, a noncompensable disability rating is warranted for sleep apnea that is asymptomatic but with documented sleep disorder breathing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847.  A 30 percent disability rating is warranted for sleep apnea with persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  Id.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for sleep apnea which requires use of breathing assistance device such as CPAP machine.  Id.  A maximum 100 percent disability rating is warranted for sleep apnea with chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or requires tracheostomy.  Id. 

In December 2020, the Veteran submitted a statement describing his current sleep apnea symptomology which included shortness of breath, snoring, awakening at night and gasping for breath.  The Veteran reported his bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) machine helps with these symptoms and he is awakened at night when the BiPAP machine restarts his breathing.

The Veteran underwent VA sleep apnea examination in January 2021 and reported that he started to have sleep issues about 10 years ago and he would stop breathing at night and wake up feeling short of breath.  He stated that his condition progressed and worsened, and he would wake up gasping for air.  He stated he current uses his BiPAP machine at night which seems to help him when he stops breathing; however, he reported that he has labored breathing while walking and constantly feels tired during the day.  The examiner reported the Veteran's sleep apnea did not require continuous medication for control but did require the use of a breathing assistance device.  The examiner reported the Veteran with persistent daytime hypersomnolence attributable to sleep apnea but there was no evidence of carbon dioxide retention, chronic respiratory failure, cor pulmonale and he did not require tracheostomy. 

The Veteran submitted a sleep apnea disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) in February 2023 completed by his private physician.  The provider reported the Veteran's sleep apnea did not require continuous medication for control but did require the use of a breathing assistance device.  The private provider reported the Veteran with persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  However, the provider reported the Veteran did not have carbon dioxide retention, chronic respiratory failure, cor pulmonale and did not require tracheostomy.  The provider reported that the Veteran has chronic pain, fragmented sleep and obesity due to back pain all of which contribute to his sleep apnea.  The provider reported that although the Veteran is compliant with treatment most of the time, he feels tired during the day and frequently nods off.  She stated that due to his lack of quality of rest, the Veteran feels excessively fatigued daily and has difficulty staying focused.

The Veteran underwent VA sleep apnea examination in April 2023 and reported compliant use with his BiPAP machine.  He also reported daytime hypersomnolence and fatigue.  He reported taking two to three naps per day and getting approximately four hours of sleep on average per night.  He attributed his decreased sleep due to poor mask seal as well as back pain.  The examiner reported the Veteran's sleep apnea did not require continuous medication for control but did require the use of a breathing assistance device.  The examiner reported the Veteran with persistent daytime hypersomnolence attributable to sleep apnea but there was no evidence of carbon dioxide retention, chronic respiratory failure, cor pulmonale and he did not require tracheostomy. 

Upon review, the Board finds an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal for the Veteran's sleep apnea.  In this regard, at no time has the Veteran's sleep apnea resulted in chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or required tracheostomy.  At worst, the Veteran's sleep apnea has resulted in persistent daytime hypersomnolence (the criteria for a 30 percent disability rating) and required use of a breathing assistance device (the criteria for a 50 percent disability rating).  Accordingly, as the evidence fails to show that the Veterans sleep apnea has resulted in chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or required tracheostomy, the Veteran's service-connected sleep apnea does not meet the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating.  

Accordingly, a disability rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted at any time during the appellate period for the Veteran's service-connected sleep apnea.

Earlier Effective Date Claims

2. Entitlement to an earlier effective date, prior to February 17, 2023, for the grant of a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is granted.

The Veteran has been awarded a TDIU from February 17, 2023.  As mentioned, pursuant to the April 2024 decision, the Board determined that the Veteran's claim for TDIU was part and parcel of his claim for service connection for sleep apnea pursuant to Rice, 22 Vet. App. at 453, a favorable finding which the Board will not disturb.  The Veteran requests an earlier effective date of January 9, 2020, the date his grant of service connection for sleep apnea was made effective since his claim for TDIU is part and parcel of his claim for service connection for sleep apnea.

Generally, the effective date of an award of disability compensation based on an original claim shall be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  However, if the claim is received within one year after separation from service, the effective date of an award of disability compensation shall be the day following separation from active service.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).  With respect to claims to reopen, the effective date for an award of benefits will be the date of the new claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(r).

Under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a), the effective date of an increase in a veteran's disability compensation shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2) provides an exception to this general rule: "The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if application is received within one year from such date."  Thus, "the plain language of [section] 5110(b)(2) . . . only permits an earlier effective date for increased disability compensation if that disability increased during the one-year period before the filing of the claim."  

Thus, three possible dates may be assigned depending on the facts of an increased rating earlier effective date case:

(1)	If an increase in disability occurs after the claim is 

filed, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred

(date entitlement arose) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1));

(2)	If an increase in disability precedes the claim by a 

year or less, the date that the increase is shown to have 

occurred (factually ascertainable) (38 C.F.R. 

§ 3.400(o)(2)); or

(3)	If an increase in disability precedes the claim by more 

than a year, the date that the claim is received (date of 

claim) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2)).

In general, VA rating decisions that are not timely appealed are final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.

In this case, prior to the January 9, 2020 claim for service connection for sleep apnea, there are no pending and unadjudicated claims for TDIU.  In this regard, the Veteran initially filed a claim for TDIU in July 1994.  Pursuant to a November 1994 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim for a TDIU.  The Veteran was notified the decision and of his appellate rights in a letter dated December 5, 1994.  In December 1994, the Veteran submitted a request to reopen his claim for a TDIU.  Pursuant to a January 1995 rating decision, the AOJ declined to reopen the claim for a TDIU.  The Veteran was notified the decision and of his appellate rights in a letter dated January 12, 1995.  However, the Veteran did not perfect an appeal, and the November 1994 and January 1995 rating decisions became final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.

The most recent claim of record prior to the January 9, 2020 claim for service connection for sleep apnea is a May 29, 2017 intent to file a claim for compensation with a completed fully developed claim submitted by the Veteran in July 2017, requesting an increased disability rating for the service-connected hiatal hernia with esophageal dysmotility and service connection for allergic rhinitis, anemia primary, erectile dysfunction and sinusitis.  A September 2017 rating decision adjudicated the issues.  The Veteran was notified the decision and of his appellate rights in a letter dated September 18, 2017.  However, the Veteran did not perfect an appeal, and the September 2017 rating decision became final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.

On January 9, 2020, the Veteran submitted his claim for service connection for sleep apnea and as mentioned above, he continuously pursued his claim for service connection for sleep apnea and once service connection was granted for sleep apnea, he continuously appealed the disability rating assigned for sleep apnea.  As his TDIU is part and parcel of his claim for service connection for sleep apnea, the Board finds that he has also continuously pursued his claim for a TDIU as well.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(h).  Thus, the earliest effective date possible for an award of TDIU would be January 9, 2020, the date he submitted his claim for service connection for sleep apnea.  However, in order to warrant an earlier effective date for TDIU, the criteria for a TDIU must also be met as of this date.

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one such disability, such disability shall be ratable as 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

As an initial matter, the Board notes the schedular requirements for a TDIU were met on January 9, 2020.  In this regard, the Veteran was service-connected for sleep apnea, rated as 50 percent disabling from January 9, 2020; chronic intermittent low back pain, rated as 40 percent disabling from September 1, 1991; hemorrhoids, rated as noncompensable from September 1, 1991; bilateral hammertoes, rated as 10 percent disabling from September 1, 1991; septal deviation with allergic rhinitis, rated as 10 percent disabling from September 1, 1991; and hiatal hernia with esophageal dysmotility, rated as 10 percent disabling from September 1, 1991. He has combined ratings of 60 percent from September 1, 1991 and 80 percent from January 9, 2020.  Accordingly, the claim turns on whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded gainful employment at any time prior to February 17, 2023.  

In order to establish entitlement to a TDIU, there must be impairment so severe that it is impossible for the average person to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  The question in a TDIU claim is whether a veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether the veteran can   find employment.  See Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).  In reaching such a determination, the central inquiry is "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  In arriving at a conclusion, consideration may be given to a veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion but not to his age or to the impairment from nonservice-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. 361.

The Court has held that the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 has two components.  First, there is an economic component which essentially contemplates an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Second, there is a non-economic component dealing with the individual veteran's ability to "follow and secure" employment.  For the second component, attention must be given to: (a) the veteran's history, education, skill and training, (b) the veteran's physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, and auditory and visual limitations, and (c) whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as memory, concentration, and ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).

Pursuant to his June 2023 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran has reported that he last worked in January 2012 and became too disabled to work at a level consistent with his prior experience at the same time.  He reported that from January 2011 to January 2012, he worked as a security officer and from May 2005 to June 2010, he worked as a chemical specialist.  He stated that in the last 12 months, he has not earned any income and was not presently employed.  He stated that he left his last job due to his disability but did not receive disability retirement benefits.  He also stated that he has not attempted to obtain employment since he became too disabled to work.  The Veteran graduated college but did not have any other education or training since before or after becoming too disabled to work.

Pursuant to an October 2023 VA Form 21-4192 Request for Employment Information in Connection with Claim for Disability Benefits, the Veteran's previous employer who employed him as a security officer, stated that the Veteran began employment in June 2013 and his employment ended on March 17, 2014.  The employer reported that the reason the Veteran was no longer employed there was due to his resignation and that he last worked on November 21, 2013.  The employer stated that the Veteran was not entitled to receive sick, retirement or other benefits as a result of his employment with the company.

Pursuant to the January 2021 VA sleep apnea examination, the examiner found the Veteran's condition impacted his ability to work.  In this regard, the examiner stated that the Veteran is retired but he constantly feels tired.  Pursuant to the February 2023 sleep apnea DBQ completed by a private physician, the provider stated that his sleep apnea impacted his ability to work.  In this regard, the provider stated that the Veteran told her that his back pain frequently woke him up in the middle of the night and although he is compliant with treatment most of the time, he feels tired during the day and frequently nods off.  She stated that due to his lack of quality of rest, he feels excessively fatigued and has difficulty staying focused/motivated.  Pursuant to an April 2023 VA sleep apnea examination, the examiner reported that the Veteran's sleep apnea impacted his ability to work.  In this regard, the examiner stated that the Veteran was currently retired and therefore, his condition has not resulted in missed work.  However, the examiner stated that the condition would likely affect the Veteran's ability to maintain gainful employment due to his associated daytime hypersomnolence. 

Pursuant to a September 2023 VA lumbar spine examination, the examiner found the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran stated that back pain with extended sitting, prolonged standing and walking limited his activities.  Pursuant to a September 2023 VA foot conditions examination, the examiner found that the Veteran's bilateral hammertoes impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran reported that foot pain with weight-bearing, prolonged standing and extended walking limited his activities.  Pursuant to a September 2023 VA sinusitis/rhinitis examination, the examiner found the Veteran's service-connected septal deviation with allergic rhinitis impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran reported that frequent running nose, eye irritation, sinus congestion and frequent sneezing limit his activities.  The examiner concluded that the functional impairment on the Veteran's ability to perform physical and sedentary activities of employment was the Veteran may seek carrier that will grant sick time off during sinus flares.

Pursuant to a September 2023 VA esophageal conditions examination, the examiner found that the Veteran's hiatal hernia impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran reported that his hiatal hernia and reflux with regurgitation and frequent awakening at night makes him feel tired during the day which limits his activities.  Pursuant to a September 2023 VA anus and rectum examination, the examiner found the Veteran's hemorrhoids impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran reported that rectal pain, itching, and rectal bleeding during flares limit his activities.

Pursuant to an October 2023 VA addendum opinion regarding TDIU and the functional impacts due to his service-connected sleep apnea, the examiner, citing to medical literature, stated that poor quality of nocturnal sleep is associated with worse quality of life and the presence of symptoms of excessive daytime somnolence; however, not significantly influencing functional mobility.  The examiner stated that previous VA examinations/DBQs and opinions reveal the Veteran has had issues with chronic back pain and ill-fitting sleep apnea appliance, which contribute to poor sleep quality and limited sleep hours, resulting in daytime somnolence and frequent napping.  The examiner noted the referenced medical literature did not find functional limitation from poor quality sleep, but somnolence; the examiner referenced another medical study which was conducted on adults with insomnia and found that both physical exercise and mind-body exercise intervention led to improvements in subjective sleep quality.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's ability to function/focus in an occupational environment is limited by his somnolence and fatigue; however, physical functional abilities to perform frequently in a sedentary work environment exist.  

In October 2024, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion, dated February 2013, completed by Dr. M.B., who stated she reviewed the entire claims file.  Dr. M.B. stated that when she consulted with the Veteran, he told her that during his last employment as a security officer, he was required to do prolonged sitting, walking, and standing.  He also had to climb, stoop, and kneel.  He stated that he was struggling to stay awake while at work and further noted having difficulty with prolonged sitting, walking, and standing.  He stated he could not stand all day to due to his back pain and experienced headaches related to his sinus problems.

Further, Dr. M.B. stated that prior to his job as a security officer, he was employed as a chemical specialist.  The Veteran stated that this job required him to walk, stand, lift, sit, write, type, and drive.  He stated that he was on multiple medications to treat his back pain that caused him to be drowsy.  The Veteran reported that since he stopped working, his back pain, fatigue from chronic sleep impairment, rhinitis symptoms, and hiatal hernia symptoms have continued to plague his life and limit his ability to do things in an occupational setting, as well as personally.  He stated that it is hard to do any prolonged standing or walking.  He stated that he is unable to sit for short periods of time due to his back pain, and he is not able to stay in one position for very long before he must reposition himself, recline, or get up and move around.  He stated he will frequently nod off due to his fatigue, as his back pain impedes his ability to sleep.  Additionally, he stated he takes several medications to treat his service-connected disabilities which cause him to have difficulty concentrating and staying awake and make him feel dizzy.

Dr. M.B. stated that based on her understanding of the Veteran's limitations due to his service-connected back pain, bilateral hammertoes, allergic rhinitis and septal deviation, hiatal hernia with esophageal dysmotility, and hemorrhoids, as well as the side effects of the medications he uses to treat these conditions, she found that he would be unable to stand for 20 minutes without needing to lean on something because his back would hurt too much.  She stated he would only be able to walk for 15 minutes, slowly and unassisted, due to his back pain.  She stated that he could sit for a total of 30 minutes at a time, depending on the chair, but he would be uncomfortable for a lot of that time due to back pain and stiffness.  Additionally, she stated that because his back pain interferes with his sleep cycles, he would experience excessive daytime fatigue, which would cause him to frequently fall asleep when sitting still for prolonged periods.  She stated that the Veteran would be unable to lift or carry more than 15 pounds due to the strain that the excessive weight would put on his back.

Dr. M.B. stated that due to these issues, the Veteran would be required to miss work or leave early three or more days per months.  She stated he would need more than one additional break per day aside from normally scheduled morning, lunch, and afternoon breaks so he could lie down, nap, regurgitate due to hiatal hernia, recline, stretch, and alleviate back and substernal pain.  She stated that for more than three days per month, he would not be able to stay focused for at least seven hours of an eight-hour workday due to fatigue, distractibility from chronic back pain, and his need to step away at a moment's notice due to sinus pressure, as well as choking, substernal pain, and regurgitation associated with hiatal hernia and dizziness associated with medication side effects.  Dr. M.B. stated that all of these issues would impair his productivity, pace, attendance, and workflow.  

Further, Dr. M.B. stated that all of these limitations are inconsistent with an ability to sustain even sedentary labor, which at the very least, required a person to attend work reliably and concentrate and sit for prolonged periods to work productively.  She stated that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and the medications he takes to treat these symptoms would prevent him from being able to meet any of those demands, and this would not be tolerated by an employer.  Dr. M.B. found that after considering the physical and mental effects of his service-connected back pain, bilateral hammertoes, allergic rhinitis with septal deviation, hiatal hernia with esophageal dysmotility, and hemorrhoids, as well as the side effects of the medications the Veteran uses to treat these conditions and his past relevant work and educational background, the Veteran has been unable to maintain substantially gainful employment since at least June 2010, the date he last worked in a gainful capacity, due to a combination of his service-connected disabilities.  

Dr. M.B. stated that she further finds that his sleep apnea would once exacerbate his inability to work by further impairing his ability to attend work reliably and work productively.  She stated that the record shows that the Veteran's sleep apnea causes him to feel tired constantly and experiences morning headaches.  She stated that these symptoms would impair his ability to attend work regularly and maintain a steady pace at work.  She stated that these limitations are inconsistent with an ability to sustain employment even at the sedentary level.

Based on the foregoing, and after resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that since January 9, 2020, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are sufficient to show that he was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  Although Dr. M.B. has concluded that TDIU is met from June 2010, the Board notes that as discussed above, the earliest date possible to award an earlier effective date is not until January 9, 2020.

Accordingly, entitlement to a TDIU since January 9, 2020, but no earlier, is granted.

3. Entitlement to an earlier effective date, prior to February 17, 2023, for the grant of basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is granted.

In general, effective dates relating to awards under Chapters 30, 31, 32, and 35 of Title 38 U.S.C. or Chapter 106 shall, to the extent feasible, correspond to effective dates relating to awards of disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 5113.  Here, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35, because the Veteran was found to have a permanent total service-connected disability when he was granted entitlement to a TDIU effective February 17, 2023, DEA benefits were granted for that same date.  Given that the Board has awarded a TDIU from January 9, 2020 herein, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to DEA benefits from January 9, 2020, but no earlier, as well.

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Medina, Sara

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.