Citation Nr: A25032822
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240321-426005
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a back condition, also claimed as a spine disorder, is denied.

Service connection for a right thumb disorder is denied.

Service connection for pes planus, claimed as foot pain, is denied.

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD is denied

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder, to include as due to toxin exposures, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for plantar warts, as due to toxin exposures, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The most probative and persuasive evidence does not reflect a current diagnosis of a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, PTSD, or other acquired psychiatric disorder during or approximate to the appeal period.

1. .

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish service connection for a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, PTSD, or other acquired psychiatric disorder, are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.309, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States (U.S.) Air Force from August 1991 to May 1995, the U.S. Coast Guard from November 10 to 20, 1998, and active duty for training with the Mississippi Army National Guard from March 2000 to July 2000.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from August 2023 and March 2024 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran appealed these decisions and elected the direct review docket. By selecting the direct review docket, the Board must base its decision on the evidence that was before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the August 2023 and March 2024 decision that corresponds to the issue on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder and plantar warts, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board recognizes that the Veteran submitted an additional VA form 10182, Notice of disagreement in June 2024. That Notice of disagreement identified service connection for PTSD and an acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD as the issues on appeal from the same March 2024 decision identified in the current appeal. The Veteran also requested a direct review. As such, the Board considers the June 2024 Notice of Disagreement a duplicate request. 

Service connection

The Veteran seeks service connection for a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, PTSD and an acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD. 

Generally, to establish service connection, a claimant must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

VA has established certain rules and presumptions for chronic diseases. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307, 3.309(a). The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b)only apply to diseases recognized by VA as "chronic." Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013). With chronic diseases shown as such in service so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless attributable to intercurrent causes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). In addition, for veterans who have served 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, chronic diseases are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a). 

Additionally, if a veteran was exposed to burn pits during service, certain diseases are presumed to be related to that exposure. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.317, 3.320, Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (Pact Act), Pub. L. No 117-168, § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759. The availability of presumptive service connection for a disability based on exposure to burn pits does not preclude a veteran from establishing service connection with proof of direct causation.

To have basic eligibility for veteran benefits based on a period of duty as a member of a state National Guard, a National Guardsman must have been ordered into Federal service by the President of the United States, see 10 U.S.C.S. § 12401, or must have performed "full-time duty" under the provisions of 32 U.S.C.S. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505. 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(21), (22)(C). To be eligible for VA disability compensation, members must have a disability that resulted from an injury or disease that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during either active duty or active duty for training. To be eligible for disability compensation for a disability that occurred during inactive duty training, the disability must have resulted from an injury, heart attack, or stroke. As shown above, the Veteran had active duty for training with the Army National Guard from March to July 2000.

Back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, PTSD, or other acquired psychiatric disorder

Pivotal to any service connection claim is the presence of a current disability. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim. Particularly, mental health diagnoses require medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5). 38 C.F.R. § 4.125.

The record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, or acquired psychiatric disorder (to include PTSD). 

A June 2023 records request determined that there were no VA treatment records; thereby, indicating that the Veteran does not receive treatment through VA. On the Veteran's September 2023 and February 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ claim forms, the Veteran was notified that he should submit any records relevant to the claim or in the alternative, he could submit authorization to allow VA to obtain any identified records on his behalf. However, the Veteran did not identify any outstanding private treatment records related to these claims or authorized VA to obtain records on his behalf. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).

The Veteran is competent to report observations and symptoms, such as pain, but does not have the medical expertise to diagnose complex medical conditions. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377-78 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Thus, he is not competent to provide diagnoses. The Board recognizes that pain alone can be a disability if that pain is shown to cause functional impairment. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). To the extent the Veteran has reported pain, the record does not demonstrate a functional impairment of earnings capacity. The Veteran did not provide any statements describing functional impairment of earning capacity, evidence of ongoing treatment, or statements from friends, family, or coworkers describing past or present symptoms of the above listed conditions that demonstrate a current diagnoses or functional impairment of earning capacity. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the etiology of his claimed disabilities. Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in initial service connection claims, VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). As shown, there is no competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; thus, examinations are not warranted.

The persuasive evidence is against finding a current diagnosis of a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, or acquired psychiatric disorder (to include PTSD). The Veteran has not identified any functional loss of his earning capacity due to these reported disorders and the record does not demonstrate any reports of these conditions. 

As shown, the record does not demonstrate, and the Veteran has not alleged functional loss or an impairment of his earning capacity related to these claimed disorders. Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, or acquired psychiatric disorder (to include PTSD) at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

In sum, there is no competent or credible evidence of record indicating that the Veteran had diagnoses for: a back disorder, right thumb disorder, pes planus, or acquired psychiatric disorder (to include PTSD) during or approximate to the pendency of the appeal. In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim of service connection. Brammer, at 225 (1992). Accordingly, the claims are denied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board regrets the delay, but for the reasons set forth below, the issues of entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder or plantar warts is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the decision on appeal. 

Headaches

The Veteran seeks service connection for a headache disorder. 

Service treatment records from the Veteran's Air Force service show that following an optometry examination, the Veteran was referred for a headache work up in March 1994. Upon separation, the Veteran waived his right to a physical examination. See May 1995 separation memorandum. However, there is an October 1996 prior service examination of record for entry into the National Guard which indicates that the Veteran's head was clinically normal. In a corresponding report of medical history, the Veteran denied a history of frequent or severe headaches. November 1998 service treatment records from his Coast Guard service indicate the Veteran was medically disqualified due to migraine headaches.

In July 2023, a VA examiner found the Veteran's headache disorder less likely than not related to his service. The examiner reasoned that there was no confirmed diagnosis or treatment (to include medications) demonstrating chronicity during or after service; thus, the most likely cause for the Veteran's headaches was a post service event or illness. It is unclear whether the examiner considered the Veteran's March 1994 report of headaches when making their findings. Thus, the Board finds that an additional opinion is needed to determine if the Veteran's in-service report of headaches is related to his current headache disorder. 

Additionally, the record demonstrates the Veteran had qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e)(2). Pursuant to the PACT Act, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to satisfy this regulatory duty to obtain an opinion to determine if the Veteran's current headache disorder is related to his toxin exposure. 38 U.S.C. § 1119, 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Plantar wart

The Veteran seeks service connection for a right heel plantar wart. On his February 2024 claim form, he requested service connection for a heel disorder with no specific condition listed. He also submitted January 2003 treatment records related to treatment for a growth on his heel. In the March 2024 decision on appeal, service connection for right heel plantar warts was denied, and in the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran identified right heel plantar wart as the disability on appeal. 

The Board recognizes that a plantar wart is physically observable; thus, the Veteran is competent to diagnose them.

Active duty service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a foot disability. Additionally, there is no evidence of an ongoing foot disorder on the Veteran's March 1998 enlistment examination report. In a corresponding report of medical history, the Veteran denied any foot trouble.

The first indication of a heel disorder is in January 2003, in his National Guard records. Plantar warts are caused by a virus. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 493 (32d ed. 2012) (defining plantar wart as a painful wart on the sole, "usually" transmitted by human papillomavirus (HPV)). 

Any service at that time would be considered inactive duty for training. It is unclear from the record whether HPV is a disease. Additionally, as discussed above, the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. Pursuant to the PACT Act, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to satisfy this regulatory duty to obtain an opinion to determine if the Veteran's right heel plantar wart is related to his toxin exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

In remanding this case, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide opinions as to:

(i)	whether the Veteran's current headache disorder had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service. The examiner is asked to consider: 

(a)	the March 1994 headache treatment, and

(b)	the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

(ii)	whether the Veteran's current right heel plantar wart disorder had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service. The examiner is asked to consider:

(a)	the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

(b)	A discussion of whether plantar warts are caused by diseases or injuries would be of considerable assistance to VA.

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion. 

If the reviewing health care provider finds that physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to VA.

2. Readjudicate the claims

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Palatt, E V.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.