Citation Nr: A25032579
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231127-397819
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

During the entire appeal period, a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches, is denied.

Between September 1, 2020, and April 27, 2021, a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right upper extremity (RUE) neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

Between April 27, 2021, and September 20, 2023, a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

From September 20, 2023, to November 3, 2023, a rating in excess of 10 percent for RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is denied.

During the appeal period, a rating in excess of 20 percent for status-post, arthroscopy, with right shoulder labral repair is denied.

During the appeal period, a compensable rating for a right shoulder scar, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral tear, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the entire appeal period, the Veteran's migraine headaches resulted in characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over several months, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

2. The Veteran is ambidextrous and/or left hand dominant.

3.  Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, between September 1, 2020, and April 27, 2021, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is manifested by RUE neuropathy resulting in no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve.

4. Between April 27, 2021, and July 9, 2022, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is manifested by RUE neuropathy resulting in no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the median nerve.

5.  Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, between July 9, 2022, and November 3, 2023, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is manifested by RUE neuropathy resulting in no more than mild incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve.

6. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's status-post, arthroscopy, with right shoulder labral repair is manifested by complaints of pain and loss of range of motion of the arm, but not to 25 degrees from his side, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups, without ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, malunion of the humerus, recurrent dislocation of the humerus at the scapulohumeral joint, fibrous union of the humerus, nonunion of the humerus, flail shoulder, dislocation of the clavicle or scapula, or malunion or nonunion of the clavicle or scapula.

7. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's right shoulder scar, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral tear is not unstable, painful, associated with underlying soft tissue damage, of a size warranting a compensable rating, and/or does not result in any disabling effects.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. During the appeal period, the criteria for a rating in excess of 30 for migraine headaches have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

2. Between September 1, 2020, and September 20, 2023, the criteria for a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for RUE neuropathy rated with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8515, 8516.

3. Between September 20, 2023, to November 3, 2023, the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for RUE neuropathy rated with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8516.

4. The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent for status post, arthroscopy, with labral repair, right shoulder, have not been met. 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5201.

5. During the entire appeal period, the criteria for evaluation of a right shoulder scar, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral tear have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.118, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7802.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1989 to August 1996. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In November 2023, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 3, 2023, AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. With respect to the claims denied herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for GERD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

As a matter of background, the Board notes that, in his November 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also disagreed with the proposed reduction for his right shoulder evaluation in the November 2023 rating decision; however, proposed reductions are not appealable, and such claim will not be addressed herein.

Increased Ratings 

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.  

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination and endurance. Functional loss may be due to the absence or deformity of structures or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior in undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. In Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011), the Court held that, although pain may cause a functional loss, "pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by VA regulations applicable to the musculoskeletal system." Rather, pain may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance." Id., quoting 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

With respect to joints, in particular, the factors of disability reside in reductions of normal excursion of movements in different planes. Inquiry will be directed to more or less than normal movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity or atrophy of disuse. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint, even in the absence of arthritis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011). 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is applicable to the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities involving actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints or periarticular regions, regardless of whether the diagnostic code under which the disability is evaluated is predicated on range of motion measurements. Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).

The appeal period before the Board begins on April 27, 2020, the date VA received the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for his migraine headaches, right hand cubital tunnel syndrome, right shoulder disability and right shoulder scar disability, plus the one-year look-back period. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Moreover, as addressed in the Introduction herein, based on the Veteran's election on his VA Form 10182, the appeal period ends on November 3, 2023.

1. During the appeal period, entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches.

Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's migraine headaches disability is rated as 30 percent disabling pursuant to DC 8100. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. Under such DC, a 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The rating criteria do not define "prostrating;" nor has the Court. Cf. Fenderson, supra (in which the Court quotes DC 8100 verbatim but does not specifically address the matter of what is a prostrating attack). By way of reference, the Board notes that, according to Webster's New World Dictionary of American English, Third College Edition (1986), p.1080, "prostration" is defined as "utter physical exhaustion or helplessness." A very similar definition is found in Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1367 (28th Ed. 1994), in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Also, the term "productive of severe economic adaptability" has not been clearly defined by regulations.

The Court has, however, explained that "productive of" for purposes of DC 8100 can either mean producing, or capable of producing. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445 (2004). Thus, migraine headaches need not actually produce severe economic inadaptability to warrant a 50 percent rating under DC 8100. Id. at 445-46. Similarly, "economic inadaptability" does not equate to unemployability, as such would undermine the purpose of regulations pertaining to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability. Id. at 446; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. The Board notes, however, that the migraine headaches must be, at a minimum, capable of producing severe economic inadaptability in order to meet the 50 percent criteria.

During a February 2020 visit, the Veteran described his headaches since the military, stating he feels them in his left or right temple, that they radiate across his forehead, are worse with light, and last the whole day. According to the Veteran, he had nausea but no vomiting, and blurry vision but no double vision.

In August 2020, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination for his migraine headaches. Per an August 2020 Headache Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), the Veteran described that when his headaches onset, he would smell something strong such as cheese or cleaning products and would get a bad headache. Reportedly, over the years, he began to recognize triggers that cause the headaches such as not getting enough sleep or certain smells. In this regard, he stated he would smell something and get a bad headache; he identified not getting enough sleep and certain smells as triggers. The Veteran described bilateral headaches, sometimes with photophobia, incapacitation, and unilateral nausea and vomiting. According to the Veteran, since onset, he has had no improvement with his headaches. Rather, the Veteran stated the episodes are more frequent and severe. Further, the Veteran reported that his headache pain is bilateral, accompanied by photophobia and nausea. Per the Veteran, his headaches are not improved with Excedrin or any other medications. Moreover, the Veteran reported that last year he began receiving Botox injections to his temporal area for his migraines. The Veteran indicated that he had some improvement with intensity and frequency of headache episodes since starting his injections.

Regarding symptoms, the August 2020 VA examiner documented pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain localized to one side of the head, pain on both sides of the head, and pain worsening with physical activity. Moreover, regarding non-headache symptoms, the August 2020 VA examiner noted nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light sensitivity to sound, and symptoms associated with certain smells. Also, as reflected in the August 2020 VA examination, the Veteran's duration of typical head pain was 1 to 2 days, and the location of typical head pain was on both sides of his head. In addition, the examiner indicated the Veteran does have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain once every month. However, the examiner stated that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. According to the VA examiner, the Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms and/or scars related to his migraine headaches. In regard to functional impact, the examiner noted the Veteran's migraine headaches do impact his ability to work. In particular, the examiner documented the Veteran works in Information Technology, and that he lost 0 to 1 week of work in the last 12 months. The examiner noted the Veteran is unable to travel, work in front of a computer, that he is unable to drive, was not able to make it to appointments on time and requires a dark cool place to lay down.   

According to a December 2020 post-service treatment record, the Veteran was experiencing worsening migraine headache pain for past 2 months. He stated that he was having migraine headaches once to twice per week and was having worsening headache pain. In this regard, he described suffering from bitemporal headaches, worse with light, lasting 3 to 4 hours, with nausea no vomiting, along with blurry vision without double vision.

In a February 2021 post-service treatment record, the Veteran reported that his migraine headaches occur once to twice per week, and he stated he had worsening pain. As reflected in the treatment record, the Veteran was having 15 headaches per month. The Veteran described he was having typical migraine without auras. The Veteran indicated that his last Botox treatment was 3 to 5 months ago, and he stopped due to cost.

In a subsequent April 2021 Headaches (Including Migraine Headaches) DBQ, upon in-person examination and records review, a VA examiner documented the Veteran's symptoms of constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, and dizziness with headaches. According to the examiner, the Veteran does have prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain once every month. Also, per the examiner, the Veteran does not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. According to the examiner, the Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms and/or scars related to his migraine headaches. Regarding functional impact, the examiner noted the Veteran's headache condition does impact his ability to work, noting the Veteran's reported difficulty with focusing and concentrating affecting driving and productivity.   

As reflected in an October 2021 Headache DBQ, upon records review, the examiner noted that the Veteran experienced constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light and dizziness. Per the examiner, the duration of typical head pain was less than one day, and typically located on both sides of his head. Per the October 2021 VA examiner, the Veteran does have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain once every month. However, per the examiner, the Veteran does not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The examiner also noted the Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms and/or scars related to his migraine headaches. Although noting the Veteran was military. retired, the examiner documented that he lost 0 to 1week of work in the past 12 months due to constant bitemporal, throbbing headaches associated with nausea and vomiting, photophobia and dizziness, as well as decreased concentration and productivity. 

Subsequently, in July 2022, the Veteran was afforded another in-person VA examination for his headaches. At that time, the Veteran reported that he continued to have headache episodes, but the condition was stable with Botox treatment, which he was getting every 2 to 3 months. Per the July 2022 VA examiner, the Veteran's symptoms consisted of constant head pain, pain on both sides of the head, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. According to the July 2022 examiner, the Veteran does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain and/or prostrating and prolonged attached of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The examiner further stated the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms and/or scars related to his migraine headaches. In regard to functional impact, the examiner documented that the Veteran was a computer engineer, lost 0 to 1 week of work in the past 12 months, and noted that when the Veteran has migraine headaches, he has to rest in a dark room away from noise, which causes disturbance to his daily activities.  

In a September 2023 Headaches DBQ, a VA examiner documented that the Veteran has symptoms of constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain localized to one side of the head, pain on both sides of the head, pain worsening with physical activity, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, and changes in vision. As reflected in the examination, the duration of typical head pain was less than one day, and the location of the typical head pain was on both sides of the Veteran's head. Moreover, per the examiner, the Veteran does have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain greater than once per month, and he does not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain. In addition, the examiner noted that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms and/or scars related to his migraine headaches. The examiner did note that the Veteran's headache condition impacts the Veteran's ability to work, documenting the Veteran's report that when his head pain is severe, he has difficulty with focus and concentration. 

Thus, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that, during the appeal period, the Veteran's migraine headaches resulted in characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, to include without consideration of the ameliorative effects of medication used to treat such disability. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). In this regard, August 2020, April 2021, October 2021, and July 2022 VA examiners determined that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. Moreover, the September 2021 VA examiner stated that the Veteran does not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain.

Consequently, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's migraine headaches is not warranted. In this regard, the Board finds that the evidence does not show that the Veteran's migraine headaches resulted in frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. Consequently, an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for such disability is not warranted. 

2. Between September 1, 2020, and September 20, 2023, entitlement to a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair.

3. Between September 20, 2023, and November 3, 2023, entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair.

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with right hand cubital tunnel syndrome is rated as 10 percent disabling pursuant to DC 8516.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

DC 8516 provides the rating criteria for paralysis of the paralysis of the ulnar nerve. In this regard, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent for both the major and minor extremity. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 30 percent for the major extremity and 20 percent for the minor extremity. Severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent for the major extremity and 30 percent for the minor extremity. Complete paralysis requires the "griffin claw" deformity, due to flexor contraction of ring and little fingers, atrophy very marked in dorsal interspace and thenar and hypothenar eminences; loss of extension of ring and little fingers cannot spread the fingers (or reverse), cannot adduct the thumb; flexion of wrist weakened is rated as 60 percent for the major extremity and 50 percent for the minor extremity. In this regard, the Board notes that the record reflects that the Veteran is left-handed and, thus, ratings for the minor/non-dominant side are applicable to his claim.

Also, DC 8514 provides the rating criteria for paralysis of the musculospiral (radial) nerve. Disability ratings of 20 percent, 30 percent, and 50 percent are assignable for incomplete paralysis that is mild, moderate, or severe in degree, for the major arm, respectively. Disability ratings of 20 percent, 20 percent, and 40 percent are assignable for incomplete paralysis that is mild, moderate, or severe in degree, for the minor arm, respectively. Complete paralysis of such nerve, which is rated as 70 disabling for the major side and 60 percent disabling for the minor side, contemplates drop of hand and fingers, wrist and fingers perpetually flexed, the thumb adducted falling within the line of the outer border of the index finger; cannot extend hand at wrist, extend proximal phalanges of fingers, extend thumb, or make lateral movement of the wrist; supination of hand, extension and flexion of elbow weakened, the loss of synergic motion of extensors impairs the hand grip seriously; total paralysis of the triceps occurs only as the greatest rarity.

Moreover, DC 8515 provides the rating criteria for paralysis of the median nerve. Disability ratings of 10 percent, 30 percent, and 50 percent are assignable for incomplete paralysis that is mild, moderate, or severe in degree, for the major arm, respectively. Disability ratings of 10 percent, 20 percent, and 40 percent are assignable for incomplete paralysis that is mild, moderate, or severe in degree, for the minor arm, respectively. Complete paralysis of such nerve, which is rated as 70 disabling for the major side and 60 percent disabling for the minor side, contemplates the hand inclined to the ulnar side, the index and middle fingers more extended than normally, considerable atrophy of the muscles of the thenar eminence, the thumb in the plane of the hand (ape hand), pronation incomplete and defective, absence of flexion of index finger and feeble flexion of middle finger, cannot make a fist, index and middle fingers remain extended, cannot flex distal phalanx of thumb, defective opposition and abduction of the thumb, at right angles to palm, flexion of wrist weakened, and pain with trophic disturbances.

VA regulations provide that, in rating peripheral nerve injuries and their residuals, attention should be given to the site and character of the injury, the relative impairment and motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, disability from neurological disorders is rated from 10 to 100 percent in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory, or mental function. With partial loss of use of one or more extremities from neurological lesions, rating is to be by comparison with mild, moderate, severe, or complete paralysis of the peripheral nerves. The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.

Although the words "mild," "moderate" and "severe" are not defined in the VA rating schedule the Board must evaluate all of the evidence in order to render a decision that is "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. Additionally, "VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual [M21-1] provides benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions," and "[a]lthough the Board is not bound by the M21-1, the standards provided in the M21-1 are 'relevant guidance promulgated for the purpose of facilitating the efficient and proper resolution of claims,' which the Board must consider and address as part of its duty to provide a reasoned explanation for its decision." Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 4, 17-18 (2021) (citing Healey v. McDonough, 33 Vet. App. 321 (2021) and Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018)).

In this regard, the M21-1 provides that, in cases where a peripheral nerve disability is only manifested by sensory impairment, 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a directs decision makers to assign the evaluation corresponding with the mild or at most the moderate degree of impairment. M21-1, V.iii.12. A 2.b. Such further provides that, to make a choice between mild and moderate, the adjudicator should consider the evidence of record and the following guidelines:

" The mild level of evaluation would be more reasonably assigned when sensory symptoms are

" recurrent but not continuous

" assigned a lower medical grade reflecting less impairment

" and/or affecting a smaller area in the nerve distribution.

" Reserve the moderate level of evaluation for the most significant and disabling cases of sensory-only involvement. These are cases where the sensory symptoms are

" continuous

" assigned a higher medical grade reflecting greater impairment, and/or

" affecting a larger area in the nerve distribution.

The M21-2 also provides general guidelines for each level of incomplete paralysis of the upper and lower peripheral nerves. M21-1, V.iii.12. A 2.c. A "mild" degree of incomplete paralysis is characterized by disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area. A very minimal reflex or motor abnormality potentially could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis.

"Moderate" is the maximum evaluation available for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment and is characterized by symptoms described by the claimant and medically graded as significantly disabling and involving a larger area in the nerve distribution. Other sign or symptom combinations that may fall into the moderate category include combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate.

"Moderately severe" contemplates motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability. Additionally, atrophy may be present; however, for marked muscular atrophy, a rating contemplating severe incomplete paralysis is warranted.

"Severe" is characterized by motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe long-standing neuropathy cases. For the sciatic nerve, marked muscular atrophy is expected. Although severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than those for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs or symptoms that resemble some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.

Turning to the evidence, in August 2020, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination for a claimed right-hand condition. At the August 2020 VA examination, it was noted that the Veteran was ambidextrous. The Veteran reported having pain in his bilateral hands at all metacarpal phalangeal joints, and he described his pain as intermittent, aching nagging pain which he rated as a 3 out of 10 on the pain scale. However, the examiner stated that the Veteran's hands, bilaterally, were normal. 

However, per a September 2020 Peripheral nerves Conditions (Not Including Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy) DBQ, as attributable to the Veteran's right hand cubital syndrome, the Veteran was noted to have moderate right upper extremity constant pain, moderate right upper extremity intermittent pain, right upper extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate right upper extremity numbness. Per the examiner, muscle strength resting, reflex examination, and sensory examination were all normal. Further, the September 2020 VA examiner noted that the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy, trophic changes attributable to peripheral neuropathy, and he has a normal gait. Also, per the examiner, upon conducting special tests for the median nerve, the Veteran's results were positive on the right side for Tinel's sign. Regarding affected nerves, the examiner noted that the Veteran had moderate incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve. Moreover, as reflected in the September 2020 VA examination, the Veteran was using a copper wrist sleeve for his right-hand cubital tunnel syndrome. Moreover, according to the examiner, due to the peripheral nerve conditions, there was not functional impairment such that no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis. Also, the examiner stated that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complication, condition, signs and/or symptoms, and/or scars related to any conditions listed in the diagnosis section of the VA examination.    

As reflected in an April 2021 VA examination, upon in-person VA examination and records review, the Veteran was noted to have mild right upper extremity intermittent pain, and mild right upper extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias. Also, at such examination, it was noted that the Veteran was left-handed. The examiner documented the Veteran's muscle strength testing, reflex examination, and sensory examination were normal. Also, the examiner noted that the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy. Moreover, per the examiner, the Veteran does not have tropic changes attributable to peripheral neuropathy, and his gait is normal. Regarding affected nerves, the examiner stated the Veteran has mild incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve. The April 2021 VA examiner also indicated the Veteran does not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. In addition, the examiner stated that due to the peripheral nerve conditions, there was not functional impairment such that no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis. Additionally, the examiner indicated that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complication, condition, signs and/or symptoms, and/or scars related to his right cubital tunnel syndrome of his right hand. The examiner noted that the Veteran's peripheral nerve condition and/or peripheral neuropathy does not impact his ability to work.

In a July 2022 Peripheral Nerves Conditions (Not Including Diabetic-Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy) DBQ, the Veteran's symptoms include mild right upper extremity intermittent pain, mild right upper extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild right upper extremity numbness. At the July 2022 VA examination, it was noted that the Veteran was left-handed. Per the examiner, the Veteran's muscle strength testing, reflex examination, and sensory examination were normal. Also, the examiner stated that the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy. According to the July 2022 VA examiner, the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy, tropic changes attributable to peripheral neuropathy, and his gait. Further, special tests for his median nerve were not performed. In addressing nerves affected, the examiner identified the median nerve, stating the Veteran has right-side moderate incomplete paralysis. Moreover, per the examiner, the Veteran does not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. The ulnar nerve was stated to be normal. In addition, the examiner stated that due to the peripheral nerve conditions, there was not functional impairment such that no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complication, condition, signs and/or symptoms, and/or scars related to his right-hand disability.    

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination related to his peripheral nerves condition. At such examination, it was noted that the Veteran was left-handed. As reflected in a September 2023 Peripheral Nerves Conditions (Not Including Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy) DBQ, in addressing the Veteran's diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome of the right hand associated with status-post arthroscopy with labral tear, the examiner stated that the Veteran does have symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions. Per the Veteran, his current symptoms involved sharp pain, numbness and tingling. In this regard, the examiner noted mild right upper extremity intermittent pain, mild right upper extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild right upper extremity numbness. Further, per the examiner, the Veteran's muscle strength testing, reflex examination, and sensory examination were normal. Also, the examiner documented that the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy. According to the September 2023 VA examiner, the Veteran does not have tropic changes attributable to peripheral neuropathy, his gait is normal and the special tests for his median nerve were all negative. 

In addressing nerves affected, the September 2023 VA examiner identified the ulnar nerve, stating the Veteran has right side mild incomplete paralysis. Moreover, per the examiner, the Veteran does not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible. In addition, the examiner stated that due to the peripheral nerve conditions, there was not functional impairment such that no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complication, condition, signs and/or symptoms, and/or scars related to any conditions listed in the diagnosis section of the VA examination.

4. Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that between September 1, 2020, and April 27, 2021, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is manifested by RUE neuropathy resulting in no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve, warranting a 20 percent rating. Further, per the evidence of record, between April 27, 2021, and July 9, 2022, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is manifested by RUE neuropathy resulting in no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the median nerve, warranting a 20 percent rating. Moreover, the Board finds that, between July 9, 2022, and November 3, 2023, the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with cubital tunnel syndrome of the right hand, associated with status-post arthroscopy with right shoulder labral repair, is manifested by RUE neuropathy resulting in no more than mild incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve, warranting a 10 percent rating.

In particular, the September 2020 VA examiner determined, regarding affected nerves, that the Veteran had moderate incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve. Further, per the July 2022 VA examination, in addressing nerves affected, the examiner identified the median nerve, stating the Veteran has right side moderate incomplete paralysis. However, in September 2023, a VA examiner stated the Veteran has right-side mild incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve. In addition, in considering the presence of moderate incomplete paralysis of the ulnar and or medial nerves,  the Board notes that the M21-1 indicates that such contemplates motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability; however, such is not demonstrated in the instant case as the Veteran has normal muscle strength without atrophy, normal sensation, and only hypoactive reflexes with, at most, moderate subjective symptomatology.

Thus, based on the foregoing and in light of the guidance provided in the M21-1, the Board finds that the Veteran's the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with right hand cubital tunnel syndrome results in no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the ulnar and/or medial nerve between September 1, 2020, and September 2023, and no more than mild incomplete paralysis of the ulnar nerve between September 20, 2023 and November 3, 2023 . Consequently, between September 1, 2020, and September 2023, the Board finds that a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for such disability is warranted, however a higher rating is not warranted between September 20, 2023 and November 3, 2023.

Other Considerations

In reaching the foregoing conclusions, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his RUE neuropathy with right hand cubital tunnel syndrome is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned disability ratings. In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007) (although the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions). Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his reports regarding the severity of his disability.

The Board has also considered whether additional staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected RUE neuropathy with right hand cubital tunnel syndrome; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout each period on appeal. Therefore, assigning additional staged ratings for such disability is not warranted. Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching the foregoing determinations, the Board has applied the benefit of the doubt doctrine, which has resulted in a partial award of an increased rating for the Veteran's RUE neuropathy with right hand cubital tunnel syndrome. However, insofar as the Board has denied higher ratings for the disabilities on appeal, the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspects of the Veteran's claim. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard and his increased ratings claim must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.    

5. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for status post, arthroscopy, with right shoulder labral repair.

For the entire appeal period, such disability has been rated as 20 percent by analogy under DC 5201. Under DC 5201, limitation of arm motion that is limited to shoulder level warrants a 20 percent rating in the major and minor extremity. Limitation of arm motion that is limited midway between the side and shoulder level warrants a 20 percent rating in the minor extremity and a 30 percent rating in the major extremity. Limitation of arm motion to 25 degrees from the side warrants a 30 percent rating in the minor extremity and a 40 percent rating in the major extremity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201. Normal range of motion in the shoulder is from zero to 180 degrees of forward elevation (flexion) and zero to 180 degrees of shoulder abduction. See 38 C.F.R.§ 4.71a, Plate I.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021. 85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020). These amendments revised select diagnostic codes "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities." Id. 

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g). If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change. 38 U.S.C. § 5110. Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to February 7, 2021, and both the old and new rating criteria as of February 7, 2021, applying the criteria that is more favorable to him.

The February 7, 2021, amendments to DC 5201 did not intend to alter the rating criteria; rather, they simply clarified the specific ranges of motion that qualified as limitations to promote consistency among ratings. As noted in the clarification, a 20 percent rating for a major or minor joint where motion is limited "at shoulder level," was clarified as being flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees or less. A 30 percent rating for a major joint, or 20 percent for a minor joint, where motion is limited to "midway between side and shoulder level," was clarified as being flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees or less. Finally, a 40 percent rating for a major joint, or 30 percent for a minor joint, where motion is limited "to 25 degrees from side" was clarified as being flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from side.

In August 2020, the Veteran appeared for an in-person VA examination related to his shoulder. Per an August 2020 Shoulder and Arm DBQ, a VA examiner noted reported flareups of his status-post arthroscopy with labral repair, right shoulder, with pain in shoulder increasing to 9 out of 10, and with subluxation of extremity. Regarding functional loss, the Veteran reported that he is unable to move his arms at times, is unable to lift his shoulder over his head, is unable to type at a keyboard, and is unable to lift objects. Upon examination, the Veteran's initial range of motion for his right shoulder was abnormal with flexion from 0 to 125 degrees, abduction from 0 to 100 degrees, external rotation of 0 to 65 degrees, and internal rotation of 0 to 55 degrees. According to the examiner, the abnormal initial range of motion itself does contribute to a functional loss and noted pain with overhead lifting and weakness in the shoulder. The examiner documented that pain was noted on examination with flexion, abduction, external rotation, and internal rotation, and causes functional loss. Also, per the examiner, there was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. In this regard, the examiner noted mild tenderness to palpation over the anterior shoulder joint. Per the examiner, there was evidence of pain with weight bearing and objective evidence of crepitus. In regard to observed repetitive use, the examiner stated the Veteran was able perform repetitive-use testing, and there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. According to the examiner, the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repetitive use over time. However, the examiner indicated the examination was neither medically consistent or inconsistent with the Veteran's statements describing functional loss with repetitive use over time. In addition, the examiner noted that pain and weakness significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over a period of time.

Moreover, the August 2020 VA examiner documented that the examination was not being conducted, and stated the examination is neither medically consistent or inconsistent with the Veteran's statements describing functional loss during flareups. According to the examiner, pain and weakness significantly limit functional ability with flareups. Also, the examiner indicated that the were no additional factors contributing to the Veteran's right shoulder disability. Further, testing reflected normal muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, and no right side ankylosis. The August 2020 VA examiner also documented that a rotator cuff condition was suspected with the right shoulder, and a Hawkins' Impingement test, external rotation/infraspinatus strength test and lift off subscapularis test were positive. Also, according to the examination, shoulder instability, dislocation or labral pathology was suspected. The examiner stated there was history of recurrent dislocation bilaterally, with frequent episodes and guarding of movement only at shoulder level. However, no clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint or any other impairment to the clavicle or scapula was suspected. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran does not have loss of head, malunion of the humerus with marked deformity, and his he does not have a humerus condition that affects range of motion of the shoulder. Further, the examiner noted that residuals of the Veteran's arthroscopy with labral tear included pain, decreased range of motion and recurrent subluxation. Per the examiner, the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complication, conditions, signs or symptoms related to his right shoulder disability. According to the examiner, the Veteran was not using any assistive devices for his right shoulder. Moreover, as reflected in the examination, due to the Veteran's shoulder or arm condition, there was no functional impairment of an extremity such that no effective functions remain other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis.  Regardless of the Veteran's current employment status, the examiner stated the Veteran's right shoulder disability does impact his ability to work. In particular, the examiner noted the Veteran's difficulty lifting heavy objects, and with prolonged computer work.

Subsequently, in July 2022, a VA examiner noted the Veteran's current symptoms as constant throbbing pain to the right shoulder, pain aggravated with activities such as lifting, pushing, pulling and typing. Also, the examiner stated that pain causes disturbance with sleep, as well as with activities of daily living. Upon examination, the examiner documented that the Veteran's initial range of motion for his right shoulder was abnormal, and stated the abnormal range of motion did by itself contribute to a functional loss. In this regard, the examiner noted pain aggravated with activities such as lifting, pushing, pulling and typing. Also, the examiner indicated that pain causes the Veteran disturbance with sleep and with activities of daily living. Regarding active range of motion, the examiner stated the Veteran's flexion was 90 degrees, his abduction was 70 degrees, his internal rotation was 5 degrees, and his external rotation was 5 degrees. Also, per the examiner, the Veteran exhibited pain with flexion, abduction, internal rotation, and external rotation.  

As reflected in the July 2022 examination, the Veteran's passive range of motion for his right shoulder disability was the same as active range of motion.  The examiner stated that the Veteran exhibited pain with flexion, abduction, internal rotation, and external rotation. Moreover, there was evidence of pain with active motion and passive motion, the Veteran's pain was aggravated with activities such as lifting, pushing, pulling and typing. Also, the examiner stated that pain causes disturbance with sleep, as well as with activities of daily living. In addition, the examiner noted thee was objective evidence of crepitus and objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. Specifically, the examiner stated that the Veteran had tenderness to his glenohumeral joint and acromioclavicular joint.

Regarding repetitive use, the July 2022 VA examiner stated the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions, and there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. Also, the examiner noted that the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time. Further, per the examiner, the procured evidence reflects pain which significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time.  Per the examiner, the estimated range of motion for the Veteran's right shoulder after repeated use over time consisted of flexion of 90 degrees, abduction of 70 degrees, internal rotation of 5 degrees and external rotation of 5 degrees. Moreover, the examiner stated the examination was not conducted during a flareup. 

The examiner noted the procured evidence does not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flareups; the examiner stated the Veteran denied flareups. There were no other factors identified that were stated to contribute to the Veteran's right shoulder disability. In addition, the examiner noted the Veteran does not have muscle atrophy and/or ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation. In regard to rotator cuff conditions, the Veteran's Hawkins' Impingement Test, and external rotation/infraspinatus strength test related to his right shoulder were positive. The examiner indicated the lift off subscapularis test could not be performed, however also stated that a rotator cuff condition was not suspected. Likewise, the crank apprehension and relocation test reportedly could not be performed, however the examiner noted that shoulder instability, dislocation or labral pathology was not suspected. Nonetheless, the examiner also indicated there is shoulder instability, dislocation or labral pathology, and the Veteran does have mechanical symptoms.

Also, per the July 2022 VA examiner, there were no current residuals of recurrent dislocation of the glenohumeral joint. Also, the Veteran was noted not to have a clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint, sternoclavicular joint condition or other impairment. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran does not have loss of head, or malunion of the humerus with marked deformity, although the examiner marked that he does not have a humerus condition that affects range of motion of the shoulder. The examiner also stated that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complication, conditions, signs or symptoms related to his right shoulder disability, and that he was not using any assistive devices for his right shoulder. Moreover, as reflected in the examination, due to the Veteran's shoulder or arm condition, there was no functional impairment of an extremity such that no effective functions remain other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis.  Regardless of the Veteran's current employment status, the examiner stated the Veteran's right shoulder disability does impact his ability to work. In particular, the examiner noted the Veteran's right shoulder pain was aggravated with activities such as lifting, pushing, pulling and typing, and that his pain causes disturbance with sleep and with activities of daily living.

As reflected in a September 2023 VA examination for the Veteran's shoulder, the Veteran reported his current symptoms consisted of sharp pain, and electrical shooting pain down his arm. According to the examiner, he did experience severe flareups with his right shoulder 2 to 3 times per month, which lasted about 10 to 15 minutes. According to the Veteran, the flareups were precipitated by repetitive activities and quick movements and were alleviated by rest and Aleve. Upon examination, the examiner noted normal initial range of motion measurements pertaining to the Veteran's right shoulder. However, per the examiner, pain was exhibited with external rotation. Also, the examiner stated that the Veteran's passive range of motion was the same as his active range of motion. Per the September 20203 VA examiner, there was evidence of pain with weight-bearing, non-weight bearing, on active motion and on passive motion, however pain did not result in/cause functional loss. Moreover, according to the examination, there was objective evidence of crepitus, however no evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. 

According to the examiner, the Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions, and there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. Further, the examiner noted the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time. Nonetheless, per the examiner, procured evidence suggest pain, fatigability and lack of endurance which significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner estimated the Veteran's right shoulder range of motion immediately after repeated use over time, based on procured information from relevant sources, as 175 degrees flexion, 175 degrees abduction, 85 degrees internal rotation, and 85 degrees external rotation.

Also, the September 2023 VA examiner noted that the examination was not being conducted during a flareup. However, the examiner stated that procured evidence suggests pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance significantly limit functional ability with flareups. The examiner estimated that the Veteran's right shoulder range of motion during flareups was 175 flexion, 175 abduction, 85 degrees internal rotation and 85 degrees external rotation. The examiner did not identify any other factors contributing to the Veteran's right shoulder disability. Also, per the VA examiner, the Veteran did not have right shoulder muscle atrophy and/or ankylosis. In regard to rotator cuff conditions, the Veteran's external rotation/infraspinatus strength test was positive. Further, the examiner noted the Veteran does not have mechanical symptoms or current residuals of recurrent dislocation of the glenohumeral joint. 

Also, the examiner stated there is no clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint, sternoclavicular joint condition or other impairment. In addition, per the examiner, the clavicle or scapula condition does not affect range of motion of the shoulder. Further, the examination reflects that the Veteran does not have loss of head, nonunion or fibrous union of the humerus, he does not have malunion of the humerus with moderate or marked deformity, and a humerus condition des not affect range of motion of the shoulder. According to the examiner, the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, signs or symptoms related to any right shoulder condition. Moreover, the examiner documented that the Veteran was not using any assistive devices for his right shoulder. The September 2023 VA examiner further indicated, due to the Veteran's shoulder or arm condition, there was no functional impairment of an extremity such that no effective functions remain other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis.   

As an aside, the file is devoid of evidence that the Veteran has been prescribed and/or utilized medication for relief of pain associated with his service-connected right shoulder disability, and thus, the ameliorative impact of such medications can neither be contemplated nor discounted under the facts of this case.  Jones, supra; Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's right shoulder disability under DC 5201. In this regard, while such disability results in the loss of range of motion of the minor arm, such is not limited to 25 degrees from his side, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups. In this regard, the Veteran's right shoulder flexion and abduction were limited to, at most, 90 degrees. Furthermore, while the Veteran has additional pain after repetitive use, repeated use over time, and/or on flare-ups, there is no indication that such additional symptoms resulted in functional loss that more nearly approximates limitation of the left arm to 25 degrees from his side. Therefore, the Veteran is not entitled to a rating in excess of 20 percent under DC 5201.

The Board further finds that a separate or higher rating is not warranted under any other potentially applicable DCs related to the shoulder. In this regard, the evidence, to include VA examination reports and treatment records, does not show, nor does the Veteran contend, that his right shoulder disability results in ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, impairment of the humerus, or impairment of the clavicle or scapula. Consequently, higher or separate ratings are not warranted under DCs 5200, 5202, and 5203, respectively.

Other Considerations

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his symptoms associated with his service-connected right shoulder disability are more severe than as reflected by the current assigned disability rating. In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his own reports regarding the severity of his disabilities.

The Board has also considered whether additional staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, and Hart, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout each period on appeal. Thus, assigning additional staged ratings for such disabilities is not warranted. Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claims adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

Consequently, the Board finds that an increased rating for the Veteran's right shoulder disability is not warranted. In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the weight of the probative evidence is against such claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable in the instant appeal and his increased rating claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

6. Entitlement to a compensable rating for a right shoulder scar, associated with status post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair.

During the appeal period, the Veteran's right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair, is rated as noncompensably disabling pursuant to DC 7802. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

In this regard, scars are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DCs 7800 through 7805. During the pendency of the appeal, VA amended the criteria for rating the skin, to include scars. See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Skin, 83 Fed. Reg. 32,592 (July 13, 2018). As pertinent to the instant appeal, such amendment changed DC 7801 by removing the term "deep and nonlinear" and replacing it with "associated with underlying soft tissue damage," and changed DC 7802 by removing the term "superficial and nonlinear" and replacing it with "not associated with underlying soft tissue damage." Such also amended the accompanying notes to read: Note (1): For the purposes of DCs 7801 and 7802, the six (6) zones of the body are defined as each extremity, anterior trunk, and posterior trunk. The midaxillary line divides the anterior trunk from the posterior trunk. Note (2): A separate evaluation may be assigned for each affected zone of the body under this diagnostic code if there are multiple scars, or a single scar, affecting multiple zones of the body. Combine the separate evaluations under § 4.25. Alternatively, if a higher evaluation would result from adding the areas affected from multiple zones of the body, a single evaluation may also be assigned under this DC.

With regard to the effective date of the new criteria, VA indicated in the Supplementary Information to the Final Rule that its "intent is that the claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both old and new rating criteria, and whatever criteria is more favorable to the veteran will be applied." The Veteran's claim in this case was pending prior to the August 13, 2018, effective date of the new criteria and, therefore, the Board will consider both the old and new criteria.

DC 7800 pertains to burn scars of the head, face, or neck; scars of the head, face, or neck due to other causes; or other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck. However, as the scars at issue affect the Veteran's finger, DC 7800 is inapplicable and will not be further considered.

DC 7801 pertains to burn scars or scars due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are, prior to August 13, 2018, deep and nonlinear and, after such date, associated with underlying soft tissue damage. Under this DC, a 10 percent rating is assigned when the scar(s) cover an area or areas of at least 6 square inches (39 sq. cm.) but less than 12 square inches (77 sq. cm.). Higher ratings are available for greater areas affected.

DC 7802 pertains to burn scars or scars due to other causes not of the head, face, or neck that are, prior to August 13, 2018, superficial and nonlinear and, after such date, not associated with underlying soft tissue damage. Under this DC, a single 10 percent rating is assigned when the scar(s) cover an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm) or greater.

DC 7804 provides that one or two scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 10 percent evaluation. Three or four scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 20 percent rating, while five or more scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 30 percent evaluation. Note (1) states that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. Note (2) states that if one or more scars are both unstable and painful, the rater is to add 10 percent to the evaluation that is based on the total number of unstable or painful scars. Scars evaluated under DCs 7800, 7801, 7802, or 7805 may also receive an evaluation under DC 7804, when applicable. Note (3).

DC 7805 provides that other scars (including linear scars) and other effects of scars evaluated under DCs 7800, 7801, 7802, and 7804 that require the evaluation of any disabling effect(s) not considered in a rating provided under DCs 7800-7804 should be rated under an appropriate DC.

According to a July 2022 Scars/Disfigurement DBQ, the Veteran does have one or more scars anywhere on the body, or disfigurement of the head, face or neck. Also, the examiner indicated the Veteran does have additional diagnoses that pertain to scars anywhere on the body, or disfigurement of the head, face or neck due to scars or other causes. Moreover, the examiner stated that the Veteran does have scars on the trunk or extremities, however, does not have any scars or disfigurement of the head, face or neck. In this regard, the examiner noted the Veteran has a well-healed scar on his right shoulder, that is not painful, not unstable with frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar and not due to burns. As reflected in the examination, the Veteran's scar located on his right shoulder is 4 centimeter long and 0.1 centimeters wide. According to the VA examiner, the Veteran's scar, regardless of location, or disfigurement of the head, face, or neck do not result in limitation of function. Moreover, per the examiner, the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms associated with any scar.

In a subsequent September 2023 Scars/Disfigurement DBQ, the Veteran's scar resulting from his right shoulder is stable, is not painful, and is not due to burns. Per the examiner, the affected area was he RUE, on the Veteran's shoulder, and the scar measured 8 centimeters by 0.1 centimeters. According to the VA examiner, the Veteran's scar, regardless of location, or disfigurement of the head, face, or neck do not result in limitation of function, and does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms associated with any scar.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair is not associated with underlying soft tissue damage and does not cover an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm) or greater. Thus, a rating for a right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair pursuant to DC 7802 is not warranted.

Furthermore, based on the measurements of the Veteran's right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair, and the fact that they are not painful or unstable, or result in any disabling effects, higher or separate ratings pursuant to the DCs pertinent to scarring, to include DC 7801, 7802, 7804, or 7805, is not warranted.

In reaching its conclusions in this case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his symptoms related to his right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair are more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned rating. The Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). The Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran in regard to his right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his own reports regarding the severity of such disability.

In this regard, the Board affords greater probative weight to the VA examiner's assessment than the Veteran's own report as such was rendered by a physician with the appropriate expertise necessary to assess the nature and severity of his right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair upon physical examination.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected his right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disabilities is not warranted. Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for his right shoulder scar, associated with status-post right shoulder arthroscopy labral repair, the benefit of the doubt 

(Continued on the next page)

doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his initial rating claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Spielmann, Jill F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.