Citation Nr: A25032068
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240202-413440
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a temporomandibular joint (TMJ) condition to include lower jaw pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a dental condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a peripheral vestibular disorder (claimed as dizziness and vertigo) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's TMJ condition, to include lower jaw pain, is related to his active-duty service.

2. The probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has problems of the maxilla, mandible, or temporomandibular articulation, loss of whole or part of the ramus, loss of the condyloid process or coronoid process, loss of the hard palate, or loss of teeth due to loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible due to trauma or disease such as osteomyelitis rather than as a result of periodontal disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a TMJ condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a dental condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.381, 4.150.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from July 1981 to July 1984 and from February 2003 to October 2003.

In February 2024, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal electing the Direct Review docket to review a January 2024 rating decision issued by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding all issues on appeal as described on the title page, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995), aff'd per curiam, 78 F. 3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (table); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.303. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after the military discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to the period of military service, establishes that the disease was incurred during the active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1113 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (d).

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Masors v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 181 (1992). Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b). This benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is nearly equal but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a TMJ condition.

The Veteran contends that he has a TMJ condition that is related to his active-duty service.

The Veteran's VA treatment records are largely silent for the issue as well, with only two entries, both in March 2023, showing that the Veteran reported pain in his lower jaw when chewing food. The Veteran noted that the condition began six months prior. See January 2024 CAPRI at 22-23. There is no diagnosis provided and no reference made to the Veteran's military service. However, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the description of pain and difficulty chewing food is sufficient to establish the present disability element of service connection. See Shedden, supra.

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's service treatment records (STR) and notes no entries regarding a temporomandibular joint condition or symptoms thereof either during service or in subsequent reserve service examinations between the Veteran's periods of active duty. See generally, e.g., December 1984 STR - Medical. Similarly, the Veteran's private treatment records show no complaint, diagnosis, or treatment for a TMJ condition. See generally, e.g., March 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's lay statements and finds that none of them contain any reference to the Veteran's claimed TMJ condition or to an in-service injury, event, or illness that may have precipitated the Veteran's recently reported lower jaw pain.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record does not establish that an in-service injury, event, or illness occurred with respect to the Veteran's TMJ claim. Accordingly, the second Shedden element is not satisfied. See Shedden, supra.

The Board notes that to date, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination of his lower jaw pain. In determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided, or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration. These four factors are: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4). The third factor, in particular, is a low threshold. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Applying the McLendon factors, the Board finds that factor (1) is satisfied because there is an indication of jaw pain and functional impairment, specifically difficulty chewing food. Factor (2) is not satisfied at all because there is no evidence at all that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; or that the symptoms manifested recently after service. Factor (3) is also not satisfied, because absent some indication of an in-service event, injury, or disease there can be no link between the current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease. Thus, while the McLendon threshold is low, it is still a threshold and the Board finds that in this case, it has not been reached, and no duty-to-assist error occurred in not affording the Veteran a VA examination of his claimed TMJ condition.

Thus, the weight of the competent and probative evidence does not support entitlement to service connection for a TMJ condition. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim is denied. In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a dental condition.

The Veteran contends he suffers from a dental disability that is related to his active-duty service.

Dental disorders are treated differently than other medical disorders in the VA benefits system. 38 U.S.C. § 1712; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.381, 17.161. As provided by VA regulations, treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses and periodontal disease are not considered disabling conditions and may be considered service connected solely for establishing eligibility for VA outpatient dental treatment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a).

Under current VA regulations, compensation is only available for certain types of dental and oral conditions listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150. These conditions include various problems of the maxilla, mandible, or temporomandibular articulation, loss of whole or part of the ramus, loss of the condyloid process or coronoid process, loss of the hard palate, or loss of teeth due to loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible due to trauma or disease such as osteomyelitis rather than as a result of periodontal disease. Therefore, in the absence of a claim for any of these disabilities, or evidence that the Veteran has such disabilities, service connection for compensation purposes for a dental disability or condition is not warranted.

The evidence does not indicate that any of the above-listed problems exist. Specifically, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records (STR) are silent for any such conditions. See, e.g., December 1984 STR - Dental. The Board has also reviewed the Veteran's post-service VA treatment records and finds that they are silent for any such conditions or symptoms thereof. See, e.g., January 2024 CAPRI at 5, 24, 33, 67 (no dental diseases checked in September 2023, February 2023, September 2022, January 2022). The Board has also reviewed the private treatment records submitted by the Veteran and notes that none of these records describe any of the conditions listed above, or symptoms thereof. See generally, e.g., March 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The record contains references in post- active-duty records showing that the Veteran underwent a root canal and wisdom tooth removal while on reserve status between his two periods of active duty. See December 1984 STR - Medical at 102, 112. However, as discussed above, these are not among the dental conditions for which service connection is available under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150. Accordingly, it is not necessary for the Board to analyze whether these conditions were incurred during a period of active duty for training because service connection is not available for them in any event.

The Board further notes that the Veteran has not described any symptoms of a compensable dental condition in any lay statement or testimony. The Board also notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his claimed dental condition. Applying the McLendon factors, the Board notes that there is no evidence in the record of a disability for VA compensation purposes, as described above. Accordingly, factor (1) is not satisfied at all. Factor (2) is also not satisfied, as no in-service event, injury, or illness is described anywhere in the record. Accordingly, factor (3) cannot be satisfied. Based on this analysis, the Board finds that no duty-to-assist error occurred in not affording the Veteran a VA examination of his claimed dental condition.

While the Veteran believes he has a current diagnosis of a dental disorder that is compensable for VA purposes, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence, which, as discussed above, suggests that no compensable condition exists.

The Board finds based on the above facts that the weight of the competent and probative evidence does not support entitlement to service connection for a dental condition. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim is denied. In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a peripheral vestibular disorder (claimed as dizziness and vertigo) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a peripheral vestibular disorder which causes dizziness and vertigo that is related to his active-duty service or to his service-connected tinnitus.

An October 2023 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran complained of two episodes of Vertigo in October 2019. See March 2023 CAPRI at 126. In September 2023, the Veteran was diagnosed with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo of the left side. See October 2023 CAPRI at 1. The Veteran has been prescribed meclizine to take "as needed" for his vertigo. Id.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his peripheral vestibular condition in November 2023. See November 2023 C&P Exam. The examiner reviewed the claims file and examined the Veteran. Id. The examiner noted dizziness as a component of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus. Id at 2. The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with any vestibular disorder. Id at 1. The examiner noted that this condition does not cause any functional impairment. Id at 7. The Board finds this conclusion inadequate for rating purposes. Specifically, the Board notes that the Veteran has been prescribed medication to treat this condition. It is unclear whether the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of this medication or not when assessing whether the Veteran experiences any functional impairment due to this condition. It is also unclear whether the Veteran's dizziness, with or without such ameliorative effects, should be diagnosed or rated as a disability apart from the Veteran's tinnitus such that service connection can be granted as secondary to tinnitus. Such a distinction is medically complex, and the Board may not substitute its own judgment where a medical opinion is required. Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991).

One of the effects of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). In this case, remand is required to afford the Veteran an examination that adequately identifies the Veteran's claimed disability and describes the ameliorative effect of the medication he uses to improve his symptoms.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician. The examiner must review the claims file but need only examine the Veteran if it is necessary to do so to provide a valid opinion.

The examiner should provide a diagnosis for the Veteran's claimed vertigo condition. If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

In so doing, the examiner must consider the ameliorative effects of medication, and must consider whether the Veteran's vertigo symptoms cause functional impairment with and without such medication.

The examiner must answer the following questions:

(a)	Does the Veteran have a vertigo condition that is due to or caused by his service-connected tinnitus? 

(b)	Does the Veteran have a vertigo condition that is aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus? 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robert Divis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.