Citation Nr: A25032266
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240731-461476
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence of the record favors a finding that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis caused his obstructive sleep apnea, based on the intermediate step of?obesity.? 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive?sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis have been met.? 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.310.?

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1992 to September 1996.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea most recently addressed in an August 2022 rating decision.  In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In July 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  In its review, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

SERVICE CONNECTION

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to his bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis.  See April 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Board acknowledges that service connection may be established on a direct or a secondary basis.  However, as the Veteran specifically seeks service connection on a secondary basis, and the Board is granting the claim on that basis, the Board will limit its discussion and not address?service connection on a direct basis.

Applicable Law

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a).? A disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or chronically aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury is considered service-connected, and when thus established, this secondary condition is considered a part of the original condition.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a) and (b).? Establishing service connection on this secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.? Allen v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?439 (1995) (en?banc).? 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in Walsh v. Wilkie that obesity?as an "intermediate step" in a causal chain for service connection can be established on either a causal or aggravation basis.? See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300, 306-307 (2020).? Furthermore, the Court concluded that General Counsel Precedent Opinion 1-2017, which determined that?obesity?can constitute an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis, not only applies when a service-connected disability causes?obesity, but also when a service-connected disability aggravates?obesity.? See id.? 

Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.? See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).? 

Analysis

As to a current disability, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  As a separate disability already subject to service connection, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis.? See October 2023 Rating Decision.? The Board is bound by these favorable findings.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).  Therefore, the remaining question for the Board is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities.  See Allen, 7?Vet. App.?at 439.? 

As to a nexus, or link, there are several opinions of record.  Against the claim, there is a May 2022 opinion that the Veteran's claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that medical literature is silent of any evidence connecting the cause of sleep apnea to pes planus and plantar fasciitis in a subject who is not obese.  See May 2022 VA Medical Opinion.  Here, as the examiner failed to discuss whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea, the Board affords the opinion little probative weight.

There is a September 2023 opinion that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As a rationale, the examiner discussed the Veteran's relevant medical history and cited to medical literature detailing when sleep apnea occurs, its severity from moderate to severe, the causes, and the symptoms.  See September 2023 VA Medical Opinion.  Here, as the Veteran specifically sought service connection on a secondary basis, the Board affords this opinion addressing service connection on a direct basis has little probative weight.

For the claim, there is an April 2023 opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and obesity is due to and/or related to his service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis arthritis degenerative with heel pain bilateral, degenerative joint disease left ankle, arthritis right ankle, arthritis left knee, osteoarthritis right knee, and right knee strain, that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea with mandibular advancement device is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from the service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis arthritis degenerative with heel pain bilateral, degenerative joint disease left ankle, arthritis right ankle, arthritis left knee, osteoarthritis right knee, and right knee strain, and that it is at least as likely as not that without the Veteran's weight gain and obesity his obstructive sleep apnea with mandibular advancement device would not have occurred.  In forming the opinion, the examiner reviewed the Veteran's military service medical records, personnel records, civilian medical records, physical exams, diagnostic impressions, radiological study reports, laboratory studies, claims file paperwork, VARO correspondence, lay statement, previous compensation and pensions exams, and clinical expertise, clinical experience, and medical literature review.  See April 2023 Private Medical Opinion. 

As a rationale for the opinion, the examiner discussed the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis, current service-connected musculoskeletal disability conditions, and progressive weight gain.  Citing to medical literature, the examiner discussed sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity, musculoskeletal conditions associated with weight gain/obesity, pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea related to obesity, effects of chronic musculoskeletal pain on sleep, pathophysiology of sleep disturbance related to obesity, and weight gain and obesity as a major risk factor associated with obstructive sleep apnea.  See id.  

In conclusion, the examiner stated that the Veteran's service-connected conditions caused his weight gain and obesity, that the weight gain and obesity caused or contributed to his current condition, and that the Veteran had a total weight gain of approximately fifty pounds from active duty to present time.  Finally, the examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not secondary to his weight gain from his service-connected conditions, substantiated from medical literature, and that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran would not have developed obstructive sleep apnea if not for his weight gain and obesity.  See id.

Satisfying the final element for service connection, the Board finds there is a nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis.  Specifically, the examiner's rationale is logical, well-reasoned, thorough, and relied upon consideration of the entire record.  Additionally, the opinion is highly  probative and persuasive as to the question of whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis caused his obstructive sleep apnea, based on the intermediate step of?obesity.? The opinion was based on a review of the Veteran's service and post-service medical records, was supported by relevant treatise evidence, and is consistent with the Court's holding in Walsh and the General Counsel's precedential opinion regarding obesity serving as an intermediate step for the award of service connection.  The Board affords the April 2023 medical opinion?great probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 301 (2008) (explaining that a medical examination report must contain clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two).? 

Based on the foregoing facts of this case, as all three elements for service connection on a secondary basis have been met, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle arthritis, and bilateral knee arthritis, is granted.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Lynch,?21 F.4th at 776. 

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ti'a L. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.