Citation Nr: A25032339
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240718-457379
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's left knee strain is due to active service.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right knee strain is due to active service.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right shoulder impingement syndrome is due to active service.

4. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's left hip strain is due to active service.

5. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right hip strain is due to active service.

6. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is due to active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left knee strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right knee strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left hip strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right hip strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from December 2005 to June 2006 and May 2007 to May 2008, with additional service in the Marine Corps Reserve.

The matter is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Thus, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for the claims of bilateral knee strain, bilateral hip strain, lumbosacral strain, and right shoulder impingement syndrome most recently addressed in a May 2022 rating decision. In August 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral knee strain. See, e.g., July 2024 VA Form 10182. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his right and left knee conditions are due to "[h]iking hills with backpack and other issued equipment like rifle," as well as "[t]he hikes during The Crucible and Marine Combat Training and during [his] deployment in Iraq." See October 2021 VA 21-526EZ. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his bilateral knee strain is due to a fall during his deployment to Iraq. See April 2023 Bilateral Knees VA 21-4138.

Service connection may be granted for disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may be granted for a disease initially diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current claimed disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury in service. Shedden v. Principi, 281 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Moreover, certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Board notes that there is a favorable finding in this matter. The AOJ conceded that the Veteran has been diagnosed with left and right knee strain. See August 2023 Rating Decision. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Therefore, the question remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's bilateral knee disability began during service or is otherwise due to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board turns now to the relevant evidence.

In evaluating that evidence, the Board has been charged with the duty to assess its credibility and weight. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F. 3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Indeed, the Court has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to do so. Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000).

The probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that the physician reaches. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). Whether a physician provides a basis for a medical opinion goes to the weight or credibility of the evidence in the adjudication of the merits. See Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Other factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the physician's access to the claims folder and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

As to the necessary element of incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service, the Board notes the Veteran's contention that "[d]uring active duty military service, [he] injured both of [his] knees in a fall," and has "had issues with [his] knees ever since active duty." See April 2023 Bilateral Knees VA 21-4138.

Looking to the Veteran's service treatment records, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported no bone or joint problems that could be made worse by a change in physical activity, inclusive of back, knee, or hip. See April 2008 Periodic Health Assessment. The Veteran further denied suffering from any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care, and upon separation he reported no impaired use of arms, legs, hands, or feet; no swollen or painful joints; no knee trouble, including locking, giving out, injury, etc.; no bone, joint, or other deformity; as well as no arthritis, rheumatism, or bursitis. See March 2008 Report of Medical Assessment; August 2008 Report of Medical History.

However, the Veteran was provided a post-deployment health assessment in which he rated his health as poor over the past month. See August 2008 Post-Deployment Health Re-Assessment. The Veteran also noted that his health after deployment was "[s]omewhat worse . . . than before [he] deployed," and his physical health problems were noted as making regular daily activities "extremely difficult" in the month preceding the screening. Id. Of note, the Veteran also reported knee problems as related to his deployment, which he indicated manifested as "bilateral knee pain" and stated "that his knees 'were injured in Iraq.'" See id. 

Further, the Board acknowledges that laypersons are competent to speak to symptomatology when those symptoms are readily observable. See, e.g., Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is considered competent to report the onset of bilateral knee strain symptoms, such as pain, while in-service. See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002). Moreover, while the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported no swollen, stiff or painful joints during deployment, he did report dizziness, fainting, and light headedness. See August 2008 Post-Deployment Health Re-Assessment. Additionally, while the Veteran indicated that he did not engage in "direct combat wherein he discharged his weapon," indicated that he never felt "like he was in great danger of being killed," and reported no falls or other injury events during his deployment to Iraq from July 2007 to January 2008, the Board notes that this screening was conducted over half a year post-deployment and is, thus, not dispositive contradictory evidence countering the Veteran's otherwise credible lay statements. See id. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the record sufficiently evidences the occurrence of in-service injuries.

As to the question of nexus, the Veteran was first afforded a VA bilateral knee examination in May 2022, in which the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral knee strain and detailed the resulting range of motion restrictions and the Veteran's other symptoms. See May 2022 Knee Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire. However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's "claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." Id. As rationale, the examiner noted that "the Veteran's military service ended . . . over ten years ago," and that his "enlistment physical dated [June 12, 2005,] is silent for a diagnosis, or complaints of right and left knee pain." Id. Moreover, the examiner noted that though "[t]he post-deployment health re-assessment dated [August 2, 2008,] mentions the Veteran's subjective complaints of right and left knee/lower extremity pain," and that the remaining service treatment "records remaining are silent for complaints, diagnosis, and treatment of right and left knee/lower extremity pain." Id. Thus, the examiner opined that while the "Veteran has current subjective complaints of right and left knee/lower extremity pain . . . current and since separation complaints, diagnosis, and treatment objective evidence is silent" and so "a nexus cannot be drawn." Id. Accordingly, the examiner stated that "in [her] medical opinion, the claimed right/left knee conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." Id.

The Veteran was provided a second VA examination in May 2023, which resulted in separate opinions for each knee. In both opinions, the examiner used identical language to opine that "[t]he claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness," as "[b]ased on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current . . . knee strain and military service." See May 2023 Right Knee C&P Examination; May 2023 Left Knee C&P Examination. Moreover, the examiner opined that "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." Id. As such, the examiner concluded that the "Veteran's claimed . . . knee condition diagnosed . . . is less likely as not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred or caused by or a result of the Veteran's . . . knee condition during service." Id.

The Board finds both VA opinions to be of diminished probative value. Though the records were reviewed, and the examinations conducted in-person, the examiners failed to cite medical literature to support their opinions and improperly discounted the Veteran's contentions as they relate to symptoms of knee pain in-service and in the years since. Thus, the Board finds these opinions improperly relied upon the absence of objective confirmatory in-service records as definitive negative evidence of a nexus relationship and were overly conclusory in nature. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Therefore, the Board finds that these examinations are not fully dispositive to the claim. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

The Board notes that the Veteran also submitted private medical nexus opinions in which the examiner, a certified physician assistant, opined that "[t]he veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active duty onset of symptoms of the . . . knee[s] and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date," highlighting the Veteran "report[ed] an injury" to his knees "while on active duty in a fall," and "reports that he continues to have pain and symptoms in" his knees "that initially began on active duty and have been chronic without resolution up until the current date." See April 2022 Private Left Knee Strain Condition Opinion; April 2022 Private Right Knee Strain Condition Opinion. The examiner noted that "there is current diagnosis of Left Knee Strain" as well as "Right Knee Strain that correlates with the active duty mechanism of injury/event," and that "[t]he medical literature supports and documents that prior knee injury is a primary cause of chronic knee pain conditions and instability due to post-traumatic pathological processes and changes." Id. Thus, the examiner opined that "based upon [his] professional education and experience, in conjunction with the medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, it is [his] professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's current . . . [k]nee [s]train condition is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his . . . [k]nee [i]njury that occurred during active duty military service." Id.

The Board finds this private medical opinion to be of high probative value. The opinion is highly detailed, supported by medical literature, and corroborated by medical evidence associated with the Veteran's service treatment records. Moreover, the examiner's opinion corresponds with the lay assertions made by the Veteran. Specifically, the Veteran's contentions that he "continue[s] to have pain with motion, a feeling of the knee giving out, cracking, and popping in [his] left knee and pain with motion, a feeling of the knee giving out, cracking, and popping in [his] right knee." See April 2023 Bilateral Knees VA 21-4138. The examiner also properly afforded weight to the Veteran's lay assertion that "[t]he pain in [his] knees becomes worse with stair climbing, high impact activity, prolonged standing, prolonged walking, running/jogging, or squatting," and that he "must avoid or limit certain prolonged activities, like walking around in a store, sports, and house chores that require prolonged standing because of the pain in [his] knees," and "take[s] Advil, Aleve, Aspirin, Ibuprofen, and Tylenol and use[s] ice, heat, and Epsom salt soaks to help with the pain," without improperly discounting his purported symptomatology since service. See id.

Again, the Board acknowledges that laypersons are competent to speak to symptomatology when those symptoms are readily observable. See, e.g., Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is considered competent to report the onset and continued presence of symptoms of bilateral knee strain since service. See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).

Consequently, having found the Veteran's lay statements credible and recognizing the diminished probative value of the negative VA nexus opinions, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise and accordingly, a nexus between the currently diagnosed left and right knee strain and the in-service injuries detailed above exists. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's left and right knee strain is due to knee injuries sustained during active service. Entitlement to service connection for left and right knee strain is, therefore, granted.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome. See, e.g., July 2024 VA Form 10182. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his right shoulder impingement syndrome is due to "[h]iking hills with backpack and other issued equipment like rifle," as well as "[t]he hikes during The Crucible and Marine Combat Training and during [his] deployment in Iraq." See October 2021 VA 21-526EZ. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his right shoulder impingement syndrome is due to a fall during his deployment to Iraq. See April 2023 Right Shoulder VA 21-4138.

The Board notes that there is a favorable finding in this matter. The AOJ conceded that the Veteran has been diagnosed with right shoulder impingement syndrome. See August 2023 Rating Decision. Therefore, the question remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's right shoulder impingement syndrome began during service or is otherwise due to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

As to the necessary element of incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service, the Board notes the Veteran's contention that "[d]uring [his] active duty service, [he] injured [his] right shoulder" in "a fall," and that he has "had issues with [his] right shoulder ever since active duty." See April 2023 Right Shoulder VA 21-4138.

Looking to the Veteran's service treatment records, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported no bone or joint problems that could be made worse by a change in physical activity, inclusive of back, knee, or hip. See April 2008 Periodic Health Assessment. The Veteran further denied suffering from any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care, and upon separation he reported no impaired use of arms, legs, hands, or feet; no swollen or painful joints; no painful shoulder, elbow, or wrist, including pain, dislocation, etc.; no bone, joint, or other deformity; as well as no arthritis, rheumatism, or bursitis. See March 2008 Report of Medical Assessment; August 2008 Report of Medical History.

However, during the Veteran's initial period of active service between December 2005 to June 2006, the Veteran was "seen in triage for pain" in his right arm and leg after a reported "fall" and was "instructed to use [over the counter] pain meds, ice and stretch." See April 2006 Chronological Record of Medical Care. While no swelling or bruising was noted, the Veteran described his pain at the time as a 5 out of 10, was instructed to call for a follow-up appointment, and was placed on "light duty" for 3 days. See id. Accordingly, the Board finds that the record sufficiently evidences the occurrence of an in-service injury.

As to the question of nexus, the Board notes that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2022, in which the examiner opined that the Veteran's "shoulder condition is less likely than not related to a specific exposure event experienced by the veteran during service in southwest Asia." See April 2022 Shoulder and Arm Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire. Instead, the examiner opined that the Veteran's shoulder condition was more likely due to "[d]uty wear and tear and not related to a specific exposure event experienced by the veteran during service in Southwest Asia." See id. 

In May 2023, the Veteran was afforded a second VA examination, in which the examiner opined that the Veteran's "claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." See May 2023 Shoulder Conditions C&P Examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran's records showed "[n]o indication of right shoulder condition prior to enlisting in the military," and that the "Veteran has claimed [r]ight shoulder condition as being directly related to military service," but that "[b]ased on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of [s]houlder impingement syndrome . . . and military service." See id. Specifically, the examiner opined that "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." Id. Thus, the examiner noted that "[t]he Veteran's claimed right shoulder condition diagnosed as right shoulder impingement was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." Id.

The Board finds both VA opinions to be of diminished probative value. Though the records were reviewed, and the examinations conducted in-person, the examiners failed to cite medical literature to support their opinions and improperly discounted the Veteran's contentions as they relate to symptoms of shoulder injury and pain in-service and in the years since. Moreover, the Board notes the inconsistency between the April 2022 examination, in which the examiner opined negatively, in part, based on "wear and tear" from service being a more likely cause of the Veteran's condition, while the May 2023 examiner discounted the Veteran's in-service injury altogether. Compare April 2022 Shoulder and Arm Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, with May 2023 Shoulder Conditions C&P Examination. Thus, the Board finds these opinions improperly relied upon the absence of in-service records as definitive negative evidence of a nexus relationship and were overly conclusory in nature. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Therefore, the Board finds that these examinations are not fully dispositive to the claim. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

The Board notes that the Veteran also submitted private medical nexus opinion in which the examiner, a certified physician assistant, opined that "[t]he veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active duty onset of symptoms of the right shoulder and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date," highlighting the Veteran "report[ed] an injury to the right shoulder while on active duty during a fall," and "reports that he continues to have pain and symptoms in the right shoulder that initially began on active duty and have been chronic without resolution up until the current date." See April 2022 Private Right Shoulder Condition Opinion. The examiner noted that "there is current diagnosis of chronic Right Shoulder strain that correlates with the active duty mechanism of injury/event," and that "[t]he medical literature supports and documents that overuse of the shoulder muscles or a prior injury can lead to a chronic shoulder strain with decreased range of motion, proprioception, function, and strength" that "can cause a significant disability due to the likelihood of a reinjury in the same shoulder." Id. Thus, the examiner opined that "based upon [his] professional education and experience, in conjunction with the medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, it is [his] professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's current chronic Right Shoulder Strain is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his Right Shoulder Injury that occurred during active duty military service." Id.

The Board finds this private medical opinion to be of high probative value. The opinion is highly detailed, supported by medical literature, and corroborated by medical evidence associated with the Veteran's service treatment records. Moreover, the examiner's opinion corresponds with the lay assertions made by the Veteran. Specifically, the Veteran's contention that he has "had issues with [his] right shoulder ever since active duty," and "continue[s] to have pain in [his] right shoulder." April 2023 Right Shoulder VA 21-4138. The examiner also properly afforded weight to the Veteran's lay assertion that "[t]he pain in [his] shoulder becomes worse when lifting and overhead reaching," and that he "must avoid or limit certain activities, like yard work, utilizing an overhead shelf, sports, and washing [his] car because of the pain in [his] shoulder," and that he "take[s] Advil, Aspirin, Ibuprofen, and Tylenol and use[s] ice and heat to help with the pain," without improperly discounting his purported symptomatology since service. See id.

As such, having found the Veteran's lay statements credible and recognizing the diminished probative value of the negative VA nexus opinions, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise and accordingly, a nexus between the currently diagnosed right shoulder impingement syndrome and the in-service injury detailed above exists. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's right shoulder impingement syndrome is due to a shoulder injury sustained during active service. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome is, therefore, granted.

4. Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain is granted.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral hip strain. See, e.g., July 2024 VA Form 10182. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his bilateral hip strain is due to "[h]iking hills with backpack and other issued equipment like rifle," as well as "[t]he hikes during The Crucible and Marine Combat Training and during [his] deployment in Iraq." See October 2021 VA 21-526EZ. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his bilateral hip strain is due to a fall during his deployment to Iraq. See April 2023 Hips VA 21-4138.

The Board notes that there is a favorable finding in this matter. The AOJ conceded that the Veteran has been diagnosed with left and right hip strain. See August 2023 Rating Decision. Therefore, the question remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's bilateral hip disability began during service or is otherwise due to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

As to the necessary element of incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service, the Board notes the Veteran's contention that "[d]uring [his] active duty service, [he] injured both [his] hips during a combat related incident and fall," and that he has "had issues with [his] hips ever since active duty." See April 2023 Hips VA 21-4138.

As detailed above, laypersons are competent to speak to symptomatology when those symptoms are readily observable. See, e.g., Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). Moreover, the Board notes that the so-called "combat presumption" lightens the evidentiary burden on a combat Veteran with respect to showing in-service injury. Collette v. Brown, 82 F.3d 389, 392-93 (Fed. Cir. 1996). In cases of a Veteran who engaged in combat with the enemy during active service during a period of war, VA will accept lay evidence of in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, if the lay evidence of onset is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the Veteran's service, notwithstanding the lack of documentation of this in-service incurrence. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b). Further, not only is the combat injury presumed, but so, too, is the disability due to the in-service combat injury. Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998-99 (Fed. Cir. 2012). Every reasonable doubt is to be resolved in the Veteran's favor and is rebuttable only by clear and convincing evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b). However, there must still be the evidence of a current disability and a causal relationship between the current disability and the combat injury. Id. (citing Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

Here, the Board notes that the Veteran's military occupational specialty is listed on his Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty as "Unit Level Circuit Switch Operator/Maintainer" and he is noted therein as serving "in a designated Imminent Danger Pay area from July 27, 2007[,] to January 29, 2008, in Al Asad, Iraq." See May 2008 DD 214. Department of Defense deployment records further show that the Veteran served in: Kuwait from July 15, 2007, through July 26, 2007, Iraq from July 27, 2007, through July 27, 2007, Kuwait from July 28, 2007, through July 28, 2007, Iraq from July 29, 2007, through July 30, 2007, Kuwait from July 31, 2007, through January 26, 2008, Kuwait from January 27, 2008, through January 30, 2008, and again in Kuwait from January 31, 2008, through February 14, 2008. See December 2022 Toxic Exposure Memorandum. 

Moreover, while the Veteran indicated that he did not engage in "direct combat wherein he discharged his weapon," indicated that he never felt "like he was in great danger of being killed," and reported no falls or other injury events during his deployment to Iraq from July 2007 to January 2008, the Board again notes that the Veteran made these statements in a medical screening conducted over half a year post-deployment and is, thus, not dispositive contradictory evidence countering the Veteran's otherwise credible lay statements. See id. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's combat-related contentions are consistent with the circumstances, conditions, and hardships of the Veteran's combat service. 

As to the question of nexus, the Board notes that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2022, in which the examiner opined that the Veteran's "condition is less likely than not related to a specific exposure event experienced by the veteran during service in Southwest Asia." See April 2022 Hip Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire. Instead, the examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hip condition was more likely due to "[d]uty wear and tear" and "not related to a specific exposure event experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia." See id. 

The Veteran was provided a second VA examination in May 2023, which resulted in separate opinions for each hip. In both opinions, the examiner used identical language to opine that the Veteran's "claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." See May 2023 Right Hip C&P Examination; May 2023 Left Hip C&P Examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran's records showed "[n]o indication of . . . hip shoulder condition prior to enlisting in the military," and that the "Veteran has claimed [bilateral] hip condition as being directly related to military service," but that "[b]ased on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of [bilateral] hip strain and military service." See id. Specifically, the examiner opined that "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." Id. Thus, the examiner noted that "[t]he Veteran's claimed [bilateral] hip condition diagnosed as [bilateral] hip strain was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." Id.

The Board finds both VA opinions to be of diminished probative value. Though the records were reviewed, and the examinations conducted in-person, the examiners failed to cite medical literature to support their opinions and improperly discounted the Veteran's contentions as they relate to symptoms of bilateral hip injury and pain in-service and in the years since. Moreover, the Board notes the inconsistency between the April 2022 examination, in which the examiner opined negatively, in part, based on "wear and tear" from service being a more likely cause of the Veteran's condition, while the May 2023 examiner discounted the Veteran's in-service injury altogether. Compare April 2022 Hip Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, with May 2023 Right Hip C&P Examination, and May 2023 Left Hip C&P Examination. Thus, the Board finds these opinions improperly relied upon the absence of in-service records as definitive negative evidence of a nexus relationship and were overly conclusory in nature. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Therefore, the Board finds that these examinations are not fully dispositive to the claim. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

The Board notes that the Veteran also submitted private medical nexus opinions in which the examiner, a certified physician assistant, opined that "[t]he veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active duty onset of symptoms of" left and right hip strain "from active duty to the current date," highlighting the Veteran "report[ed] an injury to" his hips "while on active duty during a combat related incident and a fall," and "reports that he continues to have pain and symptoms in" his hips "that initially began on active duty and have been chronic without resolution up until the current date." See April 2022 Private Left Hip Strain Condition Opinion; April 2022 Private Right Hip Strain Condition Opinion. The examiner noted that "there is current diagnosis of chronic" bilateral hip strain "that correlates with the active duty mechanism of injury/event," and that "[t]he medical literature supports and documents that prior hip injury can cause chronic mechanical and functional instability, leading to re-injury, weakened muscles and joint capsules, and impaired neuromuscular/postular control." Id. Thus, the examiner opined that "based upon [his] professional education and experience, in conjunction with the medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, it is [his] professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's current . . . [h]ip [s]train condition is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his . . . [h]ip [i]njury that occurred during active duty military service." Id.

The Board finds this private medical opinion to be of high probative value. The opinion is highly detailed, supported by medical literature, and corroborated by medical evidence associated with the Veteran's service treatment records. Moreover, the examiner's opinion corresponds with the lay assertions made by the Veteran. Specifically, the Veteran's contentions that he has "had issues with [his] hips ever since active duty," and "continue[s] to have pain and muscle fatigue in [his] left hip and pain and muscle fatigue in [his] right hip." April 2023 Hips VA 21-4138. The examiner also properly afforded weight to the Veteran's lay assertion that "[t]he pain in [his] hips becomes worse with stair climbing, prolonged standing, prolonged walking, prolonged sitting, or running/jogging," and that he "must avoid or limit certain activities, like yard work, long car rides, sitting through a movie, sports, and house chores that require prolonged standing because of the pain in [his] hips," and that he "take[s] Advil, Aspirin, Ibuprofen, and Tylenol and use[s] ice, heat, stretching, Epsom salt soaks, and staying off [his] feet to help with the pain," without improperly discounting his purported symptomatology since service. See id.

As such, having found the Veteran's lay statements credible and recognizing the diminished probative value of the negative VA nexus opinions, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise and accordingly, a nexus between the currently diagnosed bilateral hip strain and the in-service injury detailed above exists. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's left and right hip strain is due to a fall sustained during active service. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome is, therefore, granted.

6. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for lumbosacral strain. See, e.g., July 2024 VA Form 10182. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his lumbosacral strain is due to "[h]iking hills with backpack and other issued equipment like rifle," as well as "[t]he hikes during The Crucible and Marine Combat Training and during [his] deployment in Iraq." See October 2021 VA 21-526EZ. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his lumbosacral strain is due to a fall during his deployment to Iraq. See April 2023 Back Strain VA 21-4138.

The Board notes that there is a favorable finding in this matter. The AOJ conceded that the Veteran has been diagnosed with lumbosacral strain. See August 2023 Rating Decision. Therefore, the question remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's lumbosacral strain disability began during service or is due to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

As to the necessary element of incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service, the Board notes the Veteran's contention that "[d]uring [his] active duty service, [he] injured [his] back in 2007 when . . . in Iraq," after being "attacked in the middle of the night and at the time [he] ran as fast as [he] could" back to the facility he was tasked with managing "and fell face first injuring [himself]," and that "[s]ince separating from active duty," he has "continued to have varying degrees of pain and issues with [his] low back, used over-the-counter medication to treat [his] low back pain, and continued to use the [rest, ice, compression, and elevation] method when having flareups in [his] low back." See April 2023 Back Strain VA 21-4138.

As detailed above, laypersons are competent to speak to symptomatology when those symptoms are readily observable. See, e.g., Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). Moreover, the Board again notes that the so-called "combat presumption" lightens the evidentiary burden on a combat Veteran with respect to showing in-service injury. Collette v. Brown, 82 F.3d 389, 392-93 (Fed. Cir. 1996). For the same reasons explained in the section above, the Board finds the Veteran's combat-related contentions credible and consistent with the circumstances, conditions, and hardships of the Veteran's combat service. As such, the Board presumes the occurrence of the in-service injury. See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b). 

As to the question of nexus, the Board notes that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2022, in which the examiner opined that the Veteran's "condition is less likely than not related to a specific exposure event experienced by the veteran during service in Southwest Asia." See April 2022 Back Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire. Instead, the examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was "related to possible wear and tear of duty." See id. 

The Veteran was provided a second VA examination in May 2023, in which the examiner opined that the Veteran's "claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." See May 2023 Back Conditions C&P Examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran's records showed "[n]o indication of back condition prior to enlisting or on separation exam from the military," and that the "Veteran has claimed [l]ow back condition as being directly related to military service," but that "[b]ased on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is scant data supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of [l]umbosacral strain and military service." See id. Specifically, the examiner opined that "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." Id. Thus, the examiner noted that "[t]he Veteran's claimed back condition diagnosed as lumbosacral strain was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness." Id.

The Board finds both VA opinions to be of diminished probative value. Though the records were reviewed, and the examinations conducted in-person, the examiners failed to cite medical literature to support their opinions and improperly discounted the Veteran's contentions as they relate to symptoms of shoulder injury and pain in-service and in the years since. Moreover, the Board notes the inconsistency between the April 2022 examination, in which the examiner opined negatively, in part, based on "wear and tear" from service being a more likely cause of the Veteran's condition, while the May 2023 examiner discounted the Veteran's in-service injury altogether. Compare April 2022 Back Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, with May 2023 Back Conditions C&P Examination. Thus, the Board finds these opinions improperly relied upon the absence of in-service records as definitive negative evidence of a nexus relationship and were overly conclusory in nature. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Therefore, the Board finds that these examinations are not fully dispositive to the claim. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

The Board notes that the Veteran also submitted a private medical nexus opinion in which the examiner, a certified physician assistant, opined that "[t]he veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active duty onset of symptoms of the lower back and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date," highlighting the Veteran "report[ed] an injury to the low back/lumbar spine area while on active duty" due to a middle of the "night attack while deployed in Iraq," in which "he was running as fast as possible when he fell down, face first," and "reports that he continues to have chronic pain and symptoms in the low back/lumbar spine area that initially began on active duty and have been chronic without resolution up until the current date." See April 2022 Private Lumbosacral Strain Opinion. The examiner noted that "there is current diagnosis of Lumbosacral Strain that correlates with the active duty mechanism of injury/event," and that "[t]he medical literature supports and documents that a prior low back injury and/or lumbar spine area overuse can cause a chronic lumbar strain with mechanical and functional instability, leading to re-injury, weakened muscles and joint capsules, and significant disability." Id. Thus, the examiner opined that "based upon [his] professional education and experience, in conjunction with the medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, it is [his] professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's current chronic Lumbosacral Strain is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his low back/lumbar spine area injury that occurred during active duty military service." Id.

The Board finds this private medical opinion to be of high probative value. The opinion is highly detailed, supported by medical literature, and corroborated by medical evidence associated with the Veteran's service treatment records. Moreover, the examiner's opinion corresponds with the lay assertions made by the Veteran without improperly discounting his purported symptomatology since service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that "[s]ince separating from active duty," he has "continued to have varying degrees of pain and issues with [his] low back, used over-the-counter medication to treat [his] low back pain," as well as flare-ups," and that his "current low back pain can be described as aching, throbbing, shooting pain, and a pins-and-needles sensation," which "has caused [him] to walk unevenly," and "have muscle spasms 1-2 times per week." See April 2023 Back Strain VA 21-4138. Moreover, the Veteran contends that "[m]ovements like if [he] sit[s] for too long, stand[s] too long, or even walk[s] too much" it "exacerbate[s]" his pain, and so he tries "to avoid or limit activities that aggravate and worsen [his] pain," including "avoid[ing] or limit[ing] activities that aggravate and worsen [his] pain such as prolonged walking, prolonged standing, prolonged sitting, running, using stairs, yard work, long car rides, lifting or carrying objects of more than low weight, sex, exercising with weights, and exercising workout machines." See id. Further, the Veteran contends that "[w]hen [his] lower back pain is at its worst, [he] can still move [his] back, but only slightly, can't bend over, ha[s] to wear a back brace, and use ice or heat for [his] back." Id. The Veteran further noted that his "low back pain rates around a 1 out of 10 on most days but can be as high as an 8 with the flare-ups," and that he "use[s] Advil, Tylenol, and Ibuprofen to ease [his] symptoms," and that his "condition also effects [his] job," noting that "in the last 12 months," he has "missed at least a week of work." Id.

As such, having found the Veteran's lay statements credible and recognizing the diminished probative value of the negative VA nexus opinions, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise and accordingly, a nexus between the currently diagnosed lumbosacral strain condition and the in-service injury detailed above exists. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is due to a fall sustained during active service. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is, therefore, granted.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.W. Hall, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.