Citation Nr: A25032026
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231114-392442
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The appellant is not eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an October 2023 rating decision's award of service connection for left knee strain; in this respect only, the appeal is denied.

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an October 2023 rating decision's award of service connection for right hip limitation of abduction; in this respect only, the appeal is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's March 2023 appointment of the appellant as their attorney, and the associated fee agreement, are valid. 

2. On April 18, 2023, VA received a new claim, submitted via a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, seeking service connection for a left knee disability, among other disabilities not pertinent to this attorney fee matter. 

3. The October 2023 rating decision that produced past-due benefits from which an attorney fee is now sought was the initial decision with respect to the case in terms of the award of service connection for a left knee disability.

4. In an earlier rating decision issued in November 2017, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for a right hip disability, manifested by symptoms of pain and throbbing of the leg. 

5. The October 2023 rating decision that produced past-due benefits from which an attorney fee is now sought was not the initial decision with respect to the case in terms of the award of service connection for a right hip disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria have not been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the October 2023 rating decision as derived from the award of service connection for left knee strain. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

2. The criteria have been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the October 2023 rating decision as derived from the award of service connection for right hip limitation of abduction. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from May 1978 to July 1985. 

The appellant is the Veteran's attorney, appointed to represent him in other matters before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The present matter is a simultaneously contested claim because the Veteran and the attorney have a competing financial interest in the monetary amount involved. For that reason, the attorney does not represent the Veteran in this matter due to their opposing financial interests. 

The fee decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision in the matter of eligibility for attorney fees arising from an October 2023 rating decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, both the Veteran and the appellant were notified of the relevant rating and fee decisions issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran was also provided a copy of the appellant's November 2023 Notice of Disagreement in January 2024 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Therefore, the Board now proceeds with direct review of the appeal. 

Legal Criteria

A claimant may have attorney or agent representation for the prosecution of claims for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5904. 

A power of attorney, executed on either VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, is required to represent a claimant before VA. The power of attorney shall contain the signature of the claimant and the signature of the agent or attorney and shall be presented to the appropriate VA office for filing in the Veteran's claims folder. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(a). A power of attorney may be revoked at any time, and an agent or attorney may be discharged at any time. Unless a claimant specifically indicates otherwise, the receipt of a new power of attorney executed by the claimant and the organization or individual providing representation shall constitute a revocation of an existing power of attorney. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f)(1).

All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney. To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following: the name of the Veteran; the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the Veteran; the name of any disinterested third-party payer and the relationship between the third-party payer and the Veteran, claimant, or appellant; the applicable VA file number; and the specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined. Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past-due benefits. A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the AOJ within 30 days of its execution. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). Fee agreements must be reasonable; those which do not exceed 20 percent of past-due benefits are presumed reasonable. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(f).

For initial decisions issued on or after the effective date of the modernized review system (AMA) of February 19, 2019, agents and attorneys may charge claimants or the appellants for representation provided: After an AOJ has issued an initial decision on a claim or claims, including any claim to reopen under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a) or for an increase in rate of a benefit; a review request (such as a notice of disagreement (NOD), higher-level review (HLR), or supplemental claim) of the initial AOJ decision has been filed with respect to that decision; and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in 38 C.F.R. §14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1); see also Military-Veterans Advocacy v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 7 F.4th 1110 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

When a claimant or appellant and an attorney or agent have entered into a fee agreement under which the total amount of the fee payable to the agent or attorney (i) is to be paid to the attorney by the Secretary directly from any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim, and (ii) is contingent on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant, the total fee payable to the attorney or agent may not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim. A claim shall be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 14.636(h)(1), 14.636(h)(2).

The term "past-due benefits" means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a readjudicated claim after a denial by an AOJ or the Board or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award and the date of the grant of the benefit by the AOJ, the Board, or an appellate court. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3). The fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable to the Veteran. See Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264 (2020); see also Gumpenberger v. Wilkie, 973 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Snyder v. Nicholson, 489 F.3d 1213 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the "past-due benefits" will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the AOJ following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased rating is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability rating initially assigned by the AOJ, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3)(i).

Analysis & Conclusions

First, the Board finds that the representation and fee agreements between the parties are valid because they contain all the necessary components described above.

Next, the Board finds that the October 2023 rating decision created a retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits that could be subject to fees. Specifically, this rating decision increased the Veteran's combined rate of disability compensation from 80 percent to 100 percent, effective as of April 18, 2023. Of note, the October 2023 rating decision adjudicated six issues. Only the issues of service connection for left knee strain and right hip limitation of abduction resulted in a grant of past-due monetary benefits from which an attorney fee could be derived. 

The remainder of the analysis in this case is where the procedural history of these two issues differs, which is why the result differs as well in terms of attorney fee eligibility based upon the matters of service connection granted for the Veteran's left knee disability versus his right hip disability. The differences between these two issues, as pertains to fee eligibility, is discussed in turn below. 

1. The appellant is not eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an October 2023 rating decision's award of service connection for left knee strain; in this respect only, the appeal is denied.

The governing statutory and regulatory authorities make clear that in VA disability claims adjudications, attorney fees are not warranted when past-due monetary benefits arise from the AOJ's initial adjudication with respect to the case. See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). In plain terms, Congress established this system because "Congress doesn't want veterans to pay fees before VA denies them a benefit. But once VA denies a claim, attorneys can be compensated for helping veterans get the benefits they deserve." Chisholm v. Collins, No. 22-7028, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336, *10 (Mar. 13, 2025). One might also think of this as VA having the first opportunity to reach a grant of the benefit sought on their own first, without attorney or representative costs to the Veteran, and then, only if VA denies the claim, a fee may be charged in correcting that denial. 

Here, because the October 2023 rating decision was the first decision to adjudicate whether service connection was warranted for the Veteran's left knee disability, and the AOJ granted that claim in the first instance, the October 2023 rating decision was the initial decision with respect to the case and attorney fees are not warranted on that basis. The attorney's appeal for eligibility to the payment of fees, regarding the award of service connection for left knee strain only, is denied.  

2. The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an October 2023 rating decision's award of service connection for right hip limitation of abduction; in this respect only, the appeal is granted.

In contrast, the October 2023 rating decision was not the first decision to adjudicate whether service connection was warranted for a right hip disability. Instead, an August 2017 claim sought service connection for "right hip/leg throbs/pain (secondary to: status post right ankle fracture)." A November 2017 rating decision adjudicated that claim, denying service connection for right hip/leg throbs/pain. 

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim, again seeking service connection for "right hip condition to include as secondary to right ankle." Ultimately, the October 2023 rating decision that produced the past-due benefits from which the attorney now seeks a fee then adjudicated the claim of service connection for a right hip disability, explicitly including leg throbs and pain, and awarded service connection for a right hip condition based upon limitations of motion in the ranges of abduction, extension, and flexion of the right hip. Only the limitation of abduction resulted in a compensable rating, so where the others were granted service connection, they were rated as zero percent disabling and did not result in a monetary award. Therefore, only the award of service connection based on limitation of abduction is pertinent to this fee decision. 

[CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE]?

However, where VA previously denied a claim of service connection for a right hip disability in November 2017, then the October 2023 rating decision granted the claim, the October 2023 rating decision was not the initial decision with respect to the case and fees are warranted. The attorney's appeal for eligibility to the payment of fees, regarding the award of service connection for the right hip only, is granted.  

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.