Citation Nr: A25032877
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 220822-332629
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits, other than employment services, to include additional education in pursuit of a Doctorate Degree in Business Philosophy/Organizational Management with Entrepreneurship, under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from January 2014 to October 2015.  His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal and the Parachute Badge.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2022 decision issued by the VR&E Division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Baltimore, Maryland.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) that same month, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional error.  The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claim is readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In April 2024, after this appeal was filed with the Board, the Veteran's attorney notified VA of his intent to withdraw from representation.  However, a motion conforming to the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 20.6(a)(2) has not been received.  As such, and because the Veteran has not otherwise revoked the existing power of attorney in the representative's favor, the attorney must continue to be recognized as the Veteran's representative for purposes of issuing this remand.

Entitlement to VR&E benefits is remanded.

The Board observes that, at present, the claims file does not contain all of the documents relevant to the Veteran's claim.  Notably, the Veteran's VA Form 28-1902w (Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI)) and initial vocational evaluation is missing.  Additionally, the August 2022 decision reflects that the AOJ's determination was based, in part, on a "re-evaluation" meeting on August 2, 2022.  However, at present, no reports or notes from that meeting are located in the record.  Finally, the August 2022 decision references a "previously agreed to training program for [a] master's degree in cybersecurity," suggesting that the Veteran and vocational rehabilitation counselor signed a rehabilitation plan.  The Board has attempted to obtain the entire VR&E record administratively; however, those efforts have been unsuccessful.

Due process requires that the AOJ ensure that a complete copy of the record before the AOJ be made available for the Board's review in connection with an appeal.  See, e.g., 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (requiring the Secretary to consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case).  Here, that has not been done. As such, a remand to the AOJ for corrective action is required.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (noting that the Board may remand for correction of an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim).

On remand, the AOJ must ensure that the entire VR&E record (to include any such records located in the VR&E CWINRS notes) are obtained and associated with the claims file.  If records pertaining to the VR&E claim cannot located, the AOJ must undertake efforts to rebuild the Veteran's file, as necessary.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Ensure that all relevant documents related to the Veteran's claim for VR&E services are obtained and associated with the electronic claims file.  If any of the records sought are unavailable, undertake efforts to rebuild the Veteran's file, as necessary. 

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.