Citation Nr: A25032517
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-466479
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low back pain for accrued benefits purposes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for scar, residuals of a left knee laceration, to include a left knee condition for accrued benefits purposes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability for accrued benefits purposes is remanded.

Entitlement service connection for right foot disability for accrued benefits purposes is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had service from July 1969 to July 1971. He died in July 2019. The appellant is the Veteran's mother who has been substituted in the claim for purposes of accrued benefits.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024. In August 2024, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) received VA Form 10182 (Board NOD) selecting a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant or her attorney at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.302(a).

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the appellant's assertions.  Neither the appellant's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.  Indeed, the Board expressly defers a credibility determination in this appeal until the development has been completed to the extent feasible.

Preliminary Matters

The Veteran sought service connection for the claimed disabilities due to injury sustained in service after a fall from a telephone pole.

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence to determine its probative value, accounting for evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Masors v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 181 (1992); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 164 (1991); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). The Board finds that the decedent's reports of a fall from a pole in service are not credible.

At an October 1987 orthopedic disability evaluation, the decedent reported that he fell from a telephone pole and injured his back while in Vietnam in 1971. He stated that he did not report the injury to medics. See Medical Treatment Records - Furnished by SSA at 6 (October 2002).  At a January 1988 VA appointment, the Veteran reported that back pain began in 1973 when he fell from a telephone pole. Id at 69. At a February 1988 appointment, he continued to report onset of pain in 1976 and 1983.  Id at 70. The Veteran reported onset of back pain in 1976 resulting from work-related lifting at a November 1988 neurological examination. Id at 75. At an October 1993 disability examination, the Veteran reported that "sometime when he was two years old, he fell out of a second story window and landed on his back." Id at 49. In a September 2002 statement, the Veteran reported that he injured his knee in basic training then reinjured it in Vietnam when he "fell out of the pole" when fixing a compound light. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim (September 2002). On his January 2019 application for compensation, he claimed pain in the back caused by falling from a pole after being shot explaining that he was shot at while hanging phone lines on a pole. See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (January 2019).

The Veteran's reports to medical professionals and VA regarding when and where he injured his back are vague, inconsistent, and conflicting. He alternatively relates back injury to a pre-service fall, an in-service fall, and a post-service fall.  None of these statements offer more than vague approximations regarding the onset of the decedent's symptoms. These vague accounts lack the specificity needed for corroboration, are not corroborated by anything in the record, and are not followed by continuity of symptoms or treatment which would lend credence to the statements. The Veteran first reported an injury in service 16 years after separation. Later reports of injury varied as to whether or not onset was in and/or due to service and became more dynamic as to the circumstances but no more specific. Additionally, statements made in pursuit of the Veteran's claim for service connection for right foot disability (that he received a Purple Heart for his injury (See VA 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim (January 2016)) casts doubt on the veracity of his statements.

The Board finds the February 2020 and February 2025 private medical opinions to be of little probative value as they are based on the Veteran's inconsistent statements. Further, the Board assigns the private, February 2025 medical opinion little probative value as it includes the opinions and conclusions drawn by the appellant's attorney as evidence in support of the claims. The appellant's attorney is not a medical professional shown to possess the necessary medical training or expertise to make the determinations upon which the clinician relied. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). An adequate medical report must rest on correct facts and reasoned medical judgment so as to inform the Board on a medical question and facilitate the Board's consideration and weighing of the report against any contrary reports." Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 293 (2012); see also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) ("An opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.").

Subject to the foregoing and for the reasons below, the Board finds that the medical evidence associated with the claims file is inadequate to decide the claim.

1.  Entitlement to service connection for low back pain

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability

3. Entitlement to service connection for scar, residuals of a left knee laceration, to include a left knee condition 

4. Entitlement service connection for right foot disability

The appellant contends that the Veteran's low back, bilateral knee, and right foot disabilities were caused by service.

Service treatment records (STRs) reflect the Veteran had clinically normal knees, feet, and spine with full range of motion on entry into service. See Military Personnel Record at 59 (February 2016). On the pre-induction Report of Medical History, the Veteran reported a history of low back pain.  See STR at 19 (February 2016). A December 1969 treatment note reflects a report of low back pain and left leg pain for which the Veteran was prescribed Zactrin and Robaxin. Id at 20. January 1970 treatment notes reflect that knee pain persisted from that point, and the decedent struck his left knee in the same area roughly a month after the initial report of pain. Id at 20-21. A January 26, 1970, orthopedic appointment reflects the decedent reported that he hit his knee one time on guard duty and it "gives away at times;" he denied locking and instability. He was noted to have an abrasion on the knee; x-ray and function tests were normal. Id at 22. A May 1970 treatment note reflects the decedent received sutures for a laceration to in the right great toe which were removed a week later. Id at 26. November 1970 x-rays reflect normal right toes following the Veteran's report that a trailer was dropped on his toes. Id at 6. STRs reflect no complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for a right knee disability. A July 1971 separation examination reflects clinically normal spine, lower extremities, and feet. Id at 7. The Veteran referenced no in-service injury or disability in his comments.

As noted above, no VA medical opinions are associated with the record; and associated private medical opinions are inadequate. The Board finds that, with regard to the issues of entitlement to service connection for low back disability, left knee disability, and right foot disability, VA's duty to assist is triggered because (1) an in-service injury is established and (2) is there competent, credible evidence of in-service symptoms. 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Likewise, no VA examiner has opined as to whether right knee disability is caused or aggravated by service or a claimed disability. As such, the Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on the issues on appeal.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's claimed conditions. The examiner must review the claims file. Specifically, the examiner must opine:

a)	Whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's low back disability pre-existed service, and if so, whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the pre-existing condition did NOT undergo an increase in the underlying pathology during service, i.e., was not aggravated during service. 

If there was an increase in the severity of the Veteran's disorder, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether such increase was clearly and unmistakably due to the natural progress of the disease. The examiner should consider that the Veteran's entrance examination was normal, but on his pre-induction Report of Medical History he reported a history of low back pain. 

b)	If the low back disability is found not to have clearly and unmistakably pre-existed service, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's condition is related to service. 

c)	Whether a scar, residual of knee laceration to include a left knee disability was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including striking it on a truck in January 1970.

d)	Whether a right foot disability is at least as likely as not related to service, including dropping a trailer on the toes in November 1970.

(Continued on the next page)

?

e)	Whether a right knee disability is at least as likely as not related to service or caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase in severity due to) by any disability the examiner opines is due to service. If a disability is found to not have been caused or aggravated by service or a disability determined to be the result of service, then identify the etiology considered more likely (and explain why).

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Edwards, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.