Citation Nr: A25032229
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 221222-307884
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is granted.   

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for insomnia due to an undiagnosed illness is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for fatigue due to an undiagnosed illness is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is in approximate balance that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is related to his service. 

?

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from January 1991 to July 1991 and had an earlier period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from January 1989 to September 1989.

In April 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of his claims for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, insomnia, and fatigue, most recently addressed in a March 2003 rating decision.  In August 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received as it denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  The AOJ's favorable finding regarding VA's receipt of new and relevant evidence is binding on the Board, and thus, the threshold matter will not be addressed further.  

In a December 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran selected the Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge lane pursuant to the modernized review system.  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 supplemental claim decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

?

The Veteran submitted evidence coincident with his December 2022 VA Form 10182.  The Board is cognizant of the decision by the United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) in Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  In Edwards, the Court found that, where the Veteran had submitted additional evidence with a VA Form 10182 electing Direct review, the Board had a regulatory duty to clarify the Veteran's intentions.  The Board sent the Veteran a letter in December 2024 explaining the option to switch Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) dockets if the Veteran wished to have the Board consider the additional evidence.  The Veteran did not submit a request to switch AMA dockets, and the Board will proceed with adjudication of the appeal on the Direct docket.  

However, as the Board is remanding the claims seeking service connection for insomnia and fatigue for further development, the additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the remanded claims.

Service Connection - Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran and his representative contend the Veteran's anxiety and depression are directly related to his service.  See April 2023 Informal Hearing Presentation.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  Generally, service connection requires (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In the August 2022 decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran has a current acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as anxiety and depression.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In a March 2003 rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  In the decision, the AOJ noted how a June 5, 2001 record from the Department of the Army, U.S. Armed Services for Research of Unit Records, reflects the Veteran's unit was located in Khobar Towers, Dhahran providing security when a SCUD missile hit a warehouse in February 1991 causing multiple casualties to United States military personnel.  A review of the records from the Department of the Army dated June 5, 2001 confirm the February 1991 SCUD missile that killed 28 United States military personnel.  Accordingly, the Board finds the competent and credible evidence of record supports an in-service event regarding the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.  Thus, the question becomes whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is related to his service.  On this question there is a probative opinion relating the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder to his service in Southwest Asia.  

Following a January 1996 VA examination, the VA examiner opined the Veteran's symptoms of his acquired psychiatric disorder seem to be related to his experience in Southwest Asia.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran's depression began within six months of returning to the United States from his service during the Gulf War.  Additionally, the examiner noted the distinct change in his behavior and his outlook on life upon returning home from his service in Southwest Asia.  The Board acknowledges that as part of the opinion the examiner stated he, "is unable with conviction to relate the [V]eteran's depression with his Gulf [War] experiences."  However, VA regulations do not require one hundred percent certainty to find there is a causal relationship between a current disability and service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Thus, the Board finds the probative evidence of record to be at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is related to service.  Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for insomnia due to an undiagnosed illness is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for fatigue due to an undiagnosed illness is remanded.

The Veteran and his representative contend the Veteran's insomnia and fatigue are related to military environmental exposures during his service in Southwest Asia.  See December 2022 VA Form 10182.

A review of the claims file illustrates that the service treatment records for the Veteran's United States Air Force Reserve service were added to the claims file on December 11, 2017.  However, the service treatment records for the Veteran's period of active duty in the United States Army from January 1991 to July 1991 and his period of ACDUTRA from January 1989 to September 1989 are not in the claims file.  Moreover, the service treatment records for the Veteran's United States Army Reserve and National Guard service are not in the claims file.  As the claims file does not contain documentation that the service treatment records are unavailable, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that further attempts were not made to obtain these records, and a remand is required to obtain a complete copy of the Veteran's service treatment records.  All attempts to secure these records must be documented in the record, and the Veteran must be notified of the unavailability of any records in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).  

In addition, the Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on the issues of entitlement to service connection for insomnia and fatigue because no VA examiner has opined whether the Veteran has insomnia and/or fatigue that is related to toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during his service in Southwest Asia, or due to an undiagnosed illness from his service in Southwest Asia.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1117, 1168. As these statutes were effective at the time of the decision on appeal, opinions on these questions should have been obtained prior to the decision on appeal; thus, a remand is required to obtain new examinations and opinions.   

?

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's complete service treatment records for his period of active duty from January 1991 to July 1991, his period of ACDUTRA from January 1989 to September 1989, and for his United States Army Reserve and National Guard service.  All attempts to secure these records must be documented in the record, and the Veteran must be notified of the unavailability of any records in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).    

2. After completing the development requested in item 1, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to address the Veteran's insomnia and fatigue claims.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.  All indicated tests should be conducted, and the reports of any such studies incorporated into the examination reports to be associated with the claims file. 

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should address the following:

(a.) Insomnia 

i) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's insomnia is attributable to TERA?

In providing this opinion, the reviewing clinician must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service, as well as the synergistic and combined total effect of all TERA. 

ii) If the answer to question (i) is no, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's insomnia is an undiagnosed illness or, alternatively, a diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI) or illness resulting from a MUCMI?  The examiner should address whether the disability has a partially explained etiology or a partially explained pathophysiology.

An "undiagnosed illness" means a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.

The term "MUCMI" refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs, and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic MUCMIs of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered "medically unexplained." 

(b.) Fatigue

i) Does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome or has he had such a diagnosis at any time during the pendency of the claim (since April 2022)?

ii) If the answer to question (i) is no, then is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's fatigue is an undiagnosed illness or, alternatively, a diagnosed MUCMI or illness resulting from a MUCMI?  The examiner should address whether the disability has a partially explained etiology or a partially explained pathophysiology.

In addressing sections (a.) and (b.), the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  The examiner must fully explain the rationale for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate.  If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Breitbach, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.