Citation Nr: A25032936
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231012-384048
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection is granted for granulomatous disease (pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honors Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act)).

REMANDED

Service connection is remanded for granulomatous disease on any basis other than the PACT Act (which might establish an earlier effective date than the date assigned by the Pact Act-based grant).

Service connection is remanded for other respiratory conditions, including but not limited to, a cyst in the right lung.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of granulomatous disease and served on active duty in Iraq and Qatar after August 2, 1990, and in Afghanistan after September 11, 2001. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for granulomatous disease are met under the PACT Act. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1119, 1120, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303; the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act (2022).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2006 to January 2012. See February 2012 DD 214. The Veteran was awarded several medals, including the Afghanistan Campaign Medal with one service star, the Iraq Campaign Medal with one service star, and the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal. See id. The Veteran served in Qatar from January 2010 to June 2010 and in Afghanistan from June 2010 to July 2010. See January 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Memo, Persian Gulf Veteran-Sec. 1117. The Veteran received fire pay, imminent danger pay, and/or hazardous duty pay for service in Iraq from January 2008 to June 2008 and in Qatar from January 2010 to August 2010. See id. 

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of other respiratory condition, including but not limited to cyst in the right lung, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Finality of a Legacy Claim

Legal Background

With regard to finality, under the previous "legacy" system (for claims not subject to the modernized review system), an AOJ decision became final unless a Notice of Disagreement was filed, or new and material evidence (NME) was received within one year of the AOJ decision. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156 (b), 20.1103. Stated another way, under the previous legacy system, a "finally adjudicated claim" is a claim that is adjudicated by the VA as either allowed or disallowed when whichever of the following occurs first: (i) the expiration of the one-year period in which to file a Notice of Decision, pursuant to the provisions of §19.52(a) or §20.502(a) of this chapter, as applicable; or (ii) disposition on appellate review. 38 C.F.R. § 3.160 (d)(1). In that system, an AOJ decision became final "only after the period for appeal has run." Jennings v. Mansfield, 509 F.3d. 1362, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

However, under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b), new and material evidence, as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a), that is received prior to the expiration of the applicable appellate period (one year for a rating decision and 60 days for a SOC), will be considered to have been submitted in connection with the claim which was pending at the beginning of the appeal period. As to finality, when new and material evidence is received before the end of an appeal period for an AOJ decision under § 3.156(b), that decision does not become final.

The constructive possession doctrine allows for evidence that is within the VA's control and that "could reasonably be expected to be a part of the record before ... the Board" to be considered as part of the record. Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611, 613 (1992). VA medical records created within the appeal period following an AOJ decision, or before the AOJ issues a decision, are "constructively received" for the purpose of this analysis. Lang v. Wilkie, 971 F.3d 1348, 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2020). A Veteran does not need to take any affirmative action for that Veteran's own VA-generated medical records to become part of the record. Id.

Furthermore, constructive possession requires that the VA evidence be "relevant" and "reasonably connected" to the claim; it does not require that the VA evidence be specific to the claimant or have a "direct" relationship to the claim. Euzebio v. McDonough, 989 F.3d 1305, 1321 (Fed. Cir. 2021). However, if there is no reasonable possibility that the VA medical evidence would assist the claimant in substantiating his or her claims for benefits, VA need not obtain the VA medical evidence. Id. at 1305. Finally, for the evidence to be constructively of record, it needs to be within the control of the Secretary of VA and "relevant and reasonably connected to the veteran's claim." Conyers v. McDonough, 91 F.4th 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2024) (quoting Euzebio, 989 F.3d at 1321).

Procedural History

In February 2012, within one year of separation from active duty, the Veteran filed a claim for benefits for a "respiratory condition," among other disabilities.

In July 2013, the AOJ denied the claim for benefits for a respiratory condition. The Veteran did not appeal this decision.

In December 2019, VA associated the Veteran's June 2012 to January 2019 VA treatment records with his claims file.

In January 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for "chronic granulomatous disease and cyst in right lung (9mm)," among other conditions.

Six days later, the AOJ sent the Veteran a letter requesting that this claim be filed on the correct form because the claim was previously denied as a respiratory condition. The Veteran did not file a Supplemental Claim for benefits for either a respiratory condition or chronic granulomatous disease in response to this request.

In April 2023, the AOJ denied the claim for service connection for a cyst in the right lung, a respiratory condition. See April 2023 rating decision. The Veteran's VA treatment records encompassing June 2012 to January 2019 were not included in the list of evidence considered by the AOJ in this decision.

The next month, the Veteran timely filed a request for higher-level review of the April 2023 rating decision. In a May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ identified a duty-to-assist error in the April 2023 rating decision for the VA's failure to obtain other records.

In August 2023, after further evidentiary development, the AOJ confirmed and continued the denial of service connection for a cyst in the right lung. 

In October 2023, the Veteran filed a timely Notice of Disagreement. 

Analysis

Because the AOJ adjudicated the Veteran's claim for service connection for a cyst in the right lung, a respiratory condition, the AOJ implicitly found that the June 2012 to January 2019 VA treatment records were constructively in the possession of VA and new and material evidence under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b). Therefore, the July 2013 denial of service connection for a respiratory condition did not become final and remained pending. Accordingly, this appeal is from the original claim for service connection for any respiratory condition.

?

Service connection for granulomatous disease

Legal Criteria

Service connection may be granted for a disability caused by a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

Every Veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1111. Mere history of pre-service existence of a disease does not constitute a notation of such condition. See Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238 (1994) (holding that "asthma" was not noted where, although the Veteran checked a box indicating that he had a history of the disease, a clinical evaluation detected no abnormalities of the lungs). "A preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated by active military, naval, or air service, where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease." See 38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(a).

The Sergeant First Class (SFC) Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act of 2022, 136 Stat. 1759 (PACT Act), was enacted in August 2022. The PACT Act grants presumptive service connection benefits to a "covered veteran" for certain diseases associated with exposure to burn pits and other toxins, including but not limited to granulomatous disease. 38 U.S.C. § 1120(b)(7), (c). A "covered veteran" is any Veteran who performed active military, naval, air, or space service while assigned to a duty station in, including airspace above, specific countries on or after August 2, 1990, or certain other countries on or after September 11, 2001. 38 U.S.C. § 1119(c)(1)(A)-(B).

Factual Background

At his February 2006 enlistment examination, the medical examiner found the Veteran qualified for service and did not list any defects of diagnoses regarding the lungs. 

June 2006 service treatment records (STRs) include a chest x-ray showing multiple, sub-centimeter densities throughout both lungs, a nine-millimeter cyst at the left apical lung, and a prominent left hilum. A computed tomography (CT) examination showed multiple, densely calcified, bilateral granulomas and densely calcified, bilateral hilar and mediastinal nodes. These were consistent with old, healed, remote granulomatous disease. In June 2006, a medical examiner found the Veteran qualified for initial firefighter training and noted that CT examination of the chest revealed healed, remote granulomatous disease that was of no clinical significance.

November 2006 STRs note the Veteran's report of throat pain and difficulty breathing after strenuous physical training. He presented with trouble breathing and wheezing in the right lung. A chest x-ray showed bilateral nodules and the Veteran was diagnosed with pericarditis and prescribed albuterol.

The Veteran served in Qatar from January 2010 to June 2010 and in Afghanistan from June 2010 to July 2010. See January 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Memo, Persian Gulf Veteran-Sec. 1117. The Veteran received fire pay, imminent danger pay, and/or hazardous duty pay for service in Iraq from January 2008 to June 2008 and in Qatar from January 2010 to August 2010.

In April 2011, the Veteran had chest pain that lasted longer than 15 minutes. See April 2011 service treatment records. He reported that he had chest pain and shortness of breath every year during his 1.5-mile run for his physical training test. Id. Additionally, the Veteran experienced lightheadedness and tunnel vision. See May 2011 service treatment records. A chest x-ray revealed that multiple calcified granulomas were stable. See April 2011 service treatment records.

In June 2012, a chest x-ray showed round, smooth, calcific granuloma in the bilateral hilar, bilateral midlung, and left lower lung. See June 2012 VA treatment records. In July 2012, the Veteran reported chest wall pain, possibly from push-ups. See July 2012 VA treatment records. In October 2012, the Veteran presented with a nonproductive cough and wheezing. See October 2012 VA treatment records. An x-ray of the Veteran's left shoulder revealed several stable granulomas. See October 2012 VA treatment records. 

In November 2013, an x-ray of the Veteran's left shoulder showed multiple calcified granulomas involving the left midlung zone. See November 2013 VA treatment records.

In September 2015, the Veteran reported sinus congestion, chest congestion, trouble breathing, productive cough, yellowish mucous, runny now, headache, sneezing, and wheezing. He said it started suddenly, but the symptoms went away. The symptoms returned when he started cleaning the house, and they got worse. See September 2015 VA treatment records.

The Veteran provided a statement regarding his respiratory condition in August 2012. He worked the towers in Iraq. A colonel checked the air quality and said that it was "pretty bad." The Veteran stated human waste, paint, and batteries, were burned, and there were lots of fumes. He said he was exposed to burn pits in Iraq that were maintained by the military and contractors. See August 2012 VA examination.

Analysis

The Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to burn pits and other toxins (BPOT), and there is evidence of a current disability (granulomatous disease), which is presumed to be due to such exposure under the PACT Act. Accordingly, service connection is warranted for granulomatous disease on a presumptive basis given the Veteran's presumed BPOT exposure. This issue is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for granulomatous disease on any basis other than the PACT Act (to potentially establish an earlier effective date)

Service connection for any other respiratory condition, including but not limited to, a cyst in the right lung

These claims are remanded to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors, and to provide the Veteran with medical examinations and opinions.

A medical examination or opinion is necessary when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing an in-service injury or disease, and (3) an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with service, but (4) insufficient medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2). 

The Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on the issue of service connection for granulomatous disease prior to the effective date of the PACT Act because no VA examiner has opined whether, given the presumption of soundness, the Veteran's granulomatous disease was aggravated by active service. 

Additionally, the Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on the issue of service connection for any other respiratory condition, including but not limited to, a cyst in the right lung, because no examiner has opined whether, given the presumption of soundness, any other respiratory condition was caused or aggravated by service or whether any other respiratory condition might be secondary to (that is, cause or aggravated by) the now service-connected granulomatous disease. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's VA treatment records for the period from February 2024 to the present.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the respiratory conditions, including but not limited to granulomatous disease and a cyst in the right lung. The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Direct service connection - Is the granulomatous disease at least as likely as not related to service, including but not limited to exposure to burn pits and other toxins?

Presumption of soundness - 

Did the disability clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) preexist the Veteran's service? 

If the examiner finds granulomatous disease did clearly and unmistakably preexist service, was it clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service?  

If the examiner finds that granulomatous disease either did not clearly and unmistakably preexist service -or- was not clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to service, including the Veteran's exposure to burn pits and other toxins during active service in Iraq, Qatar, or Afghanistan.

Presumption of aggravation - 

If the examiner finds that the Veteran's granulomatous disease existed prior to service, was it at least as likely as not increased in severity during service?

If so, was the increase in severity clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) due to the natural progress of the disease?

Direct service connection - Is a respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, at least as likely as not related to service, including exposure to burn puts and other toxins during active service in Iraq, Qatar, and Afghanistan?  

Presumption of soundness - 

Did a respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) preexist the Veteran's service? 

If the examiner finds that a respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, did clearly and unmistakably preexist service, was it clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service?  

If the examiner finds that a respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, either did not clearly and unmistakably preexist service -or- was not clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to service, including exposure to burn pits and other toxins during active service in Iraq, Qatar, and Afghanistan.

Presumption of aggravation - 

Did the Veteran's respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, increase in severity during service?

If so, was the increase in severity clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) due to the natural progress of the disease?

Secondary service connection - 

Is a respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, at least as likely as not due to a service-connected disability?

Is a respiratory condition, including but not limited to a cyst in the right lung, at least as likely as not aggravated, i.e., made worse, by a service-connected disability?

Provide a rationale to support the opinions.  

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lisa N. Linney, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.