Citation Nr: A25032411
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230201-355454
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of whether the debt resulting from an overpayment of VA educational assistance benefits was properly created is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2015 to June 2018.

The purported decision on appeal was issued in January 2023. The Board is unable to locate a January 2023 decision, however, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a letter in February 2023 to the Veteran's school discussing a claimed overpayment. The Board finds that this document constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

The issue of whether the debt resulting from an overpayment of VA educational assistance benefits was properly created is remanded.

VA claims that the Veteran was paid more than he was entitled for education assistance benefits.

As an initial matter, the Veteran's VA Form 10182 identifies a January 5, 2023, AOJ decision which he intended to appeal. The claims file does not contain the January 5, 2023, decision, but does contain an email discussing a Compliance Survey Response. The claims file contains a February 7, 2023, letter to a School Certifying Official regarding the Veteran's claimed debt. The Board interprets the January 5, 2023, letter as the document that the Veteran intended to appeal. 

The documents in the claim file before the decision on appeal do not make clear the amount that VA claims is owed by the Veteran, and do not show enough information for the Board to determine whether the Veteran's debt is valid.  

In addition, the Veteran believes that the debt was improperly created because VA is not accounting for holiday periods during his term of study. See February 1, 2023, Report of Contact.

An overpayment debt is created when VA determines that a beneficiary or payee has received monetary benefits to which he was not entitled.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.911, 1.962.  A claimant has the right to dispute the existence and amount of the debt.  38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 1.911 (c).  In order for the Board to determine that the overpayment was not properly created, such that the debt was not valid, it must be established that the claimant was legally entitled to the benefits in question or, if the claimant was not legally entitled, then it must be shown that VA was solely responsible for the claimant being erroneously paid benefits.

The Board finds that the evidence of record is insufficient for the Board to make a threshold determination as to the validity of the debt.  See Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430 (1991).  

Here, the compliance survey report fails to document the evidence relied upon to determine that the Veteran's program of study ended in December 2021 instead of in February 2022, as reported by the Veteran. 

The Veteran has argued that the overpayment calculation does not include breaks for holidays during the period of enrollment. It does not appeal that the AOJ has sought to obtain more information from the Veteran about the reported holiday breaks during his period of enrollment. On remand, the AOJ should seek to obtain evidence from the Veteran and the Veteran's school regarding any periods of holiday break and determine if accounting for holidays impacts the Veteran's alleged debt. 

Further, The Board finds remand is warranted to satisfy a statutory duty under 38 U.S.C. § 5104. 38 C.F.R. §20.802(a) (the Board may remand for correction of any error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim).

Generally, notice under 38 U.S.C. § 5104 must include the following:

1. Identification of the issues adjudicated.

2. A summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary.

3. A summary of the applicable laws and regulations.

4. Identification of findings favorable to the claimant.

5. In the case of a denial, identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial.

6. An explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in making the decision.

7. If applicable, identification of the criteria that must be satisfied to grant service connection or the next higher level of compensation.

38 U.S.C. § 5104 (b).

The decision on appeal does not comply with the requirements of 38 U.S.C. § 5104 (b), and there is insufficient additional documentation to determine how the Veteran's claimed debt was calculated. 

Without adequate notice of the basis for the denial, claimants cannot make an informed decision as to whether or not to accept or appeal the decision nor can they know what evidence to submit in order to substantiate the appeal. See Ingram v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 232, 252 (2007) (discussing the legislative history of 38 U.S.C. § 5104 and the importance of clear and informative notice of decisions). Moreover, the Board cannot meaningfully review the AOJ's determination, especially in light of the fact that the initial decision was not made available for review by the Board. On remand, the AOJ must associate with the record copies of all documents relied upon to support the conclusion that the Veteran was overpaid benefits.

In addition, the AOJ must provide complete notice of the decisions on appeal as required by 38 U.S.C. § 5104, to include citation to any internal guidance or other authority relied upon to support the conclusion that the Veteran overpaid benefits.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take the necessary steps to determine the periods of holiday break during his period of enrollment, including contacting the Veteran and the Veteran's school. Determine if any periods of holiday break impact the Veteran's alleged debt. 

2. Associate with the record all documents relied upon to determine that the Veteran was overpaid benefits, to include record of payments made to the Veteran. 

3. Issue the Veteran a notice of decision on the issue of entitlement to basic eligibility for VA educational assistance benefits, as described in 38 U.S.C. §5104 (b). The notice shall include but is not limited to: a summary of the evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations, to include citation to any internal guidance or other authority relied upon to support the conclusion that the Veteran overpaid educational benefits; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial (if the claim should remain denied).

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Boal, Alan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.