Citation Nr: A25032182
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-433060
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from August 1984 to March 1992. An October 2023 rating decision granted service connection for GERD with IBS, with an effective date of November 5, 2021. After continuous pursuit of the claim, a supplemental review decision was issued in the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in February 2024. The Veteran requested higher-level review (HLR) of that decision in February 2024. Later that month, the AOJ issued an HLR decision, which is the decision on appeal. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 supplemental review decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. However, as a remand of this matter is warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD with IBS is remanded.

The Board must remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. This claim must be remanded for correction of the following pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran's GERD with IBS is rated by analogy under DC 7346 at 10 percent throughout the period under review, which the Board notes predates regulatory amendments that took effect in May 2024. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114. 

In a November 2021 statement, the Veteran reported his GERD caused heartburn with acid reflux, frequent coughing, changes in his voice, and dark colored stool every other day. He reported using Rolaids and Pepto Bismol one to two times a week to help control the heartburn. He reported he was also prescribed Prilosec and Zantac, which he took twice a day. He reported he had vitamin deficiencies due to a limited diet. He also reported experiencing chest pain during flareups of GERD, and sleep disturbances.  

A February 2022 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have an esophageal condition, but the noted symptoms on examination contradict that finding. The examiner noted that the Veteran had GERD that manifested in pyrosis. The Veteran reported increased symptoms with food and difficulty sleeping. The examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had sleep disturbance and stated the Veteran's treatment plan did not include taking continuous medication. 

A February 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had GERD with continuous medication treatment. The examiner noted the GERD manifested in regurgitation and that the Veteran reported bloating and swelling. The examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had sleep disturbance or chest pain. 

A March 2023 VA examination reported the only symptom as reflux, and the Veteran's GERD was treated with continuous medication. The examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had sleep disturbance or chest pain. 

A February 2024 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had burning in the chest with regurgitation and took daily medication. The examiner noted that the Veteran had symptoms of regurgitation and pyrosis. The examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had sleep disturbance.

Private medical treatment records from February 2022 to September 2023 showed the Veteran reporting occasional indigestion, belching, and regurgitation following consumption of spicy foods. Records indicate that the Veteran's symptoms were controlled well with medication. 

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Here, three of the four VA examiners noted the Veteran was taking medication to control his GERD symptoms, and the Veteran separately reported taking medication, but it is unclear whether the examination results are improperly based on the ameliorative effects of that medication.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). 

Therefore, the Board finds that a remand is required in this case to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an adequate examination that clarifies the severity and frequency of the Veteran's GERD symptoms, to include their severity in the absence of any beneficial effects of medication.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the severity of his GERD.  The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.  All appropriate tests and studies should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

The examiner must provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's GERD under the rating criteria (old, prior to May 19, 2024) and new, effective May 19, 2024).

The examiner is reminded to pay attention to the ameliorative effects of medication and describe its impacts on the GERD. If possible, the examiner should discuss what the Veteran's GERD would be like if he were not on medication. 

Please also review the Veteran's November 2021 description of his GERD symptoms (November 22, 2021 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim).

Please include a complete rationale for the opinions provided. If you cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, please expressly indicate this and state why it is so.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Baker, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.