Citation Nr: A25032642
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240629-453142
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression and anxiety, including memory loss, difficulty establishing relationships, reaction to loud noises, and extreme emotional distress, is denied. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Appellant has not established her status as a "veteran" for VA compensation purposes, as the evidentiary record fails to demonstrate that she served on active duty for at least 24 months and/or has any acquired psychiatric disorders, to include the claimed depression and anxiety, that were clinically diagnosed under the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria and were caused or aggravated by a disease or injury sustained in the line of duty during the periods of her service on active duty for training or by an injury sustained in the line of duty during her inactive duty for training.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 106, 1110, 1153; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.4, 3.303, 3.304, 3.306.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Appellant honorably served on active duty for training (ADT) from February 12 to June 27, 2018, and from April 13 to May 19, 2020, to include additional periods of service on inactive duty for training (IDT) in the Indiana Army National Guard from January 2018 to January 2024. 

In a February 2024 rating decision, the Regional Office (RO) denied her claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, namely, depression and anxiety, to include memory loss, difficulty establishing relationships, reaction to loud noises, and extreme emotional distress. She appealed, electing the Board's Direct Review. Given her election, the Board's appellate review will be based on the evidentiary record deemed closed as of the date on which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued its notice of the decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence received thereafter, even if new and relevant to the instant appeal, may be considered only upon filing a supplemental claim with the AOJ. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  That is, the Board, by operation of law cannot consider any evidence received after the issuance of the rating decision in adjudicating this appeal.  To this end, the Appellant is encouraged to consult with her representative.

At the outset, the Board acknowledges an August 2024 Appellate Brief pointing out the Appellant's belief that her depression and anxiety are related to her service. To this end, as reflected in her April 2023 application for VA benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ), the Appellant states that her depression started around January of 2020, as soon as she started a family life, making it extremely hard for her to go back and forth between her civilian life and military drills.  She further states that her unit did not offer any support, which did not ameliorate her already difficult circumstances and made her feel alone, sad, and without military friends. As time went on, her depression only got worse leading to her extreme emotional distress at a hindering point where being gone for more than two nights at a time would put such a strain on her life and cause so much stress that she could not take it anymore. 

A January 2024 VA mental health evaluation report further reflects her statements that she was "treated poorly" on account of her religious beliefs. For example, she and her husband (who also was in the Army National Guard) declined to receive Covid vaccinations on the grounds of their religious beliefs and she was "treated badly" about not wanting the vaccine due to her religion.  She also reported having difficulty making relationships with other service members, noting her military peers telling her that they "walk on eggshells around" her.  The Appellant also stated that she wanted to leave service because of her "convictions and everything like that," to include her religion prohibiting her from wearing pants.  She "felt like [her] religion wasn't taken seriously." To this end, she reported being told by the IG to practice her religion at home, while she was hired to serve the country in the uniform.

In a January 2024 supporting "buddy" statement, the Appellant's husband notes that the Appellant did not have any mental health issues until she enlisted in the Indiana National Guard in 2018. She was bullied in basic training and when she got to her assigned unit she was bullied even more consistently once they joined their church in August of 2020. He explains that the basis for bullying was their belonging to a modest religion (Apostolic lifestyle), so people made fun of her for dressing and believing differently. She also went through a "Covid nonsense mess" from being threatened for refusing immunization for religious reasons to having to sit through counselings for not receiving the vaccine to being run around the loop to being kicked out and losing her benefits. This situation created fear, anxiety, and worry that she might have to get something she did not want in her body. The husband also notes that his wife used to be a very happy uplifting person, but the military caused her so much depression and stress in her life that now it affects her daily life which he watched firsthand. The Appellant's husband further believes that the Appellant went through extreme distress when he was deployed and did not make it home in time to see the birth of their second son. All of this caused unnecessary stress and hardship in their personal lives.

The Board is deeply sympathetic to the Appellant's circumstances, without any reservations. It certainly could not be easy for her to try staying true to her faith without feeling adequate support and respect from her unit, making her feel sad, alone, and without military friends, while also feeling ill-treated for declining vaccinations and overwhelmed by trying to balance her civilian and military life to a point which felt to her like an extreme emotional distress. Unfortunately, the Board lacks any legal authority to award VA benefits out of its sympathies for a particular appellant. Nor may the Board award VA benefits on an equitable basis. 

Rather, the Board is ultimately bound by the existing law as passed by Congress, implemented by VA, and controlled by precedential opinions of the courts and VA General Counsel. 38 C.F.R. § 20.105. This is why every award of VA benefits, to include based on a claim for service connection sought here, must be supported in law. 

Under the current law, every claimant for service connection first must establish general eligibility for VA benefits, commonly referred to as attaining a "veteran" status. D'Amico v. West, 209 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The term "veteran" (to the extent pertinent in this appeal) is defined as a person who had served in the active military service. See 38 U.S.C. § 101(2). The phrase "active military" refers to "active duty" that includes full-time duty in the Armed Forces other than active duty for training (ADT). See 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(21), 101(24)(A). With that, it is readily apparent that the law draws a clear distinction between full-time service in the regular Army and part-time service in the Army National Guard. See Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 172 (2010). By no means is this distinction intended to downplay the substantial value of contributions by every man and woman, to include the Appellant, who honorably served our Nation in uniform, be it on a full- or part-time basis, but this distinction is legally important. 

In cases, like this, a claimant who had not performed military service on active duty for a total period of at least 24 months generally is not eligible for VA benefits predicated solely on service in the Army National Guard. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12A. One exception to this general rule arises in cases involving an existing disability with already established service connection, which has not been shown in this case. See Hill v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 243, 250-52 (2016).

In these circumstances, where a claim for service connection is predicated only on the periods of ADT and IDT service, a claimant first must establish that he or she has attained a "veteran" status for VA benefits purposes. To this end, the evidence of record must show a disability caused or aggravated by a disease or injury that was sustained the line of duty during training on ADT or an injury sustained or aggravated in the line of duty during training on IDT. See 38 U.S.C. § 101(24)(B)-(C); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(b); see also, e.g., Smith v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 40, 47 (2010); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466, 470 (1995); Biggins v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 474, 478 (1991). Of particular note, the term "injury" within the meaning of Title 38 U.S.C. § 101(24) refers to the direct result(s) of an external trauma rather than a degenerative process over time. See VAOPGCPREC 4-2002 (May 14, 2002); VAOPGCPREC 86-90 (July 18, 1990); VAOPGCPREC 8-2001 (Feb. 26, 2001). The term "aggravated" refers to a pre-existing disability permanently worsened beyond its natural progress. See Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 174 (2010). By implication, whether the claimed disability was caused or aggravated by service must be demonstrated by a causal link to a very specific trauma during ADT or IDT rather than to a generally stressful nature and other hardships of military service occurring over time, to include the periods during off duty between the weekend drills.  

To that end, the Board may not presume that the claimant entered service in sound health or that her disability, if pre-existing service, was aggravated thereby. See Bowers v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 201, 206-07 (2013). Rather, the law places the burden of proof on the claimant to establish eligibility for the sought VA benefits. See Donnellan, 24 Vet. App. at 171-175; Smith v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 40, 44 (2010).

This essentially means that the Appellant bears the ultimately responsibility to show that she is entitled to service connection by showing that she attained a "veteran" status by demonstrating that she became disabled due to a specific disease or injury sustained in the line of duty during ADT or a specific injury during IDT, which either caused her claimed disability or aggravated it, if such disability pre-existed service. By implication, a "veteran" status may be predicated exclusively on the generalized "stress and hardship" associated with service that expectedly is both physically and emotionally demanding but had occurred over the period of enlistment in the Army National Guard, which is a distinct type of part-time military service in contrast to full-time service in the regular military components for at least 24 months, unless released therefrom due to a medical condition.

Here, the Board reiterates that it is not enough to assert having experienced certain feelings in reaction to stress and other hardships during the period of enlistment in the Army National Guard or conceivably related thereto. Rather, the Appellant must show a specific traumatic event that had occurred in the line of duty, that is, either during ADT from February 12 to June 27, 2018, and from April 13 to May 19, 2020, or during any of her weekend drills between January 2018 and January 2024. The phrase "in the line of duty" essentially means "during active-duty hours" and specifically excludes the periods off duty, such as any periods between the weekend drills or annual two-week recalls, apart from the periods of authorized travel to and from the assigned unit to report for such duty. See 38 U.S.C. § 106(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(e).

Once the evidence of record establishes a traumatic event sustained in the line of duty, establishing a "veteran" status for VA benefits purposes further requires the evidence of record to show that such trauma resulted in a post-service disability. For VA purposes, the term "disability" generally refers to a current impairment in earning capacity in civil occupations as a result of a disease, injury, defect (other than of congenital, developmental, or familial origin), and/or any residuals thereof. See Palczewski v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 174, 178 (2007). As such, the evidence of record must show the existence of a disability at some point, be it shortly prior to or upon filing a claim, or during its pendency. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007). As such, a remote history of a disability and/or associated symptoms, without more, is not enough to show that the claimant became disabled.  

Showing the claimed disability in certain cases does not always entail an inquiry into very specific clinical diagnosis. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-8 (Fed. Cir. 2018). But every claim for service connection for psychiatric symptoms demands an acquired psychiatric disorder clinically diagnosed based on diagnostic criteria under the DSM-5 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. (2013), as set by the American Psychiatric Association (APA)). See Martinez-Bodon v. McDonough, 28 F.4th 1241 (Fed. Cir. 2022). 

Under the DSM-5, which necessarily requires clinical expertise in such medical fields as psychology, psychiatry, or neuropsychology, a specific traumatic event sustained in the line of duty must be shown to result in a psychological or psycho-physiological state of such emotional, cognitive, and/or behavioral dysregulation, as determined by a qualified clinician, as to be of sufficient intensity to result in a clinically significant psychiatric symptomatology and constituting a psychiatric disorder. As such, even the most persuasive evidence of some relevant symptoms that, from a clinical perspective, are not clinically significant and/or do not fully conform to all DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for a psychiatric disorder, may not form the basis for finding the claimed psychiatric disability for VA purposes. This ultimately means that the claim for psychiatric symptoms without any psychiatric disorder clinically diagnosed under the DSM-5 criteria must be denied. 

It follows that, in this appeal, the Board must ultimately resolve whether or not the Appellant had sustained any disease or injury in the line of duty during her ADT service, or an injury in the line of duty during her IDT service, and, if so, whether such traumatic event in the line of duty caused any acquired psychiatric disorder, however diagnosed, but shown to have been clinically diagnosed under the DSM-5 criteria. This is not her case. In gist, the record before the Board here is devoid of any competent, namely medical evidence showing that the Appellant has been clinically diagnosed with any psychiatric disorder adhering to the DSM-5 criteria, which is dispositive in this appeal. 

Upon a clinical mental health evaluation in January 2024, the examiner opined that the Appellant's reported military experiences and hardships along with her feelings toward service, from a medical perspective, are not clinically significant and she does not have any psychiatric disorder, to include the claimed depression and anxiety, diagnosable under the DSM-5 criteria. The examiner acknowledged the Appellant's statements submitted in support of her claim along with additional information gathered upon clinical interview, to include her report that she is not particularly proud of service, largely due to the lack of understanding from her military peers and lack of support from her unit, making her feel like the military had no respect for her religious convictions. The examiner also noted her report of historical treatment with anti-depressants prescribed following an unfortunate miscarriage in January 2019. However, upon clinical evaluation in January 2024, the examiner ultimately concluded that the Appellant does not report or exhibit any current clinical signs, symptoms, or findings that may support a diagnosis of any psychiatric disorder under the DSM-5 criteria. 

The Appellant has not challenged this medical opinion or provided any competent evidence to the contrary. Absent any specialized training, knowledge, or experience in such fields as psychology, psychiatry, or neuropsychology, the Appellant is said not to possess the requisite expertise to identify clinically significant psychiatric symptoms or render a psychiatric diagnosis. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). By implication, the examiner's opinion that the Appellant does not have the claimed depression and anxiety under the DSM-5 is the only competent medical opinion of record and substantially outweighs the Appellant's medically unqualified and unsubstantiated belief to the contrary, which tips the scales against her claim of depression and anxiety. That is notwithstanding her competent and credible report of feeling "depression" and "anxiety," which are common human reactions to stress but are not synonymous with the depressive and anxiety disorders based on the diagnostic criteria outlined under the DSM-5. As such, without any psychiatric disorder clinically diagnosed under the DSM-5, the Board is precluded from finding that the Appellant became disabled and therefore she has not attained a "veteran" status for VA compensation benefits purposes. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has carefully considered the August 2024 Appellate Brief, in which the representative of record points out that the Appellant was treated for psychiatric symptoms prior to her ADT from April to May 2020. Having been dully acknowledged by the examiner, this fact is not in dispute here. With that, however, the representative is contending that another examination should reconcile the inconsistencies in the diagnoses, while the examiner should be instructed to accept the Appellant's lay statements as credible and competent. The Board disagrees.

Every witness first must be competent to attest to the facts under consideration. The Appellant is competent to attest to the circumstances of her military service and her feelings. As discussed, the Board does not doubt the sincerity of her report of experiencing what well may felt to her as depression, anxiety, and extreme emotional distress during her service as "the time went on." Yet, as discussed, the law draws a bright line between a trauma in the line of duty and degenerative process over time. Moreover, having found that the Appellant lacks the requisite expertise to identify clinically significant psychiatric symptomatology or render a psychiatric diagnosis, her own description of her feelings falls far too short of any substantial probative value to the extent necessary to determine whether she has any acquired psychiatric disorder under the DSM-5 criteria. This is exactly why she was provided a medical evaluation of her claimed disability. 

It is readily apparent from the January 2024 examination report that the examiner has dully reviewed and considered the Appellant's lay statements, her medical history based on civilian and military treatment records, to include reported prior treatment for psychiatric symptoms, as well as her military personnel records. It is further apparent that the examiner has not raised any concerns about the credibility or competence of her lay statements regarding her service and her feelings. As such, the Appellant's statements to the farthest extent of their competence were taken at a face value. However, based on all procured data, the examiner ultimately concluded that, from a medical perspective, the Appellant does not meet the DSM-5 criteria for any psychiatric disorder which she lacks competence to diagnose. 

There are no inconsistencies between this medical opinion formed on the basis of a clinical evaluation in 2024 and historical psychiatric symptoms of depression and anxiety treated five years earlier in 2019. To this end, the private medical treatment records (from Parkview received in February 2024) reflect that the Appellant was treated with sertraline (Zoloft) 50 mg daily, which (noted by the physician in April 2019) "is a low dose" prescribed to help her coping with a miscarriage in January 2019 and continued as a prophylactic prenatal care during her second pregnancy shortly thereafter. 

In March 2019, the Appellant's physician noted a "current moderate episode of major depressive disorder without prior episode: secondary miscarriage 1/2019" and felt that "the depression is simple in nature secondary to loss of pregnancy," explaining that "it is evident that she is depressed and angry about the loss of her pregnancy." After a "lengthy discussion," the physician "highly suggest[ed] finding a healthy outlet for her anger and frustration." Upon checking with her chain of command, the Appellant indicated that taking a prescription would not conflict with her military service and expressed her wish "to have medication to help her with her emotions with the loss of her pregnancy." 

The physician further noted the Appellant was seen at an emergency room a week earlier, after having a "preworkout drink" and not remembering much thereafter, while being very irrational and experiencing tingling, shakiness, numbness and discoloration in her hands, as well as some knee swelling in the absence of injury. At that time, per physician, she tested positive for methamphetamine and was diagnosed with anxiety and hand eczema. The following day, she again presented to the ER for continued adverse illicit drug reactions, reporting hallucinations and insomnia. "Upon deep conversation and inquiring about the events of the ER visit as well as the recent miscarriage," the physician opined that the Appellant is not a habitual illicit substance user and reiterated that "it is evident that she is depressed and angry about the loss of her pregnancy." 

In June 2019, it has been noted that "major depression" may be a potential concern following a recent episode of spousal physical abuse and temporary removal of her husband from their home but further annotated that the Appellant "is coping very well." The subsequent progress notes reflect no further concerns, as "she and her husband are doing very well" while consistently denying any depression or anxiety. This is clear from the Parkview progress notes from April to December 2019.

In January 2020, as reflected in the Appellant's service treatment records (STRs), she underwent her periodic military service health assessment, at which time she was also evaluated by a clinical psychologist who noted that she was not taking any medications and noted no relevant psychiatric concerns. Likewise, as detailed in a December 2021 periodic health assessment report, none of the potentially relevant emotional, cognitive, or behavioral markers for any psychiatric distress that may be suggestive of any diagnosis were reported, observed, or noted. 

Further, between those two periodic evaluations in January 2020 and in December 2021 covering the Appellant's service on IDT, she specifically denied experiencing any psychiatric issues at the time when she re-entered ADT in April 2020 and separated therefrom in May 2020.  As such, the record is ultimately devoid of any disease or injury sustained during ADT, which left the Board with a consideration of some specific injury sustained in the line of duty while on IDT. However, the Appellant's service treatment and personnel records also are devoid of any relevant information to that end. Although it is not inconceivable that the Appellant may have had a miscarriage during her weekend drill in January 2019 and/or sustained an injury leading thereto, she claims that her depression started about one year later in January of 2020, which places this consideration beyond the realm of reasonable possibilities. Even if the Board were to make a favorable concession to that end, her claim would still fail on the basis of failing to show an unresolved resulting disability, let alone due to a specific trauma in the line of duty. 

The record before the Board viewed as a whole is devoid of any evidence showing that the Appellant had sustained a specific injury in the line of duty that may have caused any acquired psychiatric disorder. The discussed evidence affirmatively and rather persuasively shows that the Appellant's historical psychiatric symptoms and treatments are unrelated to any injury in the line of duty, be it her adverse rations to illicit drug use diagnosed as "anxiety" dubbed a week later as a single moderate episode of major depressive disorder, without any such episodes before or after, along with a "simple depression" manifesting with frustrations and anger related to a miscarriage but apparently resolved, as well as an expressed concern for spousal abuse as a potential trigger of major depression which was never retriggered. 

Even if it were presumed that the Appellant was at some point diagnosed under the DSM-5 criteria based on the commentaries of the Appellant's physician alluding to the diagnosis of "anxiety" at the ER and dubbing the same as a single "moderate episode of major depressive disorder without prior episode," the Board reiterates that the record is also devoid of any episodes thereafter. Even if those events had occurred prior to her second period of ADT, which reasonably raised a possibility of aggravation, the Appellant must show that she had a pre-existing psychiatric disorder that was made worse by a very specific injury sustained in the line of duty, which also has not been shown in her case. 

It is the Appellant's burden to establish aggravation by showing a pre-existing disorder made worse by a trauma in the line of duty. Yet, the discussed medical evidence affirmative shows largely resolved historical psychiatric symptoms and discontinued treatment. To this end, after being placed on Zoloft in March 2019, the Appellant consistently has denied any depression or anxiety, to include during her regular visits to her private physician in April, May, July, August, October, November, and December 2019. By January 2020, she discontinued Zoloft and was not on any medications. At the time, she was also evaluated by a clinical psychologist who identified no relevant concerns. Likewise, in December 2021, none of the potentially relevant issues have been reported or noted. Further, between these periodic evaluations in January 2020 and December 2021, the Appellant very specifically denied having any psychiatric issues when she re-entered ADT in April 2020 and separated therefrom in May 2020. This medical evidence, to include based on the Veteran's very own statements to her military and civilian medical care providers, plainly fails to even remotely suggest, let alone show any worsening, which rules out any reasonable possibility of aggravation.

A May 2023 annual health assessment does reflect the Appellant's report of "feeling down, depressed, or hopeless" over the past two weeks and notes that she filed a claim with VA for "depression." Of particular note, however, the examining physician, who endorsed the May 2023 evaluation, further noted that the Appellant has "no current issues" that may be associated with the diagnoses of depression or other psychiatric disorder, hopelessness, severe agitation or anxiety, interpersonal conflicts, social isolation, alcohol or substance abuse, recent loss, financial stress, legal disciplinary problems, or serious physical illness. The noted absence of any markers for emotional, cognitive, and/or behavioral dysregulation or any diagnosis, to include depression and anxiety, in May 2023 aligns with the Appellant's medical treatment records and the VA's examiner's clinical impression in January 2024. By implication, the Board finds no inconsistencies that may require reconciliation by a medical professional, to include no apparent inconsistencies between the medical opinion that the Appellant does not have any psychiatric disorder under the DSM-5, which was formed on the basis of clinical evaluation in 2024, and historical psychiatric symptoms treated with anti-depressants five years earlier in 2019 and without any clinical sequalae.

No other material issues have been expressly raised by the Appellant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record, which leaves the Board without any facts that may support the legal basis for the award of the VA benefits sought here.

In sum, in order to qualify for service connection, the Appellant first must establish her status as a "veteran" for VA purposes. To this end, the evidence of record must show that she became disabled due to a specific trauma sustained in the line of duty, rather than occurring over the period of her enlistment in the National Guard. 

The evidence of record further must establish the resulting post-service disability for VA purposes. Although the Appellant is competent to report her feelings, which well may be best described in her own words as "depression" and "anxiety" due to military stress and other hardships, be it on account of refusing vaccinations, being required to wear standardized military uniform, not being particularly proud of her service in the military that did not respect her religious convictions, or feeling emotionally overwhelmed by balancing her civilian and military life, the Board may not rely only on the Appellant's description of her "depression" and "anxiety," which is not the same as having been clinically diagnosed with depressive and anxiety disorders under the DSM-5 criteria. Moreover, such diagnosis must be current in relation to her claim filed with VA.

To that end, the law demands a clinically diagnosed psychiatric disorder, while even the most persuasive evidence of some psychiatric symptomatology is not a disability for VA purposes. Given that the Appellant apparently does not possess the requisite medical expertise to diagnose herself, the only competent opinion of record in point, which turned out negative in this case, tips the scales against her claim for "depression" and "anxiety." 

Otherwise, her remote history of diagnoses, symptoms, and treatments in 2019, all of which apparently had resolved, have not been shown to relate to any specific trauma sustained in the line of duty or continuing beyond January 2020, which is too attenuated from her claim filed in April 2023 and is not at all inconsistent with the clinical findings five years later in January 2024.  

Ultimately, the evidence of record has not established any specific traumatic event sustained in the line of duty that caused any acquired psychiatric disorder clinically diagnosed under the DSM-5 criteria. Further absent creditable military service on active duty for at least 24 months, a "veteran" status for VA benefit purposes has not been attained. This is the foundational legal requirement for the award of VA benefits, which is not met here. In accordance with the law, the appeal is denied.

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alex Bardin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.