Citation Nr: A25032316
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-467096
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bronchitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2001 to October 2004, which included service in the Southwest Asia theater of Operations.

The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) received the Veteran's original service connection claim for bronchitis in August 2022.  The claimed was denied in a January 2023 rating decision.  

The Veteran submitted a February 2023 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application and an April 2024 rating decision reconsidered but denied the claim.

The Veteran submitted a May 2024 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review and an August 2024 rating decision reconsidered but denied the claim.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), that "because the regulation gives a claimant the later of one year from the date that the AOJ mails notice of the decision or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement (NOD) to change the NOD and select a different lane, the Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up."  Although this period has not passed, the evidence of record is insufficient to adjudicate the claim, and the Board must remand the Veteran's appeal to correct pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran is better served by proceeding with his appeal at this time in the form of a remand.  There is no prejudice to the Veteran in doing so.  The Veteran may submit any additional evidence in support of his claim following remand.

Pre-Decisional Duty to Assist Error

A remand is necessary because the AOJ failed to obtain adequate medical opinion. 

The Veteran underwent a September 2022 VA respiratory conditions examination.  See September 2022 Respiratory Conditions DBQ. The Veteran reported that he began experiencing chronic cough, chest congestion, and frequent sputum production shortly after returning from his deployment in Iraq.  He attributed these symptoms to his exposure to burn pits, smoke, fumes, extreme weather changes, and dust.  The examiner concluded that no diagnosis of any respiratory condition was warranted, to include bronchitis.  The examiner answered "N/A" to the question of whether the Veteran has an undiagnosed illness, diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptoms illness of unknown etiology, a diagnosable chronic multisymptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.  

On the September 2022 General Medical Gulf War DBQ, the same examiner responded to this question with "See DBQS."  No additional opinion or rationale were provided.

The Veteran underwent another VA respiratory examination in March 2024.  See March 2024 Respiratory Conditions DBQ. The Veteran reported symptoms of shortness of breath on physical exertion, wheezing when temperature drops, and daily coughing since service.  This examiner also concluded that no diagnosis of any respiratory condition was warranted, to include bronchitis.  The examiner documented that the pulmonary function test (PFT) was invalid due to poor quality and concluded that no objective evidence on examination supported a diagnosis of asthma or respiratory condition.  No additional comment was provided.

On review, the Board finds the 2022 and 2024 VA examinations and opinions inadequate.  Initially, if the PFT was of poor quality, the 2024 examiner should have explained what caused it and whether an additional study was warranted.  Next, both examiners failed to consider or explain whether the Veteran's competent reported symptoms constitute an undiagnosed illness, a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptoms illness of unknown etiology, a diagnosable chronic multisymptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.  Finally, neither examiner considered whether the Veteran's symptoms resulted in functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018).

For these reasons, the AOJ should have obtained an adequate VA examination and medical opinion prior to adjudicating the claim.  A remand is necessary to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with another VA examination to help determine the nature and likely etiology of the claimed bronchitis.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.

After a review of the record, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a)	Elicit from the Veteran and the record the history of all signs and symptoms associated with the claimed bronchitis during service and since separation from service.

Current Disability

(b)	Does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of bronchitis?  

(c)	Or are these symptoms resulting in a functional impairment of earning capacity?

If a current diagnosis is not shown:

(d)	Are symptoms of cough and shortness of breath associated with any specific pathology or a diagnosed disability?

(e)	Are these symptoms considered an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness?

Nexus Opinion

(f)	For any current diagnosis, undiagnosed illness, a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness, or symptoms resulting in a functional impairment of earning capacity, opine whether it had its onset during service or is otherwise related to it, to include the Veteran's Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA), including established exposure to environmental hazards while stationed in the Persian Gulf.

The standard of review to be applied is "as likely as not" (meaning that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher).

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Yaffe, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.