Citation Nr: A25032284
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 250225-520596
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of fracture of left foot fifth metatarsal (hereafter left foot disability) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Army from October 1966 to October 1968. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in February 2025 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the October 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2025 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for a left foot disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (U.S. 2024), due to the possibility of a docket switch, the Board cannot adjudicate an appeal until after one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later. However, as the service connection claim is being remanded for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

In the June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran contends that he sustained a broken bone in his foot during his service that caused his left foot disability.

In the March 2025 Informal Hearing Presentation, the Veteran generally contends through his representative entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability.

The record contains a September 2023 fracture left fifth metatarsal residuals diagnosis. 

Turning to an in-service event, the Veteran has submitted several lay statements regarding this element of the claim.

An April 2011 medical note reflects that the Veteran reported that he has experienced chronic left foot and ankle pain since a 1967 injury where he fractured his foot/ankle.

In a June 2023 lay statement, the Veteran contends that while he was stationed off base he was in an accident and was transported to Tyndall Air Force Base in Panama City, Florida where he was admitted for 9 days. He contends that he hurt his 5th metatarsal and needed a walking cast. The Veteran states that he was put on light duty for approximately 5 weeks. Finally, he states that he has never walked the same again, that he has a slight limp, and that the area has a permanent lump which interferes with his walking.

In an October 2023 lay statement, the Veteran reiterated that he was in an accident during his service which injured his left foot.

In a November 2024 lay statement, the Veteran contends that he has given direct first-hand knowledge of the events, place, year, base, and hospitals concerning the in-service injury. He contends that the evidence was not found in his records and is being used against him. Finally, he states that he has submitted a lay statement from an eyewitness to the accident and that this lay statement is credible testimony to what he observed.

In a separate November 2024 lay statement, a fellow servicemember contends that on September 15, 1967, he was riding with the Veteran in Panama City, Florida and that he was in front of the Veteran as they approached a railroad crossing. He states that he slowed his motorcycle down to pass over the railroad tracks. The servicemember explains that the Veteran was looking at his motorcycle's exhaust system, as he was thinking that one cylinder was running lean (no smoke from the two-cycle engine). The servicemember states that when the Veteran looked up, it was too late to avoid sideswiping the servicemember's motorcycle.

He states that the two motorcycles were momentarily locked together, before the Veteran's motorcycle fell down. The servicemember contends that when the Veteran crashed, the motorcycle's gear shift level broke off, and the remaining part of it penetrated his left foot. The servicemember states that he flagged down a car and asked to have an ambulance called. He explains that the Veteran was transported to Tyndall Air Force Base, where he was treated for his injury. The servicemember states that when he visited the hospital, he saw that a cast was on the Veteran's left foot. Finally, he contends that when the Veteran returned to Fort Benning with the cast still on his left foot, he received further medical care at an army hospital.

The Veteran underwent VA examination in September 2023 where the VA examiner opined against service connection. The VA examiner explains that the Veteran has evidence of a left fifth metatarsal fracture which the Veteran states occurred in 1967 while in service but that there are not any service treatment records (STRs) or hospital records to verify this injury.

Similarly, the April 2024 VA examiner opined against service connection. The examiner states that the Veteran's STRs are not available at this time and that the record contains limited evidence of chronicity. The VA examiner states that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.

An additional January 2025 VA medical opinion was obtained where the clinician also opined against service connection. The VA clinician states that based on the November 2024 servicemember lay statement, the Veteran had a motorcycle accident in September 1967 in Florida where he injured his left foot, and the Veteran went to a hospital where a cast was placed on his left foot. However, the VA clinician states that there is no substantial evidence supporting this diagnosis for a fracture of the foot/metatarsal during service and there is limited evidence for chronicity of care for this condition. The VA clinician also notes that there was not an X-ray performed during the Veteran's service, to confirm the left metatarsal fracture and there is no diagnosis on the Veteran's separation examination.

Unlike in the legacy system, the reasons for remand by the Board in the modernized review system are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors); and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The Board finds that remand for an adequate VA medical opinion is required before the matter can be adjudicated. Here, the September 2023, April 2024, and January 2025 VA medical opinions are inadequate as the clinicians offered conclusory opinions without sufficient rationale and relied on the absence of complaints in the Veteran's medical records. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

Next, the September 2023 VA medical opinion did not address the Veteran's June 2023 lay statement, and the April 2024 VA medical opinion did not address the Veteran's June 2023 and October 2023 lay statements. Miller v Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 257-262 (2020). Additionally, while the January 2025 VA medical opinion addresses the servicemember's November 2024 lay statement, the medical opinion did not address the Veteran's June 2023, October 2023, and November 2024 lay statements. Id.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds an addendum VA medical opinion is necessary to properly determine entitlement to service connection. Relying on the VA medical opinions of record constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand is warranted for correction of such error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left foot disability. 

Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to respond to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left foot disability had its onset in service, or is otherwise related to service, to include the Veteran's contended motorcycle accident?

The VA clinician is asked to address and discuss the Veteran's lay statements of record and presume they are credible for the purposes of this opinion only.

Continued on the next page 

A full and complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Metoyer, D'Audra I.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.