Citation Nr: A25032848
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231201-396491
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 30 percent for migraines is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2011 to December 2022.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2022 rating decision. In November 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the initial rating decision. 

In a timely filed December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) initial December 2022 initial rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is remanding the above captioned claim for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of the Veteran's claim.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 30 percent for migraines is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR: 

a)	Remand is required to cure a pre - decisional duty to assist error. The Veteran was afforded an August 2022 VA Headaches examination where she stated she used prescription medications including Maxalt and Botox injections to manage her migraines. However, it is not clear whether the examiner discounted the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication when evaluating her symptoms. A remand is necessary to determine the severity of the Veteran's migraine headache symptoms while discounting the ameliorative effects of?medication. Jones v. Shinseki,?26 Vet. App. 56?(2012) (holding that the ameliorative effects of medication may not be considered in assigning a disability rating where these effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria). 

b)	Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW.

2. Afford the Veteran a VA?Headaches examination?from an appropriate examiner to determine the severity of the Veteran's migraines. All indicated tests should be accomplished and all clinical findings reported in detail.

(a.) Clearly indicate whether any medications (over the counter or prescription) the Veteran used affected the level of severity of her migraines as of the August 2022 examination.

(b.) If any such medication was productive of?ameliorative?affects, clearly identify such effects and opine as to the severity of the Veteran's migraines absent such medication as of the August 2022 VA examination.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

3. Provide the Veteran and the representative notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

4. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Alexander

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.