Citation Nr: A25032765
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 211109-197472
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Eligibility for benefits under VA's Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) extending from an October 2020 application.

Eligibility for benefits under VA's PCAFC extending from a March 2021 application.

Eligibility for benefits under VA's PCAFC extending from a May 2021 application.

Eligibility for benefits under VA's PCAFC extending from an August 2021 application.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The first party to the matter is the Veteran, who served on active duty from September 2006 to January 2007 and April 2010 to December 2010.  The second party to the matter is her spouse, who is applying to be the Primary Family Caregiver. 

The case is on appeal from multiple decisions of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In January 2021, the AOJ denied their October 2020 PCAFC application.  The AOJ then issued a March 2021 decision denying a first level Clinical Appeal.  A May 2021 decision denied a second level Clinical Appeal.  Next, a May 2021 AOJ decision denied a March 2021 PCAFC application.  A July 2021 AOJ decision denied their May 2021 PCAFC application.  An October 2021 decision denied a first level Clinical Appeal.  Finally, an October 2021 decision denied an August 2021 PCAFC application.  

In their November 2021 notice of disagreement (NOD), the appellants identified disagreement with multiple denials.  They listed the dates of those denials as January 25, 2021, May 24, 2021, and October 4, 2021.  The Board sent them a letter in January 2025 seeking clarification of their intent as the AOJ did not issue any decisions corresponding to the dates identified in their NOD.  The Board's letter pointed out that the first two dates in their NOD generally corresponded with the January 2021 and May 2021 decisions, but the last date identified, October 2021, fell between the two October 2021 decisions.  Because it was not clear to the Board which decision(s) they intended to appeal, the Board asked them to clarify.  

The appellants responded in February 2025.  They wrote that their intention was to appeal every decision for each application beginning with the initial application in October 2020, as denied in January 2021.  They asked the Board to adhere to the dates provided in its January 2025 letter.  

In the NOD, the appellants elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

Eligibility for benefits under VA's PCAFC.

The Veteran in this case has had a combined service-connected disability of at least 70 percent since April 2017.  She initially applied for PCAFC benefits in October 2020, jointly with her spouse as the Primary Family Caregiver-applicant. 

This appeal is remanded because: (1) the file is incomplete, (2) the decision notification is legally inadequate under 38 U.S.C. § 5104, and (3) there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

First, the file does not include a copy of all decisions issued in this case.  

Decisions of the Board shall be based on the entire record in the proceeding and upon consideration of all evidence and material of record.  38 U.S.C. § 7104(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.903; see also 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (VA "shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record").  

Here, a copy of each written denial letter is not in the file.  The file only includes a copy of the July 2021 denial letter, the May 2021 second level Clinical Appeal denial letter, and a copy of the October 2021 Clinical Appeal denial letter.  Because a copy of the remaining decisions is not the file, the record is incomplete, and the Board cannot proceed with its review.  Remand is needed to ensure that the record before the Board is complete.  

Second, remand is needed because notification of the decision was legally inadequate.  

Claimants and their representatives are entitled to notice of any decision made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or the granting of relief.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1).  Notification will be in writing.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(f).  

The AOJ shall notify the applicable individuals regarding decisions affecting the furnishing of PCAFC assistance using standardized letters, as the Secretary determines such notifications and letters to be appropriate.  38 U.S.C. § 1720(G)(a)(12)(A).  The notification provided shall include the elements required for notices of decisions under section 5104(b) of this title to the extent that those elements apply to such notification.  38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(12)(B).  

Notice under 38?U.S.C. § 5104 must include, (1) identification of the issues adjudicated; (2) a summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary; (3) a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; (4) identification of findings favorable to the claimant; (5) in the case of a denial, identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial; (6) an explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in making the decision; and (7) if applicable, identification of the criteria that must be satisfied to grant service connection or the next higher level of compensation.?  38?U.S.C. § 5104(b).  Notice must also set forth the right to a hearing, the right of representation, and the right, as well as the necessary procedures and time limits to initiate a higher-level review, supplemental claim, or appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1).  

VA may convey the section 5104 notice elements to claimants with a notice letter, enclosures (including the decision or standardized forms), or a combination of those written documents, and those documents must be read together when assessing whether VA provided proper notice to a claimant under section 5104.  The notice elements may be in the decision itself or other enclosures so long as they are easily identifiable and help claimants understand the decision.  See Cowan v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 232, 244 (2022) (discussing the post-AMA version of 38 U.S.C. § 5104).  

In this case, there is no notification letter currently in the file meeting the applicable requirements.  The July 2021, May 2021, and October 2021 notification letters omitted most of the requirements under 38 U.S.C. § 5104.  The remaining letters may comply, but a copy of those letters is not in the file, so the Board has no way to know.  Overall, the Board cannot find that a legally adequate notice of the decision, as required by 38?U.S.C. §?5104, was provided.  Remand is required to cure this due process deficiency.  

Third, remand is needed for an adequate medical decision.  

The Board particularly finds the Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) medical reviews legally inadequate to support the decision made.  

As a general matter, a determination by VA about the "furnishing of assistance or support" under PCAFC shall be considered a medical decision, which is not within the Board's jurisdictional authority to review.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1720G; Beaudette v. McDonough, 93 F.4th 1361, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2024).  These issues turn on the medical judgment of VHA and the CEAT in determining whether the Veteran met the medical eligibility criteria under PCAFC.  The CEAT is responsible for making the initial medical decision regarding medical eligibility for PCAFC benefits.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 46226, 46230 (July 31, 2020).

However, decisions as to eligibility under PCAFC are nonetheless subject to Board review.  See Beaudette, 93 F.4th at 1369.  Decisions not related to the "furnishing of assistance and support" are within the Board's jurisdiction.  Id.  The Board has the authority to determine the specific types of PCAFC eligibility decisions that fall within its jurisdictional authority to address.  Id.  To this end, the Board finds that it is within its jurisdictional authority to review the legal adequacy of all medical opinions related to the CEAT's decision regarding the "furnishing of assistance and support."  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992).  This includes the CEAT's medical opinion upon which the instant eligibility decision was based.  

A VA opinion is adequate if it "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of the medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion."  The VA opinion need not discuss each piece of favorable evidence in the record.  Likewise, a VA opinion is not nonprobative simply because it does not "explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from the facts to a conclusion."  Rather, the VA medical report "must be read as a whole" to determine the examiner's rationale.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-06 (2012).  

A non-exhaustive list of factors that, depending on the case, may be relevant considerations in determining the adequacy and probative value of a medical opinion include: (1) whether there was personal examination of the patient; (2) the expert's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data; (3) whether the opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two; (4) whether the opinion is clear and susceptible of only one meaning; (5) the expert's familiarity with pertinent medical history; (6) whether there is any inconsistency in the expert's statements; (7) whether the expert has provided a thorough and detailed opinion about an area within his or her expertise; (8) whether the expert has provided factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for his or her conclusion; (9) whether the expert relied on sufficient facts or data; (10) whether the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; (11) whether the opinion is the result of principles and methods reliably applied to facts; and (12) whether medical text evidence that a medical opinion relies on contains qualifying or contradictory aspects where the text is entered into the record, at least in part.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).

An unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context.  Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240 (2012).  In short, a medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions.  A medical opinion that is a factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  

Here, the CEAT's medical opinions do not meet these requirements.  The CEAT issued opinions in January 2021, May 2021, July 2021 and October 2021.  Each opinion consisted of the same determination.  It found, "[the] Veteran or service member does not require personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on an inability to perform an ADL and/or a need for supervision, protection or instruction."  It explained, "The [CEAT] recognizes that the Veterans [sic] caregiver plays an important role in supporting the Veteran, however it has been determined the level of care required does not meet the clinical threshold for enrollment in the program."  The CEAT gave an identical opinion and rationale on all four occasions.  

To the extent the CEAT's decisions found the Veteran did not "have a need for supervision, protection or instruction," this is not the correct legal standard.  The question is whether she needed personal care services because of (i) an inability to perform one or more activities of daily living; (ii) a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; (iii) a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.  The Board has no way to know if the CEAT's medical decision would have been different if it had applied the correct legal standard.  

Furthermore, the CEAT's decisions are legally inadequate as they are entirely conclusory.  None cited which, if any, medical records or findings supported the decision.  The CEAT did not provide any explanatory rationale other than these conclusory, generalized statements summarizing its view of her functioning with standardized text nonspecific to the instant Veteran.  

To this end, the CEAT's decisions did not account for all potentially favorable evidence of record.  For example, multiple Veteran Functional Assessment Instruments (VFAI) were completed.  

With regard to the need for assistance with ADLs, the latest VFAI from September 2021 shows that the Veteran needed assistance with grooming and bathing; her caregiver washed her legs and back.  She needed assistance with dressing and undressing, including fastening her bra in the back, pulling down her shirt, and slipping on pants, including buttoning them.  Her caregiver also assisted with socks.  She needed assistance with toileting; her caregiver helped clean after a bowel movement maybe two times per week.  She needed assistance with mobility; her caregiver would assist from sitting-to-standing several times per week and lying-to-sitting.  

With regard to the need for supervision or protection and/or regular or extensive instruction or supervision, the VFAI found she needed assistance with medication management.  Her caregiver set up her medications.  The Veteran shared that she had forgotten to take medications and had also taken too many.  She had minimal ability for self-preservation, including the judgment and physical ability to cope, make appropriate decisions and act in a changing environment or a potentially harmful situation.  The VFAI found he was also at risk of self-neglect due to mobility challenges.  She could be left home alone for an hour two, but someone always needed to be with her when away from home.  The VFAI also found her to be a safety risk due to agitation and impulsivity.  The examiner found that the Veteran had difficulty identifying what she would do in an emergency situation, even with prompting from her caregiver.  

The remaining VFAIs, conducted in January 2021, May 2021, and July 2021 presented further information regarding her need for assistance with ADLs and supervision or protection and/or regular or extensive instruction or supervision.  

This information bears on whether the Veteran needed either supervision or protection or a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which his ability to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.  

When assessing personal care needs, VA will assess and document the support the Veteran or servicemember needs to maintain personal safety, if such needs exist, and the frequency with which he or she requires interventions by the caregiver, including the Veteran's functional ability as it relates to such things as medication management.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 46226, 46241 (Jul. 31, 2020).  A need for supervision or protection and/or regular or extensive instruction or supervision may be predicted on an inability to complete ADLs.  See id. at 46235.  "If [the] requirement of hands-on, physical care is not met," regarding a need for assistance with ADLs, "a veteran or servicemember may still qualify under the definition of need for supervision, protection, or instruction, as that definition does not require hands-on, physical care."  85 id. at 46235.  

Here, it is not clear to the Board how the Veteran's ability to function in daily life would not be seriously impaired if her caregiver were not assisting her with the daily activities described in the VFAIs.

Finally, each CEAT decision found that participation in the program was not in the Veteran's best interest, but again here failed to explain the medical basis for this conclusion.  It simply answered, "No" to this question.  It provided no discussion as to why it answered, "No."  The Board cannot decide regarding legal eligibility without an opinion on the best interest requirement, as it is a clinical (medical) determination.  See 38 C.F.R. § 71.15.  

Simply put, the CEAT is responsible for making the initial medical decision regarding eligibility for PCAFC benefits, but without an adequate supporting explanation, the Board has no way to know how or why the decision here was reached, to include what specific medical facts in this Veteran's case justified the denial.  Remand is needed for a legally adequate medical decision.  

This remand is required to satisfy a statutory duty under 38?U.S.C. §?5104 and correct a duty-to-assist error that occurred prior to the decision on appeal.  See 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a); see also 38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(12).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Upload into the electronic claims file a complete copy of all records related to the instant application for Caregiver benefits.  This must include all decisions, notifications, and correspondence, whether issued by VHA or received from the appellants.  

2. Obtain a medical opinion from the CEAT as to:

(a.) Whether it is in the Veteran's best interest to participate in the PCAFC program; 

(b.) Whether the Veteran requires personal care services each time he completes one or more of the following: 

i.	Dressing or undressing oneself; 

ii.	Bathing; 

iii.	Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable; 

iv.	Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); 

v.	Toileting or attending to toileting; 

vi.	Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 

vii.	Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.)

(c.) Whether the Veteran has a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or 

(d.) Whether the Veteran has a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion must be articulated.  That is, the CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.

3. Issue notice of the decision on the issue of entitlement to eligibility for PCAFC benefits.  This notice must be compliant with 38?U.S.C. §?5104, to include: a summary of the evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and, identification of the elements not satisfied but necessary for establishing eligibility for PCAFC benefits under 38?C.F.R. §§ 71.15-71.25.  The notice must also set forth the right to a hearing, the right of representation, and the right, as well as the necessary procedures and time limits to initiate a higher-level review, supplemental claim, or appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals.  The notice must be sent to the Veteran, the caregiver-applicant, and their representative(s).

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Bosely, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.