Citation Nr: A25032990
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240111-408552
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for a total disability rating for compensation based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU) is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1975 to September 1975 and from September 1976 to September 1976. 

Consequently, this case comes before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from January 2023 and June 2023 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The January 2023 rating?decision denied entitlement to an earlier effective date for an increased rating for a lumbar spine disability; and increased the ratings for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy.  The June 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to earlier effective dates for TDIU and dependents' educational assistance.  In January 2024, the Veteran requested a direct review of the appeal by the Board.? ?? 

The current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of direct review, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based on the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the AOJ decisions on the issues on appeal.  Therefore, only evidence of record as of the date of the January 2023 and June 2023 rating?decisions will be considered.

In July 2018, the Board denied entitlement to increased ratings for a lumbar spine disability.  The Veteran appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.  The Court granted a March 2019 Joint Motion for Partial Remand, vacating the July 2018 Board decision to the extent that decision denied entitlement to increased ratings for a lumbar spine disability, and remanded that issue to the Board for additional action.

In December 2019, the Board remanded these claims to the AOJ for additional action.

Waiver of Duty to Assist

In a January 2024 brief, the Veteran's attorney attempted to waive VA's duty to assist completely.  According to the Veteran's attorney, it is a long-standing principle that the Board must address issues argued by the appellant or raised by the record.  The attorney stated that the Board must address the argument if it will not accept the waiver and otherwise, the Board violates the law and the Board's own Quality Review guidance.

Counsel argues that the Court has held that a claimant represented by competent counsel can waive VA's Duty to Assist.  The attorney cited as authority to Janssen v, Principi, 15 Vet. App, 370 (2001).  While the Court recognized that an appellant can waive rights guaranteed by an act of Congress on appeal, especially where the appellant is represented by an attorney presumed to be versed in the facts of the case and to know and to understand the law as it relates to those facts, the Court underscored that, to do so, the appellant must first possess a right, must have knowledge of that right, and he must intend, voluntarily and freely, to relinquish or surrender that right.

As is the case here, a pre-decisional error extends to ensuring that an examination report or opinion is adequate.  When VA provides an examination, the examination must be adequate one, or the claimant must be notified as to why an adequate examination one will not or cannot be provided.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The AOJ did not ensure that examinations were adequate, and in so doing has committed a pre-decisional error that must be addressed.  Waiver of that development would represent a complete abnegation on the part of VA of Congress's mandates under the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000.

Consequently, the Board finds that VA remains bound ineluctably by the duty to assist the Veteran in these matters as in other matters.  To be clear, neither the Veteran nor attorney has raised any other authority to support a full waiver of the duty to notify or duty to assist regarding these issues.  Scott v. McDonald, 789 F. 3d 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran does not raise them before the Board); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F. 3d 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

Moreover, and independently, the Board observes that waiver of right to additional assistance under the duty to assist does not compel the Board to issue a decision if development of the record is incomplete. Clark v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 317 (2022) (dismissing appeal of Board remand, where appellant purported to waive duty to assist and requested a final Board decision).  Thus, as the Board is remanding this matter to ensure substantial compliance with the December 2019 Board remand requests, the motion to waive the duty to assist is denied.

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Although the Board regrets the delay, additional development is needed prior to further disposition of the claim of entitlement to increased ratings for the back disability.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has continuously pursued a claim for an increased rating for a back disability since the initial rating establishing service connection. Therefore, the period on appeal before the Board is January 25, 2010, the effective date of service connection for a back disability, to January 9, 2023, the date of the rating decision on appeal.

During the pendency of the appeal for increased ratings for a back disability, VA examinations from October 2010 and August 2017 were agreed by the parties in a Joint Motion for Partial Remand to be insufficient for adjudication purposes.

As a result, in December 2019, the Board remanded this matter for a retrospective examination regarding the severity and manifestations of a service-connected back disability, prior to February 2017.  

Subsequently, the Veteran underwent VA back examination in March 2020.  However, that back examination does not appear to be retrospective in nature.

In an April 2020 opinion, the examiner stated that, in October 2010, Veteran's activity level was higher due to warmer weather as patients with arthritic condition have more mobility, increasing likelihood of flare ups due to the increased activity level with a chronic condition.  Later examinations were done in colder months making his mobility worse and less likely to be completing tasks that result in flare ups.  Because of the age of these examinations, the examiner stated that it would be hard to calculate with any specificity the degree of loss of active range of motion (AROM) during flare ups or repetitive motion over time as the Veteran had aged and his disease process had progressed.

The April 2020 examiner stated that the Veteran had a greater baseline flexion in August 2017, mostly in part due to the warm months increasing his baseline activity level and increasing his level of function, which would increase the likelihood of flare ups.  Winter months resulted in decrease in activity level, decreasing level of function as is typical for arthritis patients, and therefore, would have less flare ups.  Because of the age of these examinations, the examiner stated that it would be hard to calculate with any specificity the degree of loss of active range of motion during flare ups or repetitive motion over time, as the Veteran had aged, and his disease process had progressed.

An opinion is speculative when it is based on the absence of procurable information or an examiner's shortcomings or general aversion to offering an opinion on issues not directly observed.  Direct observation of functional impairment is not a prerequisite to offering an opinion. Examiners should offer opinions based on estimates derived from information procured from relevant sources, including the lay statements of Veterans.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

As a result, the April 2020 examiner did not provide an opinion as to functional loss during flare-ups, despite the possibility of there being additional loss of ability and did not give an adequate reason for not doing so.  The examiner also did not provide an opinion as to functional loss after repeated use over time, despite the possibility of there being additional loss of ability and did not give an adequate reason for not doing so.  Thus, the Board finds that the April 2020 VA examination to be incomplete for rating purposes.

The Board notes that the Veteran attended a VA back examination in April 2022 which is also not retrospective in nature.

Therefore, the Board finds that there has not been compliance with the December 2019 Board remand requests as no medical examiner has provided an adequate opinion addressing the Veteran's back disability prior to February 9, 2017, as requested.  

Compliance with Board remand instructions is neither optional nor discretionary. Stegall v. West, 11?Vet. App.?268 (1998).??Consequently,?the Board cannot consider the development requested to be substantially accomplished, and the claim must be remanded to complete the requests in the?December 2019 Board remand.? Stegall v. West, 11?Vet. App.?268 (1998). 

Accordingly, on remand, an opinion as to the nature and severity of the service-connected back disability should be requested.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159.

The Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is not a one-way street.  A Veteran is required to cooperate with the examiner's efforts to evaluate the nature and current severity of symptomology. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). The Veteran is notified that it is the Veteran's responsibility to report for any scheduled examination and to cooperate in the development of these claims.  The consequences of failure to cooperate with or report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claim.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.655; Connolly v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 566 (1991).

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

3. Entitlement to an increased rating for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Because a decision on a claim for entitlement to an increased rating for a lumbar spine disability could significantly impact a decision on the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for radiculopathy of the right and left lower extremities, which are secondary to the lumbar spine disability, a determination cannot be made on the extremity radiculopathy claims until after, the now ordered, opinions to access the severity and manifestations of the service-connected lumbar spine disability has occurred.  As a result, the Board finds that those claims are inextricably intertwined, and remand is required for the right and left lower extremity radiculopathy claims.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

4. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for TDIU is remanded.

Because a decision on the remanded issues could significantly impact a decision on the issue of entitlement TDIU, the Board finds that the issues are inextricably intertwined.  Because the back and radiculopathy claims are being remanded, the Board finds that it would be potentially prejudicial to the Veteran for the Board to consider the TDIU claim prior to the determination of the other claims.  Therefore, the adjudication of the TDIU claim must be deferred pending resolution of the increased rating claims.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

5. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is remanded.

The Board finds that the claim for an earlier effective date for basic eligibility for DEA benefits is inextricably intertwined with the resolution of the remanded issue as the effective date for the assignment of DEA benefits is predicated on the effective date of TDIU.  The appropriate remedy where a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with a claim currently on appeal is to defer the claim on appeal pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim.  Harris v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?180?(1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file to a VA examiner who has not previously provided an opinion in these claims, for a retrospective medical opinion regarding the severity of a service-connected lumbar spine disability from January 25, 2010, to October 12, 2017.  The examiner must review the claims file, to include this Remand and the Board's December 2019 Remand, and the Veteran's testimony at the March 2016 Board hearing, and should note that review in the report.  The examiner should identify all symptoms shown from January 25, 2010, to October 12, 2017, and address any resulting occupational impairment as a result of the disability.  The examiner should discuss the frequency and severity of any recurring attacks of intervertebral disc syndrome during the course of the appeal and the limitation of lumbar spine motion, with consideration of any other factors that caused functional impairment such as weakened motion, painful motion, fatigability, incoordination, or excess motion.  The examiner should estimate the degrees of range of motion on active and passive motion, and for weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  The examiner should estimate the Veteran's functional loss due to flare ups and after repeated use over time based on all the evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay information during the period of review from January 25, 2010, to October 12, 2017. The Board recognizes the difficulty in making such determinations, but requests that the examiner provide a best estimate based on the examination findings and statements of the Veteran.  The examiner should state whether or not there was any ankylosis of the spine or any part of the spine from January 25, 2010, to October 12, 2017.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mondesir, Eric

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.