Citation Nr: A25032689
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 220815-270258
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain as secondary to service-connected right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome, bicipital and rotator cuff tendonitis with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's right hip strain is caused by his service-connected right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis for right hip strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1985 to March 1995 and from October 2001 to October 2002.

In the August 2022 VA Form 10182, the Veteran appealed the July 2022 rating decision, which denied service connection for his claimed right hip and right shoulder disabilities.  This rating decision was rendered pursuant to a June 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request - Higher Level Review (HLR), following rating decisions in November 2021 (right hip) and April 2022 (right shoulder), which addressed the claims on the merits.  The Board therefore does not find it necessary to address whether new and relevant evidence has been submitted to warrant the readjudication of the claims.  

Additionally, the Board notes that in the August 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  The Board may now only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2021 and April 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) claim decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain as secondary to service-connected right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis.

The Veteran and his representative claim that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for right hip strain.  See August 2022 Form 10182. 

Service connection for a disability can be granted on a secondary basis if a Veteran has a (1) current disability, (2) a separate disability already subject to service connection, and (3) the first disability is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated beyond its natural progress by the service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

In evaluating the evidence in an appeal, it is the responsibility of the Board to weigh the evidence and decide where to give credit and where to withhold same and, in doing so, accept certain medical opinions over others.  Schoolman v. West, 12 Vet. App. 307 (1999).  In this regard, the Board has been charged with the duty to assess the credibility and weight given to the evidence.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (2007).  Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).

Following a review of the evidence, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record is at least in approximate balance to resolve in favor of the Veteran's claim.

Regarding the first element of the Veteran's secondary service connection claim, a current disability, the Board notes that the December 2020 VA examination documents a diagnosis of right hip strain.  The first element is thereby met. 

As for the second element of the Veteran's claim, a separate disability already subject to service connection, the Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis.  See February 2015 Rating Decision.  The second element is thus satisfied. 

Finally, the Board must determine whether the Veteran's current right hip strain is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by his service-connected right knee disability.  Consequently, the Board must consider and weigh the following medical nexus opinions. 

In a December 2020 medical opinion, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right hip strain is less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran's right knee disability does not cause an antalgic gait that would be a possible cause of his right hip strain.  

In August 2021, a private examiner reached opposing conclusions, finding that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right hip strain is proximately caused by his service-connected bilateral knee patellofemoral pain syndrome.  First, the examiner identified and discussed the Veteran's lay statements concerning his functional loss due to hip pain, including restricted activities and an uneven gait.  The examiner also cited and discussed medical literature that associates lower extremity pain with the development of an abnormal gait and hip strain.  Finally, the examiner concluded that due to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected knee disabilities, he developed an altered center of gravity and antalgic gait pattern with limping that, per cited medical literature, hastened the onset and progression of the Veteran's right hip strain.  

In October 2021, a VA examiner provided a negative medical opinion, stating that the Veteran's right hip strain is less likely than not secondary to his service-connected right knee disability based on the lack of any studies that support the contention of a knee condition, with or without altered gait pattern and/or surgical intervention, inducing an intrinsic condition of an ipsilateral and/or contralateral hip joint.

Weighing the above opinions, the Board finds the medical evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim to be at least in approximate balance.  The August 2021 private opinion is given significant probative value because the examiner provided a clear conclusion based on a review and discussion of the Veteran's claims file, including medical records and lay statements, and supportive medical data.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  The December 2020 VA opinion, on the other hand, is assigned little to no probative value because it contains a conclusion without any discussion of the case specific facts or supporting medical rationale.  The October 2021 VA opinion is also given less probative value as the examiner concluded that there is no evidence supporting the Veteran's claim without regard for the August 2021 positive opinion.  

Notably, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding a material issue, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  As the evidence to establish the final element of secondary service connection, a medical nexus is at least in equipoise, the Veteran is given the benefit of the doubt, and the element is satisfied.  Accordingly, since all elements are met, entitlement to service connection for right hip strain, as related to and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis, is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome, bicipital and rotator cuff tendonitis with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis.

The Veteran seeks service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome, bicipital and rotator cuff tendonitis with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis.  See August 2022 Form 10182.  

Following a review of the record, and as discussed further below, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist (DTA) error.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional DTA errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In March 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, in which a VA examiner diagnosed right shoulder impingement syndrome, bicipital and rotator cuff tendonitis with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis.  The examiner also provided a negative medical opinion.  Specifically, the examiner opined that the Veteran's right shoulder disability is less likely than not related to his active service, as his service treatment records do not reveal any in-service complaints of right shoulder.

Then, a month later, the same VA examiner provided an addendum medical opinion, in which he/she opined that the Veteran's current right shoulder disability is less likely than not caused by the minor strain he had during service in 1991, since that resolved, and no shoulder complaints were present until 2021 (30 years later).

The Board finds that the VA opinions are inadequate for adjudication purposes.  Notably, the March 2022 opinion is solely based on the absence of medical evidence, which is not adequate to support a negative opinion.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  The April 2022 opinion is also inadequate, as the examiner provided a conclusion without a medical explanation as to why a minor strain during service cannot possibly develop into the Veteran's current disability, as the Veteran asserted during the March 2022 examination.  

From the foregoing, all medical opinions of record are inadequate, and remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion as to whether the Veteran's current right shoulder disability is directly related to his active service. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a qualified VA examiner for medical opinions regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for right shoulder impingement syndrome, bicipital and rotator cuff tendonitis with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinion.  Any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted.  The need for a full, in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Following a review of the claims file, the examiner shall address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed right shoulder impingement syndrome, bicipital and rotator cuff tendonitis with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis is directly related to service?  Please state the facts and medical principles and/or medical literature upon which you base this opinion.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner must specifically consider and discuss the relevant lay and medical evidence of record, including March 2002 STRs, pgs. 37 (reports football injury in December 1991) and 55 (reports basketball injury in November 1988); March 2022 VA examination and medical opinion; and April 2022 VA addendum medical opinion. 

The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above.  This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alexander, Lasheyna T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.