Citation Nr: A25032523
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240115-408150
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 30 percent therefrom, for a headache condition, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a cervical spine condition, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a low back condition, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a left shoulder condition, is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date of January 20, 2022, for the assignment of a separate noncompensable rating for a left shoulder surgical scar is granted. 

Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for a left shoulder surgical scar is denied. 

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for dry eye syndrome is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to January 20, 2023, it was not factually ascertainable that the headache condition was manifested by prostrating attacks of headache pain occurring at least once per month; from that date, the Veteran's headache condition is characterized by chronic headache pain with increased pain as well as lightheadedness and dizziness that occurs daily, but which does not result in severe economic inadaptability as the more severe symptoms only last for an hour or two and are alleviated with rest.  

2. Prior to January 20, 2023, it was not factually ascertainable that the cervical spine condition was manifested by forward flexion limited to 20 degrees or less, combined range of motion of the cervical spine 170 degrees or less, or muscle spasm severe enough to result in abnormal gait or spinal contour, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis; from that date, the cervical spine condition was manifested by pain and stiffness, but even with consideration of his complaints of pain and other functional loss, the increase in severity during flare-ups, and the ameliorative impact of his use of medication, the condition was not manifested by forward flexion of the cervical spine of 15 degrees or less, nor was there any evidence of ankylosis, or incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks during any 12-month period, even when considering the increase in severity during flare-ups.

3. Prior to January 20, 2023, it was not factually ascertainable that the low back condition was manifested by forward flexion of 60 degrees or less, combined range of motion of the cervical spine 120 degrees or less, or muscle spasm severe enough to result in abnormal gait or spinal contour, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis; from that date, the low back condition was manifested by pain and stiffness, but even with consideration of his complaints of pain and other functional loss, the increase in severity during flare-ups, and the ameliorative impact of his use of medication, the condition was not manifested by forward flexion of the cervical spine of 30 degrees or less, nor was there any evidence of ankylosis, or incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks during any 12-month period, even when considering the increase in severity during flare-ups.

4. For the period prior to January 20, 2023, it was not factually ascertainable that the Veteran's left shoulder condition was manifested by limitation of the left arm at shoulder level; from that date, there is no evidence that the left arm is limited in flexion or abduction to 25 degrees from side; furthermore, there is no evidence of unfavorable ankylosis of the left shoulder or malunion and/or recurrent dislocation of the major humerus, nor does the Veteran's left shoulder symptomatology approximate impairment of this degree.

5. Although it is factually ascertainable that the Veteran exhibited a left shoulder surgical scar for the entire one-year period preceding the filing of his increased rating claim, the asymptomatic surgical scar is 8 centimeters long by one half centimeter wide, and the scar does not result in functional impairment or other disabling effects. 

6. For the entirety of the appeal period, the Veteran has exhibited 50 percent obstruction in both nasal passages but has not exhibited nasal polyps. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 30 percent therefrom, for a headache condition, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8199-8100.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a cervical spine condition, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a low back condition, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

4. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a left shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5201-5202.

5. An effective date of January 20, 2022, for the assignment of a separate noncompensable rating for a left shoulder surgical scar is warranted.  38 U.S.C.      § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7801-7805.

6. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable initial rating for a left shoulder surgical scar are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7801-7805.

7. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1978 to August 1998.  The current appeal arises out of the Veteran's February 2023 claim seeking entitlement to service connection for the disabilities listed above, in addition to entitlement to an increased rating for the headache condition.  In a May 2023 rating decision, the regional office granted service connection for allergic rhinitis, denied service connection for right ear hearing loss as well as a dry eye condition, and deferred adjudication of the remaining service connection claims.  Following additional development, the regional office issued a July 2023 rating decision which granted service connection for a low back condition, a cervical spine condition, a left shoulder condition, and a left shoulder surgery residual scar.  That decision also increased the evaluation for allergic rhinitis to 10 percent and denied entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for the headache condition. 

Thereafter, the Veteran submitted an August 2023 request for higher-level review of the July 2023 rating decision as well as the May 2023 rating decision, as it pertained to the denial of service connection for right ear hearing loss.  The regional office in a December 2023 rating decision then elected to assign a 30 percent rating for the headache condition, continue the assigned ratings for the cervical spine condition, left shoulder condition, low back condition, and allergic rhinitis, and finally continue the denial of service connection for right ear hearing loss.  

Most recently, the Veteran submitted a January 2024 notice of disagreement on VA Form 10182 and selected direct review of the evidence.  As such, the Board's review is restricted to that evidence that was of record at the time of the underlying May 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions. To that end, the Board highlights that no evidence has been added to the claims file outside this evidentiary review period, and so the entire evidentiary record may be considered by the Board in the present appeal.

The Board notes that it has considered whether a claim for TDIU has been raised by the Veteran during the pendency of this appeal.  In Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that VA must address the issue of entitlement to TDIU with increased rating claims when the issue of unemployability either is raised expressly or by the record.  Here, the Board highlights that the Veteran does not meet the schedular threshold for warranting consideration for entitlement to TDIU.  Moreover, consideration of TDIU on an extraschedular basis is also not warranted as there is no indication from the record that the Veteran's various service-connected disabilities preclude him from securing and following substantially gainful employment.  Specifically, the examiners who have evaluated the severity of the various disabilities on appeal have not opined that the conditions together would prevent the Veteran from working.  Additionally, while not dispositive, the record indicates that the Veteran is currently employed full-time.  As such, the Board does not find that the issue of entitlement to TDIU is raised by the record, and it will not be addressed herein.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  In cases in which a claim for a higher initial evaluation stems from an initial grant of service connection for the disability at issue, multiple ("staged") ratings may be assigned for different periods of time during the pendency of the appeal.  See generally Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In determining the appropriate rating for musculoskeletal disabilities, particular attention is focused on functional loss of use of the affected part.  Factors of joint disability include increased or limited motion, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and painful movement, including during flare-ups and after repeated use.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-08 (1995); 38 C.F.R.     § 4.45.  A finding of functional loss due to pain must be supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

Where pain alone results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability.  However, subjective pain in and of itself will not establish a current disability.  Consideration should be given to the impact, or lack thereof, from pain, focusing on evidence of functional limitation caused by pain.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir., 2018).  Pain in a particular joint may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance.  Id.; 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful joints are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.

The Board notes that during the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021.  85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  These amendments revised select diagnostic codes "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities."  Id.  These rating changes, including the new Diagnostic Code 5244 (traumatic paralysis), are not directly applicable to the facts of the instant case.  Traumatic paralysis has not been shown in this case.

1. Headache Condition

The Veteran is service connected for a headache condition, rated as 10 percent disabling prior to January 20, 2023, and 30 percent disabling therefrom. The Veteran seeks ratings in excess of these for the entirety of the appeal period, which extends back to January 20, 2022, one year prior to the date that the Veteran submitted his claim seeking entitlement to an increased rating.  38 U.S.C.                  § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).

The ratings at issue are assigned pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8199-8100.  The hyphenated diagnostic code indicates that the disability is rated under the criteria for migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100.

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once every two months over the last several months, while a 30 percent disability rating is warranted for prostrating attacks occurring once every month.  38 C.F.R.            § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. Headaches manifested by very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability warrant a 50 percent disability rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

VA regulations do not define "prostrating," nor has the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). Cf. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999) (in which the Court quotes Diagnostic Code 8100 verbatim but does not specifically address the matter of what is a prostrating attack).  However, the Board notes that according to MERRIAM WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "prostration" is defined as "complete physical or mental exhaustion."  A similar definition is found in DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY 1554 (31st Ed. 2007), in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." VA regulations also do not define "economic inadaptability."  

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

In rating headaches or migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).

The severity of the headache condition was evaluated in a July 2023 VA examination, during which the Veteran detailed that he experiences chronic headaches daily that last for an hour or two at a time.  According to the Veteran, he alleviates his headache pain through the use of over-the-counter medication, topical creams, heating pads, and stretching exercises.  An in-person evaluation indicated that the Veteran experiences constant head pain on both sides of the head that worsens with physical activity.  Additionally, the examiner found that the Veteran experiences moderate lightheadedness and dizziness.  It was the examiner's impression that the Veteran did not experience any prostrating attacks of headache pain.  That being said, the examiner did acknowledge that the headache symptoms do occasionally result in impairment of occupational functioning, as the Veteran related that when he experiences lightheadedness or dizziness he requires rest breaks, which interrupt his work activity.  

A review of available VA medical records pertaining to the appeal period reflects that the Veteran does have a headache condition listed as an active problem; however, there is no indication that he underwent any treatment for the condition.

Upon review of the evidence, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the headache condition is not warranted at any point prior to January 20, 2023.  As a reminder, in order to warrant the greater 30 percent rating, it must be "factually ascertainable" that any increase in severity had occurred during the one-year period prior to the filing of the claim.  Here, there are no pertinent medical records corresponding to the one-year period from January 20, 2022, to January 20, 2023, and so the Board cannot establish that any increase in severity documented on the July 2023 examination was present during the period of time.  

As for the period from January 20, 2023, the Board does not find that the Veteran's symptomatology warrants a rating in excess of 30 percent.  This rating corresponds to the Veteran's detailing of having experienced constant daily headache pain that reportedly interferes with his ability to work uninterruptedly throughout the day.  Although VA regulations do not define the word "prostrating," granting the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the evidence suggests that when the Veteran experiences a more severe bout of headache symptomatology, he is significantly limited in his functioning, such that he has to rest until the symptoms subside.  As the Veteran himself detailed, these more severe headache symptoms occur almost daily, which correlates to the currently assigned rating of 30 percent.  

That being said, the evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran experiences the degree of economic inadaptability that characterizes the 50 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8100.  While the Board of course acknowledges that the Veteran reported experiencing daily headache pain with dizziness and lightheadedness, he himself did not report that his symptomatology requires more than a period of rest to recover, and further noted that the symptoms subside after an hour or two.  The Board also highlights that the July 2023 examiner dismissed a determination that the Veteran experienced any prostrating attacks of headache pain whatsoever.  With this in mind, the Board does not find that the Veteran meets the criteria for a 50 percent rating at any point during the appeal period.  Therefore, an increased rating for the headache condition is not warranted.  

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

2. Cervical Spine Condition

The Veteran is service connected for a cervical spine condition, characterized as degenerative joint disease with degenerative arthritis. The condition is rated as 10 percent disabling prior to January 20, 2023, and 20 percent disabling therefrom. The Veteran seeks ratings in excess of these for the entirety of the appeal period, which extends back to January 20, 2022, one year prior to the date that the Veteran submitted his claim seeking entitlement to an increased rating.  38 U.S.C.                  § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).

Disabilities of the spine are to be evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (outlined below). 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5242.  Intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) will be evaluated under the general formula for rating diseases and injuries of the spine or under the formula for rating intervertebral disc syndrome based on incapacitating episodes (outlined below), whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5242.

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases or Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent evaluation is warranted with forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees, muscle spasm, guarding, localized tenderness not resulting in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis is present, or vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.

A 20 percent evaluation is warranted with forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees, combined range of motion of the cervical spine is not greater than 170 degrees, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis is present.

A 30 percent evaluation is warranted if forward flexion of the cervical spine is 15 degrees or less or there is favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 40 percent evaluation is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 100 percent rating is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Disease and Injuries of the Spine.

Normal ranges of motion of the cervical spine are flexion from 0 to 45 degrees, extension from 0 to 45 degrees, lateral flexion from 0 to 45 degrees, and lateral rotation from 0 to 80 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate V. Ankylosis is defined as immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure.  Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 94 (32nd ed. 2012). Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.  Id. at Note 5.

Under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, a 20 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least two weeks but less than four weeks during the past twelve months; a 40 percent rating requires evidence of incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months; and a 60 percent rating requires evidence of incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating IVDS.

An incapacitating episode is defined as a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.  Id. at Note (1).  If intervertebral disc syndrome is present in more than one spinal segment, provided that the effects in each spinal segment are clearly distinct, each segment will be evaluated on the basis of incapacitating episodes or under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, whichever method results in a higher evaluation for that segment.  Id. at Note (2).

Beginning February 7, 2021, Diagnostic Code 5243 (pertaining to IVDS) is only used when there is disc herniation with compression and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root. Diagnostic Code 5242 is used for all other disc diagnoses.

In any event, in this case there is no evidence of physician-prescribed bedrest for either the cervical spine, or the lumbar spine conditions discussed below.  Thus, no further discussion of the provisions of Diagnostic Code 5243 is warranted.

The Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination in July 2023, during which he reported that he experiences chronic neck pain that is nagging or aching in nature.  When queried, he endorsed experiencing flare-ups of symptoms, including pain, about once per week or every two weeks.  According to him, the neck pain makes it difficult to look up and down as well as side to side, and also impairs his ability to lift or carry heavy objects.  He further detailed that he relieves his symptoms through the use of over-the-counter medication as well as ice and heating pads, a TENS unit, and topical creams.  

Range of motion testing during the July 2023 examination revealed forward flexion reduced to 35 degrees, extension reduced to 30 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion reduced to 30 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation reduced to 40 degrees.  The examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited pain throughout the entire range of cervical spine motion.  There was no alteration in the range of motion with passive range of testing, although the examiner did note that the Veteran exhibited crepitus and localized tenderness, manifested by pain with light palpation of the neck.  Repetitive use testing did not reveal any increased loss of range of motion; however, the examiner did estimate that during a flare-up or following repeated use, the Veteran would exhibit forward flexion further reduced to 25 degrees, extension further reduced to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion further reduced to 20 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation further reduced to 30 degrees.  Reflex, sensory, and muscle testing each revealed no loss of function, and there was no objective evidence of radiculopathy. The examiner further found no evidence of ankylosis or IVDS.  In summation, the examiner found that the cervical spine condition contributed to impairment of occupational functioning in the form of the impaired neck movement and difficulty with lifting and carrying objects.  

There are no available VA medical records pertaining to the time period on review which pertain to the Veteran's treatment for his cervical spine condition.  

Upon review of the evidence, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the cervical spine condition is not warranted at any point prior to January 20, 2023.  As a reminder, in order to warrant the greater 20 percent rating, it must be "factually ascertainable" that any increase in severity had occurred during the one-year period prior to the filing of the claim.  Here, there are no pertinent medical records corresponding to the one-year period from January 20, 2022, to January 20, 2023, and so the Board cannot establish that any increase in severity documented on the July 2023 examination was present during the period of time.  

As for whether a rating in excess of 20 percent is warranted for the cervical spine condition from January 20, 2023, the Board highlights that the Veteran on the July 2023 VA examination was evaluated as exhibiting no less than 25 degrees of forward flexion and a combined range of motion of 145 degrees.  Loss of range of motion to this extent equates to the currently assigned 20 percent rating.  Moreover, the July 2023 VA examiner did not find any evidence to suggest that the Veteran had IVDS of such severity that it necessitates doctor-prescribed bed rest.

In denying an increased 30 percent rating, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups on the July 2023 examination; however, the July 2023 examiner estimated that the increased loss of range of motion would still not rise to a severity necessary to warrant an increased rating.  Moreover, the Board highlights that the lay testimony of record reflects only that the Veteran experienced pain and stiffness in his neck.  Simply put, there is no indication from the record that any increase in the severity of symptomatology during a flare-up or following repeated use would equate to forward flexion of 15 degrees or less and/or favorable ankylosis of the cervical spine.  As such, even in consideration of the Veteran's complaints of flare-ups, the Board finds that a 30 percent rating is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45; Sharp v. Shinseki, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017); Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

The Board has additionally considered this case in light of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court's) opinion in Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021), wherein the Court held that the application of §§ 4.40 and 4.45 permits consideration of an evaluation based on ankylosis, if a claimant's functional loss is consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.  Essentially, if the demonstrated functional loss is the functional equivalent of ankylosis, the Court in Chavis determined that a rating based on ankylosis may be appropriate for a spine condition despite an explicit determination by a medical professional that ankylosis is not demonstrated in the affected joint. 

Ankylosis contemplates "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure."  Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 94 (32nd ed. 2012); see also Villareal v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 13 (2001) (defining ankylosis to mean that "a joint is fixed, or 'frozen' in one position").

In this case, although the Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms of stiffness, pain, and difficulty engaging in sustained physical activity, the Board concludes that such asserted functional loss is not consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.  Notably, there is no suggestion of any limited motion of the cervical spine comparable to any type of immobility, as the Veteran remains capable of performing some degree of each range of motion.  Also, as detailed above, to the extent that the Veteran has experienced functional loss due to the considerations set forth in 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, he has not asserted functional impairment comparable to that experienced by an individual with immobility of the cervical spine. 

In reaching this determination, the Board acknowledges that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use."  Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the Board is aware that the Veteran has taken medication to address the symptoms of the cervical spine condition at issue. That having been said, entitlement to an increased 30 percent rating nevertheless still requires objective evidence demonstrating that the Veteran is limited to 15 degrees of forward flexion or less, or, in the alternative, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  Even when considering the impact of the over-the-counter pain medication as well as ice and heating pads, a TENS unit, and topical creams utilized by the Veteran, there is still no suggestion that without the use of this medication his range of motion would be so further impaired as to warrant an increased rating under the applicable diagnostic code.  Moreover, as stated, there is no objective medical evidence to reference regarding the one-year period preceding the filing of the claim, and so no reasonable means by which to establish that the Veteran was utilizing any listed medication during this period of time.  

Accordingly, a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to January 20, 2023, and in excess of 20 percent therefrom, for a cervical spine condition is not warranted.  

3. Low Back Condition

The Veteran is service connected for a low back condition, characterized as degenerative joint disease. The condition is rated as 10 percent disabling prior to January 20, 2023, and 20 percent disabling therefrom.  The Veteran seeks ratings in excess of these for the entirety of the appeal period, which extends back to January 20, 2022, one year prior to the date that the Veteran submitted his claim seeking entitlement to an increased rating.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).

The current ratings have been assigned pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.  Spinal conditions are evaluated under either the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula) or under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes (Formula for Rating IVDS), whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.25, 4.71a.

The General Rating Formula provides for a 10 percent evaluation for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is for application with forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees.  38 C.F.R.      § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, Note (2); see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate V.

The Veteran was afforded a VA back examination in July 2023, during which he reported that he experiences low back pain that is nagging or aching in nature.  When queried, he endorsed experiencing flare-ups of symptoms, including pain, about once per week or every two weeks.  According to him, the back makes it difficult to bend, lift, twist, use stairs, and stand or sit for long periods of time.  He did not report utilizing any specific medication or treatment to alleviate the symptoms of his low back condition.  

Range of motion during the July 2023 examination revealed forward flexion reduced to 50 degrees, extension reduced to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion reduced to 25 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation reduced to 20 degrees.  The examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited pain throughout the entire range of thoracolumbar spine motion.  There was no alteration in the range of motion with passive range of testing, although the examiner did note that the Veteran exhibited crepitus and localized tenderness, manifested by pain with light palpation of the lower spine.  Repetitive use testing did not reveal any increased loss of range of motion; however, the examiner did estimate that during a flare-up or following repeated use, the Veteran would exhibit forward flexion further reduced to 45 degrees, extension further reduced to 15 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion further reduced to 20 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation further reduced to 15 degrees.  Reflex, sensory, and muscle testing each revealed no loss of function, and there was no objective evidence of radiculopathy. The examiner further found no evidence of ankylosis or IVDS.  In summation, the examiner found that the thoracolumbar spine condition contributed to impairment of occupational functioning in the form of difficulty bending, lifting, twisting, using stairs, and standing or sitting for long periods of time. 

There are no available VA medical records pertaining to the time period on review which pertain to the Veteran's treatment for his thoracolumbar spine condition.  

Upon review of the evidence, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the low back condition is not warranted at any point prior to January 20, 2023.  Once again, in order to warrant the greater 20 percent rating, it must be "factually ascertainable" that any increase in severity had occurred during the one-year period prior to the filing of the claim.  Here, there are no pertinent medical records corresponding to the one-year period from January 20, 2022, to January 20, 2023, and so the Board cannot establish that any increase in severity documented on the July 2023 examination was present during the period of time.  

As for whether a rating in excess of 20 percent it warranted for the low back condition from January 20, 2023, the Board highlights that the Veteran on the July 2023 VA examination was evaluated as exhibiting no less than 45 degrees of forward flexion and a combined range of motion of 130 degrees.  Loss of range of motion to this extent equates to the currently assigned 20 percent rating.  Moreover, the July 2023 VA examiner did not find any evidence to suggest that the Veteran had IVDS of such severity that it necessitates doctor-prescribed bed rest.

In denying an increased 40 percent rating, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups on the July 2023 examination; however, the July 2023 examiner estimated that the increased loss of range of motion would still not rise to a severity necessary to warrant an increased rating.  Moreover, the Board highlights that the lay testimony of record reflects only that the Veteran experienced pain and stiffness in his back.  Simply put, there is no indication from the record that any increase in the severity of symptomatology during a flare-up or following repeated use would equate to forward flexion of 30 degrees or less and/or favorable ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine.  As such, even in consideration of the Veteran's complaints of flare-ups, the Board finds that a 30 percent rating is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45; Sharp v. Shinseki, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017); Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

The Board has additionally considered this case in light of Chavis, and although the Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms of stiffness, pain, and difficulty engaging in sustained physical activity, the Board concludes that such asserted functional loss is not consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.  Notably, there is no suggestion of any limited motion of the thoracolumbar spine comparable to any type of immobility during the time period in question, as the Veteran remained capable of performing some degree of each range of motion. Also, as detailed above, to the extent that the Veteran has experienced functional loss due to the considerations set forth in 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, he has not asserted functional impairment comparable to that experienced by an individual with immobility of the thoracolumbar spine.

4. Left Shoulder Condition

The Veteran is service connected for a left shoulder condition, rated as 10 percent disabling prior to January 20, 2023, and 20 percent disabling therefrom. The Veteran seeks ratings in excess of these for the entirety of the appeal period, which extends back to January 20, 2022, one year prior to the date that the Veteran submitted his claim seeking entitlement to an increased rating.  38 U.S.C.                  § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).  It is noted that the Veteran's left shoulder is his non-dominant shoulder. 

Disabilities of the shoulder and arm are rated under Diagnostic Codes 5200 through 5203.  The plain language of 38 C.F.R. § 4.71(a) confirms that a veteran is only entitled to a single disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5201 for each arm that suffers from limited motion at the shoulder joint.  The diagnostic code does not provide separate ratings for limitation of motion in the flexion and abduction planes, but rather is addressed generically to "limitation of motion of" the arm. Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Diagnostic Codes 5200-5203 distinguish between the major (dominant) extremity and the minor (non-dominant) extremity.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.69.  As discussed above, the Board has determined that the Veteran's right extremity is his dominant extremity, as confirmed by a July 2023 VA examination. Given such, the applicable rating will be assigned under the "minor" rating for the Veteran's left shoulder disability.

Here, the regional office has rated the left shoulder condition pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5203 for the period prior to January 20, 2023 and Diagnostic Codes 5201-5202 from that date.  In the selection of code numbers assigned to disabilities, injuries will generally be represented by the number assigned to the residual condition on the basis of which the rating is determined. With injuries and diseases, preference is to be given to the number assigned to the injury or disease itself; if the rating is determined on the basis of residual conditions, the number appropriate to the residual condition will be added, preceded by a hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  Therefore, the hyphenated diagnostic code in this case indicates that the left shoulder condition is characterized as a recurrent left shoulder dislocation, which corresponds to Diagnostic Code 5202, but is rated under the criteria for limitation of the motion of the arm pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5201. 

Diagnostic Code 5201 provides for limitation of motion of the arm, pertinent to the minor upper extremity, and allows for a minimum 20 percent rating for limitation of motion of the arm at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees). Once again, a 20 percent rating is also assigned for limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/abduction limited to 45 degrees). A maximum 30 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion of the arm flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from side.

Diagnostic Code 5202, which again corresponds to impairment of the humerus, provides a 20 percent evaluation for minor joints that exhibited a moderate or marked deformity of malunion of the humerus, or recurrent dislocation of the humerus at the scapulohumeral joint with either infrequent episodes and guarding of movement only at the shoulder level or frequent episodes and guarding of all arm movements.  A 40 percent evaluation is warranted for fibrous union of the minor humerus; a 50 percent evaluation for nonunion of the minor humerus (false flail joint); and a maximum 70 percent evaluation for the loss of head of the minor humerus (flail shoulder).

Under Diagnostic Code 5203, malunion or nonunion without loose movement of the minor clavicle or scapula warrants a 10 percent evaluation. A 20 percent evaluation is warranted in cases of nonunion of the minor clavicle or scapula with loose movement, or dislocation thereof. 

The Board also acknowledges Diagnostic Code 5200, concerning ankylosis of scapulohumeral articulation, but such has not been shown in this case.

In evaluating whether it was "factually ascertainable" that a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted for the period prior to January 20, 2023, the Board reiterates that there is a relative paucity of evidence pertaining to this period of time. Specifically, a review of the available VA medical records from this period of time does not reflect that the Veteran underwent any specific treatment for left shoulder symptomatology.  As such, the Board cannot establish that the Veteran was experiencing any of the symptoms which characterize the minimum 20 percent rating under the criteria outlined above.  Accordingly, the Board does not find that the Veteran is entitled to an increased rating for the one-year period prior to the submission of the increased rating claim.

The Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination in July 2023, during which he reported that he dislocates his left shoulder about once per month, and that he pops his shoulder back in when it occurs.  According to the Veteran, he experiences increased fatigue in his left shoulder, and severe pain and loss of motion when he dislocates the shoulder.  He alleviates his symptoms with the use of over-the-counter pain medication.  When queried, he endorsed experiencing flare-ups of pain when he dislocates the shoulder.  He also reported that he has difficulty with lifting and carrying object as well as reaching more than a shoulder level.  

Range of motion testing on the July 2023 examination revealed flexion reduced to 80 degrees, abduction reduced to 80 degrees, internal rotation reduced to 40 degrees, and external rotation reduced to 40 degrees, with passive range of motion testing revealing the same limitations.  The examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited pain in all ranges of motion, both in passive and in active testing. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited pain with weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing as well as on rest; however, there was no evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness.  Following repetitive use testing, the examiner found no additional loss of range of motion.  After repeated use, the examiner estimated that the Veteran would exhibit flexion and abduction both further reduced to 70 degrees.  During a flare-up, specifically when he dislocates his shoulder, the examiner further estimated that the Veteran would exhibit flexion and abduction reduced to 40 degrees, and internal and external rotation reduced to 20 degrees.  Muscle strength testing did not reveal any abnormalities, and there was no evidence of ankylosis, instability, or a rotator cuff impairment.  In summation, the examiner found that the left shoulder condition contributes to impairment of occupational functioning, in acknowledgement of the Veteran's reporting that he has difficulty lifting, carrying, pushing, and pulling objects, as well as working overhead.  Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran has to completely stop working when he dislocates his shoulder and must rest after he pops it back in. 

Upon review of the claims file, the Board does not find that a rating in excess of 20 percent is warranted for the left shoulder condition.  In order to warrant the higher 30 percent rating, the evidence must demonstrate that the Veteran exhibits flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees, which is not reflected in the record.  

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's lay testimony, and the VA treatment records in the claims file, but this evidence does not tend to show that the symptoms of the left shoulder condition warrant a rating in excess of 20 percent under any of the applicable criteria on a schedular basis.  As stated, for any additional functional loss to warrant a higher rating, that loss must rise to the level of the more severe symptomatology represented by the ratings in excess of those assigned, which has not been shown.  Here, although the Veteran has endorsed experiencing flare-ups of additional symptomatology on the July 2023 examination, the VA examiner did not estimate that he would exhibit a further loss of range of motion of either forward flexion or abduction which would warrant the increased 30 percent rating.  

In order to warrant an increased rating under one of the other potentially applicable diagnostic criteria, there must be evidence of unfavorable ankylosis pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5200 or malunion and/or recurrent dislocation of the major humerus pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5202; neither of these manifestation of a left shoulder condition are reflected in the record, and there is no indication that the Veteran experiences impairment which would equate to unfavorable ankylosis or malunion of the major humerus.

Accordingly, the Board finds that all the symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder disability are contemplated by the applicable rating criteria. The various functional loss factors of his disability, including pain, weakness, and lack of endurance, have been fully considered and are contemplated in the rating schedule.  That is, the Board finds that these symptoms are contemplated under the relevant rating criteria and under the DeLuca criteria, including §§ 4.40 and 4.45, which compensate for limitation of motion, and symptoms such as pain, weakness, and instability producing functional limitations. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; Correia, supra; Sharp, supra.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statements regarding the pain he experiences in his left shoulder.  However, painful motion as well as additional impairment of function is contemplated and compensated by the ratings that are currently assigned.  DeLuca, supra.  There is no basis for awarding a rating in excess of 20 percent, even in consideration of the additional loss the Veteran would exhibit during a flare-up or following repeated use.

The Board has once again considered the ameliorative impact of the Veteran's use of medication to alleviate the symptoms of his left shoulder condition pursuant to Ingram but affirms that his use of medication in this regard does not warrant an increased rating under the applicable criteria.  Specifically, entitlement to an increased 30 percent rating still requires objective evidence demonstrating arm flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from side.  Even when considering the impact of over-the-counter pain medication, there is still no suggestion that without the use of this medication his range of motion would be so further impaired as to warrant an increased rating under the applicable diagnostic code.  Moreover, as stated, there is no objective medical evidence to reference regarding the one-year period preceding the filing of the claim, and so no reasonable means by which to establish that the Veteran was utilizing any listed medication during this period of time.  

Overall, the Board finds that a rating for the left shoulder condition in excess of 20 percent is not warranted.  Moreover, it was not factually ascertainable that the Veteran met the criteria for a minimum 20 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5201 during the one-year period prior to the filing of the increased rating claim.  The evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, and there is no doubt to be resolved.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

5. Left Shoulder Surgical Scar

The Veteran is service connected for a left shoulder scar that is a residual of a prior left shoulder surgery. The condition is evaluated as noncompensable.  He seeks a compensable rating for the entire period of the appeal, which extends back to January 20, 2022, one year prior to the date of the increased rating claim which triggered the assignment of a separate rating for the surgical scar as associated with the left shoulder condition also on appeal. 

The noncompensable rating is assigned pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 7802, pertaining to superficial scars.  Pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7802, a 10 percent rating is warranted for burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage and cover an area of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

Other potentially applicable criteria for rating scars include Diagnostic Code 7801, which provides for a 10 percent rating for a scar other than the head, face, or neck that is associated with underlying soft tissue damage, as well as Diagnostic Code 7804, which provides for a 10 percent for one or two scars that are unstable or painful, a 20 percent rating for three or four scars that are unstable or painful, and a 30 percent rating for five or more scars that are unstable or painful.  38 C.F.R.         § 4.118.

In addition, Diagnostic Code 7805 directs that scars resulting in limitation of function be rated based on disabling effects not considered in a rating provided under Diagnostic Codes 7800-7804 under an appropriate diagnostic code. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

The relevant evidence of record includes a July 2023 VA scar examination, wherein it was noted that the Veteran had a scar on his left anterior shoulder that is a residual of a left shoulder surgery he underwent in 1998.  An in-person evaluation revealed that the scar was 8 centimeters in length and one half centimeter in width. The examiner determined that the combined total area in centimeters squared was 4 centimeters squared. In summation, the examiner did not find that the scar contributed to any functional limitations.

Upon review of the evidence, which does not suggest that the Veteran experienced any disabling effects due to the left shoulder surgical scar, a compensable rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 7802. The Board has also considered the applicability of other potentially applicable diagnostic criteria for rating the scars but finds that no higher rating is assignable under any other diagnostic code. Specifically, Diagnostic Code 7800 contemplates a scar of the head, face, or neck, while Diagnostic Code 7801 contemplates a scar associated with underlying soft tissue damage. Finally, Diagnostic Code 7804 contemplates scars that are unstable and painful, and there is no evidence of that in the record.

In summation, a compensable rating is not warranted for the right or left knee replacement surgical scars.  That being said, the Board does find that the effective date of the assignment of a separate rating for a left shoulder surgical scar should extend back to the maximum one year period prior to the filing of the claim, that is, from January 20, 2022, in light of the fact that it is clear that the Veteran exhibited the left shoulder scar ever since the surgery in 1998. 

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, the evidence of record is persuasively against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an increased rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

6. Allergic Rhinitis

The Veteran is service connected for allergic rhinitis, rated as 10 percent disabling. He seeks a rating in excess of that 10 percent for the entirety of the appeal period, which extends back to August 10, 2022, the effective date of the PACT act legislation which established new criteria allowing for the grant of service connection in this matter.  Specifically, these regulations allow for the establishment of an effective date for the grant of service connection based on the new criteria set at the date of the PACT Act legislation if the underlying claim was filed within a year of the date of the PACT Act legislation.  

The rating for allergic rhinitis is assigned pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.  Under Diagnostic Code 6522, allergic rhinitis will be rated as 10 percent disabling when it is manifested by a greater than fifty percent obstruction of both nasal passages or complete obstruction of one nasal passage, without polyps.  A 30 percent disability rating is the maximum available rating and is warranted when polyps are present. 

The nature and severity of the allergic rhinitis was evaluated in a July 2023 VA examination.  Upon evaluation, the examiner found evidence of permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates as well as greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both side due to rhinitis.  There was no evidence of nasal polyps.  When queried, the Veteran reported using nasal sprays daily as well as albuterol on occasion.  In summation, the examiner did not find that the condition contributed to any impairment of occupational functioning. 

A review of available VA medical records does show that the Veteran has allergic rhinitis listed as an active problem.  There are no records showing specific treatment for the condition.

Upon review of the record, the Board does not find that a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted for the allergic rhinitis at any point during the appeal period. Specifically, the Board highlights that the July 2023 in-person examination is the only objective medical evidence that is available in the claims file, and the VA examiner found no evidence that the Veteran had any nasal polyps, which would be necessary for the assignment of a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6522.  

The Board has also considered the applicability of alternative diagnostic codes for rating the allergic rhinitis.  However, because allergic rhinitis has its own code, Diagnostic Code 6522, rating by analogy under other codes is not permissible. Moreover, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran's symptomatology is attributable to a separately diagnosed respiratory condition, to specifically include sinusitis.  Thus, higher ratings under another code provision are not appropriate. Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 338 (2014). Therefore, there is no legal basis upon which to award a compensable schedular rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522; Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded. 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss as directly attributable to excessive noise exposure in service.  In support thereof, he was afforded a VA examination in April 2023 to evaluate the nature and likely etiology of the condition.  After confirming that the Veteran had hearing loss in his right ear for VA compensation purposes, the chosen examiner found that it was less likely than not that the hearing loss is attributable to service.  In support thereof, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not exhibit any significant auditory threshold shifts while in service as evidenced by the results of testing undertaken at the entrance to service and at the time of the Veteran's discharge.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran's military occupational specialty only entailed a moderate probability of exposure to hazardous levels of noise, and so considered this additional evidence weighing against a finding that there is a nexus between service and the right ear hearing loss.  

The Board cannot rely on this opinion, as the examiner did not provide a sufficient rationale for her conclusion.  Specifically, she did not explain why the presence of "normal" hearing upon separation as well as the lack of a pure tone threshold shift made it more likely that hearing loss was attributable to later auditory exposure after the Veteran's discharge from service, especially in light of the fact that the regional office in the May 2023 rating decision conceded that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous levels of noise in service.  As a reminder, service connection for a hearing loss disability may be awarded even if such disability did not manifest during service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); see also Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993).  Accordingly, a remand is necessary in order to correct a failure of the duty to assist in neglecting to secure an etiology opinion with a sufficient rationale. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for dry eye syndrome is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for dry eye syndrome, which he contends is directly attributable to his service.  In support thereof, he was afforded a VA examination in April 2023, wherein the chosen VA examiner confirmed a diagnosis of dry eye syndrome but ultimately found that the condition was less likely than not attributable to service.  As a rationale, the examiner focused entirely on the possibility that the condition is due to the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, as acknowledged by the regional office on the basis of a March 2023 memorandum of record.  In determining that the Veteran's participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) did not contribute to his development of dry eye syndrome, the examiner relied entirely on the fact that the Veteran's presumed toxic exposure occurred in service in 1990 and in 1991, while the dry eye syndrome was not diagnosed until 2020, nearly 30 years later.  

The Board cannot rely on this examination, as the examiner provided no explanation to justify his determination that the dry eye syndrome is not attributable to the presumed in-service TERA other than a conclusory statement noting the gap in time between the occurrence of the TERA and the diagnosis of dry eye syndrome.  The examiner did not refer to any medical literature or any other objective evidence to substantiate his determination, and did not discuss the relevance of the gap in time between the occurrence of the TERA and the diagnosis of the dry eye syndrome.  

Accordingly, remand is necessary in order to correct a pre-decisional failure of the duty to assist in affording the Veteran a deficient examination in support of his service connection claim. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the claims file to a qualified examiner in order to secure an opinion that addresses the etiology of the Veteran's right ear hearing loss.  A copy of the claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any clinical testing deemed necessary should be scheduled.

After a review of the Veteran's claims file, to include his service treatment records, the examiner should determine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's current right ear hearing loss disability is related to his period of active duty service.  Should the examiner find it less likely than not that the Veteran's current hearing loss disability is related to his period of service, the examiner should discuss why this is the case, to include the clinical significance of any "normal" in-service hearing test results, as well as the lack of permanent pure tone threshold shifts during service.  Any intercurrent cause for hearing loss post-service should be described.  In setting forth this opinion, the examiner should be cognizant of the fact that exposure to a significant degree of in-service hazardous noise has already been conceded by the regional office.

Should the chosen examiner rely on the 2005 IOM report "Noise & Military Service: Implication for Hearing Loss and Tinnitus", he or she must fully explain the implications of the conclusions made therein, to include any determination that it is unlikely that noise-induced hearing loss would occur after a prolonged delay following the purported hazardous noise exposure. Moreover, the examiner must make every attempt possible to review the accuracy of the finding within the 2005 IOM report that definitive studies of prolonged delay noise-induced hearing loss have not been undertaken.

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. As exposure to hazardous levels of noise while in service has already been conceded, the lack of documented in-service noise exposure should not be relied upon in support of a negative etiology opinion in this regard. The Veteran's lay contentions as to acoustic trauma must be considered in full. 

2. Provide the claims file to a qualified VA medical professional in order to secure an addendum opinion regarding the likely etiology of the claimed dry eye syndrome.  The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner for review, and the chosen examiner must indicate that they reviewed the claims file in its entirety before setting forth any requested opinion.

After a thorough review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the claimed dry eye syndrome had its onset during service or is otherwise related to active service.  In setting forth this opinion, the examiner must comment upon the possibility that the condition is attributable to the Veteran's presumed participation in a TERA during service.  If the examiner determines that this presumed exposure nevertheless did not contribute to the later development of the claimed dry eye syndrome, he or she must explain why with reference to medical literature as well as discussion of the Veteran's medical history.  

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered in full.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher M. Collins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.