Citation Nr: A25032292
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210415-153365
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension on a direct basis prior to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Navy from May 1972 to May 1976. The Veteran had nautical service in the offshore eligible waters as defined in the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2021; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In September 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2019 decision. In February 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior September 2019 decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2019 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window. 

In the April 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. In May 2024, the Veteran withdrew hearing requests for other docketed appeals and the Veteran did not appear for the Board hearing scheduled for September 2024 for this docketed appeal.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension on a direct basis prior to the PACT Act is remanded.

The Board finds that the AOJ committed pre-decisional errors and remand is necessary to correct them.

Prior to the PACT Act, hypertension was not on the list of diseases presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents. As the Veteran filed his claim in August 2019, the Board must consider entitlement to service connection for hypertension on other bases.

VA treatment records in 2018 show that the Veteran was in receipt of Social Security Administration (SSA) disability. In particular, an August 2018 VA treatment note the Veteran reported social security and in an August 2019 VA 21-8940, the Veteran reported that he received or expected to receive disability. The claims file does not contain an SSA decision or any of the medical records upon which an SSA determination was based prior to the September 2019 rating decision that was the subject of the HLR that is currently on appeal. Although the SSA records appear to have been associated with the claims file in April 2020, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) to not attempt to obtain the records pertaining to any SSA disability claim prior to the September 2019 adjudication as they are potentially relevant to this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Thus, a remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Prior to the September 2019 decision that was reviewed by the HLR rating decision currently on appeal, the Veteran was not afforded an examination regarding the nature and etiology of his hypertension. 

The Board notes that in November 2018, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (NAS) published Veterans and Agent Orange: Update 11 (2018), in which the NAS found sufficient evidence of an association for hypertension and exposure to herbicide agents used during the Vietnam War. As a result, hypertension was upgraded from its previous classification in the category of "limited or suggestive" evidence of an association with exposure to herbicide agents to the category of "sufficient" evidence of an association with exposure to herbicide agents. Id. According to NAS, "[t]he sufficient category indicates that there is enough epidemiologic evidence to conclude that there is a positive association" between hypertension and herbicide agent exposure. Id. The Board finds that VA had constructive possession of the report at the time of the September 2019 AOJ decision. See Euzebio v. McDonough, 989 F.3d 1305, 1321 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Thus, a medical opinion should have been obtained by the AOJ addressing this theory.

In addition, the Veteran has been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and has contended that his hypertension disability is secondary to his diabetes mellitus. A VA medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's hypertension is due to or aggravated by his diabetes mellitus was not associated with the claims file prior to the September 2019 rating decision that was the reviewed by the HLR on appeal. Furthermore, although there is a VA examination report associated with the claims file, dated in January 2020, the opinion provided does not discuss whether the Veteran's disability was aggravated by diabetes mellitus and does not opine on whether the Veteran's hypertension disability was due to the Veteran's exposure to herbicides. 

Accordingly, remand is necessary for adequate medical opinions. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159, McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (indicating that findings of "not due to," "not caused by," and "not related to" a service-connected disability are insufficient to address the question of aggravation).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ensure that the Veteran's complete Social Security Administration records are associated with the claims file. If the records are not available, such unavailability should be documented in the record. The Veteran and his representative should be notified of unsuccessful efforts in order to allow them the opportunity to obtain and submit those records for VA review.

2. Forward the claims file to an appropriate VA examiner for a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's hypertension and herbicide agent exposure. After review of the claims file, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's hypertension related to his active service, to include his presumed herbicide agent exposure during his service in the offshore eligible waters as defined in the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019?

(b.) The examiner must address the NAS Update 11 (2018), wherein the NAS found sufficient evidence of an association for hypertension and exposure to herbicide agents used during the Vietnam War and hypertension was upgraded from its previous classification in the category of "limited or suggestive" evidence of an association with exposure to herbicide agents to the category of "sufficient" evidence of an association with exposure to herbicide agents.

(c) The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension was caused by, is the result of, or is aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities. Explain why or why not.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide any requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must provide a reasoned explanation for such conclusion.

 

 

T. RAYMOND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robert J. Burriesci, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.