Citation Nr: A25032487
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240909-471052
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for left knee disability, to include as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain and/or posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from April 2009 to January 2016.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the December 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305.  In Williams v. McDonough, the Court held the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In the present case, the rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024.  Thus, the one-year period following the decision has not yet elapsed.  However, the Board finds that there is no prejudice with the Board remanding the claim prior to the expiration of the one-year period, and delaying adjudication would needlessly delay the potential award of benefits to the Veteran with no potential benefit.  Thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claim.  

Service connection for left knee disability, to include as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain and/or PTSD is remanded.

The Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In May 2023, a VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a left knee strain but found that it was not proximately due to or a result of the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain or not aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  The examiner did not address the related, but distinct, question of whether the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain aggravated his left knee strain or whether his left knee strain was proximately due to or a result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (holding that a VA examination is inadequate if it does not rule out the possibility of aggravation); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) (secondary service connection is awarded when a claimant suffers a disability that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury).  As such, a new opinion is required.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Ask an examiner of appropriate expertise to review the Veteran's file.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  Based on review of the record and conducting an examination (if deemed necessary) of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

a)	The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left knee disability began in service, was caused by active service, or is otherwise related to active service. 

b)	The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left knee disability was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain and/or PTSD.

"	If the examiner finds that the Veteran's left knee disability was aggravated by his service-connected lumbosacral strain and/or PTSD, then he/she should specify the baseline level of disability of the disability prior to aggravation and the permanent, measurable level of increased impairment due to the service-connected disability.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be taken into account in formulating the requested opinions.  

The examiner is also reminded that the absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence in the service treatment records is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion.  See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992).  Thus, the examiner is to consider the totality of the record, and not just the absence of clinical treatment, in weighing the Veteran's statements asserting symptomatology.

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gandhi, Rahil

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.