Citation Nr: A25032697
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-437672
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for joint pains to include back and neck issues is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified insomnia to include bereavement is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1989 to June 1994. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with the VA Form 10182 or within 90 days of receipt of the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

In October 2024, the Board sent the Veteran and his representative a letter to clarify if the Veteran wished to withdraw his appeal, citing unclear correspondence received September 9, 2024. The Board explained that if the Veteran did not respond within 30 days of the letter, the Board will proceed to review the issue on appeal. Neither the Veteran nor his representative replied within 30 days of the Board's October 2024 letter. Therefore, the Board will proceed with the appeal.

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

Under the AMA, only pre-decisional duty to assist errors are eligible for remand. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Therefore, if the Board identifies a duty to assist error that existed at the time of the AOJ's decision on the claim under review, the claim must be returned for correction of the error and readjudication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(g).

1. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran contends that he has bilateral hearing loss due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) of cannon fire direction specialist. See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

A March 2024 Examination Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation notes a hearing loss examination was cancelled, indicating the Veteran was a "No Show."

The AOJ stated in the April 2024 rating decision that the evidence showed no good cause for the Veteran's failure to report to the examination. Upon further review of the claims file, in the November 2023 examination request, the AOJ indicated that the Veteran does not need to report for all examinations for the contention of hearing loss. Thus, it appears that the examination was scheduled, but the Veteran was not notified to attend the hearing loss examination as the November 2023 examination request did not require his presence, thus he was deemed to be a "No Show." However, VA hearing loss examinations require the presence of the Veteran to determine whether he has hearing loss for VA purposes and for the examiner to obtain his history regarding the hearing loss. 

As such, the Board finds that remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error to afford the Veteran an in-person examination for his bilateral hearing loss. 

The Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is a two-way street and failure to attend the VA examination could negatively affect his claim; the Veteran has a duty to cooperate with VA and facilitate needed development. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).

2. Entitlement to service connection for joint pains to include back and neck issues 

The Veteran asserts that his joint pains to include back and neck issues are related to all the field problems while being on active duty. See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

The Veteran's VA treatment records and private treatment records document that he complained of back and neck pain. 

The AOJ denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for joint pains to include back and neck issues. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran has not been provided an examination for his back or neck condition. Here, the Veteran has stated that he believes his joint issues stem from his active-duty service, to include his MOS duties.

The VA Secretary must provide a VA medical examination when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran should have been afforded a VA examination for his back and neck conditions and therefore, remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

3. Entitlement to service connection for unspecified insomnia to include bereavement 

The Veteran maintains that he has insomnia and has trouble sleeping due to his time in the military and performing field exercises. See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2023. The Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified insomnia and bereavement, however, the examiner stated that these conditions do not appear to be related but many impact each other to an extent. The examiner opined that the condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balance of nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner stated that the Veteran denied insomnia or other significant mental health during active duty and the medical records do not appear to show a history of insomnia or other mental health symptoms in service. 

However, the Veteran's VA treatment records noted that he has difficulty sleeping and that he reported neck pain disrupts his sleep. See February 2022 VA treatment record. Furthermore, another VA treatment record from February 2022 noted that the Veteran was recommended to use lidocaine for neck pain which may help sleep. Thus, the evidence shows that the Veteran's insomnia may be related to trouble with joint pains to include back and neck issues. 

As development of the Veteran's claim for service connection for joint pains to include back and neck issues may have an impact on the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for insomnia, the Board finds this issue is inextricably intertwined. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

Accordingly, the Board will defer adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim for insomnia at this time.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA audiological examination with medical opinion to address the claim for the bilateral hearing loss. The Veteran's presence is required to obtain the audio metrics. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished (with all findings made available to the requesting examiner prior to the completion of his or her report), and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. The electronic records, to include a copy of this remand, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner, and an opinion as follows is requested: 

The examiner must opine as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher)

a) had its onset in service; or is otherwise incurred in service to specifically include the competently reported in-service noise exposure due to his MOS of cannon fire direction specialist; or

b) manifested to a compensable degree within one year of service. 

In considering any lay statements of record, the examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examination report must include a complete rationale for any opinion provided. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should so state and explain why an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA audiological examination with medical opinion to address the claim for joint pains to include back and neck issues. The decision for an in-person examination of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished (with all findings made available to the requesting examiner prior to the completion of his or her report), and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. The electronic records, to include a copy of this remand, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner, and an opinion as follows is requested: 

The examiner must opine as to whether the Veteran's joint pains to include back and neck issues at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher)

a) had its onset in service; or is otherwise incurred in service to specifically include duties performed during active duty due to his MOS of cannon fire direction specialist.

In considering any lay statements of record, the examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examination report must include a complete rationale for any opinion provided. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should so state and explain why an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation.

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Kim, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.