Citation Nr: A25032842
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241105-488111
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for cervical disc disease (claimed as arthritis) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar disc disease (claimed as arthritis) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for Lewy body dementia with depression (also claimed as anxiety and memory loss) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for thrombocytopenia is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic renal insufficiency is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's bilateral carotid artery stenosis was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

2. The Veteran's cervical disc disease was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

3. The Veteran's thoracolumbar disc disease was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

4. The Veteran's dementia with depression was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

5. The Veteran's sleep apnea was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

6. The Veteran's left lower extremity neuropathy was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

7. The Veteran's right lower extremity neuropathy was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

8. The Veteran's thrombocytopenia was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

9. The Veteran's GERD was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

10. The Veteran's IBS was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

11. The Veteran's hypothyroidism was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

12. The Veteran's chronic renal insufficiency was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

13. The Veteran's Parkinson's disease was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

14. The Veteran's fibromyalgia was not incurred in or caused by active service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for cervical disc disease are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for thoracolumbar disc disease are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for dementia with depression are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

8. The criteria for service connection for thrombocytopenia are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for service connection for GERD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

10. The criteria for service connection for IBS are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

11. The criteria for service connection for hypothyroidism are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

12. The criteria for service connection for chronic renal insufficiency are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

13. The criteria for service connection for Parkinson's disease are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

14. The criteria for service connection for fibromyalgia are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from May 1966 to October 1968. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from November 2023 and August 2024 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the claims of entitlement to service connection for dementia with depression, cervical disc disease, and thoracolumbar disease, and at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision on appeal for the claims of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, bilateral carotid artery stenosis, bilateral hearing loss, chronic renal insufficiency, fibromyalgia, GERD, hypothyroidism, IBS, bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, Parkinson's disease, sleep apnea, and thrombocytopenia. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for hypertension and bilateral hearing loss, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disabilities due to disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection may be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after discharge. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on an analysis of all evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value. Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Additionally, VA must provide a VA medical examination and/or medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Further, under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), effective from August 10, 2022, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. A Veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; or, if VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim, or the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure.

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of bilateral carotid stenosis. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA. More specifically, the November 2023 TERA Memorandum found participation in a TERA as related to the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as a nurse. The TERA Memorandum noted that nurses are likely exposed to chemicals (e.g., sterilant), cleaning and disinfecting agents, hazardous drugs (e.g., antineoplastic drugs), mercury, materials that cause allergic reactions (e.g., latex), pesticides and physical agents (e.g., radiation). Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's bilateral carotid artery stenosis condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of carotid artery stenosis and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 TERA opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis is denied. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for cervical disc disease (claimed as arthritis).

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for cervical disc disease. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the November 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of cervical disc disease. See also March 2012 Private Treatment Records. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection requiring an in-service injury, event or illness, upon a review of the record including the Veteran's treatment records, service treatment records and lay statements, the Board finds no evidence of an in-service event related to the cervical spine. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the second element of service connection. 

Additionally, the Board finds that a remand for a VA examination pursuant to McLendon is not warranted. A remand pursuant to McLendon requires evidence of a current disability as well as evidence of an in-service event. In the instant case, as there is no evidence of an in-service event, the claim may not be remanded pursuant to McLendon for further development. 

Also, a TERA examination is not warranted if the VA determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the Veteran and TERA. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). The VA has determined that physical injury has no positive association with TERA. Id. Accordingly, under the PACT Act, the Board has no basis upon which to order a remand for a TERA examination and/or opinion for the Veteran's claim of service connection for cervical disc disease.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection, the evidence of record weighs persuasively against the finding of an in-service event and, thus, the Veteran's claim does not meet the second element of service connection. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for cervical disc disease is denied. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar disc disease (claimed as arthritis).

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar disc disease. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the November 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of thoracolumbar disc disease. See also August 2016 Private Treatment Records. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection requiring an in-service injury, event or illness, upon a review of the record including the Veteran's treatment records, service treatment records and lay statements, the Board finds no evidence of an in-service event related to the thoracolumbar spine. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the second element of service connection. 

Additionally, the Board finds that a remand for a VA examination pursuant to McLendon is not warranted. A remand pursuant to McLendon requires evidence of a current disability as well as evidence of an in-service event. In the instant case, as there is no evidence of an in-service event, the claim may not be remanded pursuant to McLendon for further development. 

Also, a TERA examination is not warranted if the VA determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the Veteran and TERA. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). The VA has determined that physical injury has no positive association with TERA. Id. Accordingly, under the PACT Act, the Board has no basis upon which to order a remand for a TERA examination and/or opinion for the Veteran's claim of service connection for thoracolumbar disc disease.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection, the evidence of record weighs persuasively against the finding of an in-service event and, thus, the Veteran's claim does not meet the second element of service connection. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar disc disease is denied. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for Lewy body dementia with depression (also claimed as anxiety and memory loss).

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for Lewy body dementia with depression. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the November 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of dementia with depression. See also October 2022 Private Treatment Records. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection requiring an in-service injury, event or illness, upon a review of the record including the Veteran's treatment records, service treatment records and lay statements, the Board finds no evidence of an in-service event related to any psychiatric disorder, to include dementia and depression. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the second element of service connection. 

Additionally, the Board finds that a remand for a VA examination pursuant to McLendon is not warranted. A remand pursuant to McLendon requires evidence of a current disability as well as evidence of an in-service event. In the instant case, as there is no evidence of an in-service event, the claim may not be remanded pursuant to McLendon for further development. 

Also, a TERA examination is not warranted if the VA determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the Veteran and TERA. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). The VA has determined that mental disorders have no positive association with TERA. Id. Accordingly, under the PACT Act, the Board has no basis upon which to order a remand for a TERA examination and/or opinion for the Veteran's claim of service connection for dementia with depression.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection, the evidence of record weighs persuasively against the finding of an in-service event and, thus, the Veteran's claim does not meet the second element of service connection. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for dementia with depression is denied. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of obstructive sleep apnea. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of obstructive sleep apnea and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied. 

6. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy.

7. Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of bilateral lower extremity small fiber neuropathy. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity small fiber neuropathy was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of small fiber neuropathy and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy is denied. 

8. Entitlement to service connection for thrombocytopenia.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for thrombocytopenia. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of thrombocytopenia. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's thrombocytopenia condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of thrombocytopenia and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for thrombocytopenia is denied. 

9. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for GERD. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of GERD. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's GERD condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of GERD and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for GERD is denied. 

10. Entitlement to service connection for IBS.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for IBS. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of IBS. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's IBS condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of IBS and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for IBS is denied. 

11. Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of hypothyroidism. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found the Veteran's hypothyroidism condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of hypothyroidism and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is denied. 

12. Entitlement to service connection for chronic renal insufficiency. 

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for chronic renal insufficiency. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, a March 2024 VA examination found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chronic renal insufficiency. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's chronic renal insufficiency condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of chronic renal insufficiency and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner further opined that this condition was likely a result of a childhood illness of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for chronic renal insufficiency is denied. 

13. Entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of Parkinson's disease. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found the Veteran's Parkinson's disease condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of Parkinson's disease and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease is denied. 

14. Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of fibromyalgia. See also March 2024 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the August 2024 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran participated in a TERA related to her MOS of nurse. See also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, a March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's fibromyalgia condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner could find no association between the development of fibromyalgia and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there is an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The March 2024 VA examiner considered the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. Accordingly, the Board assigns the March 2024 nexus opinion significant probative weight. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim does not meet the third element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, although the Veteran's claim meets the first and second elements of service connection, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus and, thus, the third element of service connection is not met. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for hypertension. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and medical opinions.

A March 2024 TERA opinion found that the Veteran's hypertension condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. After researching peer-reviewed medical literature, the VA examiner found no association between the development of hypertension and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner concluded that there was an absence of a causative pathophysiological connection between these events and that a nexus had not been established.

The Board finds the March 2024 TERA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes. The TERA opinion failed to address the relevant August 1966 service treatment records showing an elevated blood pressure reading of 130/76. When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA opinion addressing the Veteran's in-service TERA as well as the pertinent medical evidence of record.

Additionally, in terms of McLendon, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion for direct service connection. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of hypertension and, as noted above, August 1966 service treatment records show elevated blood pressure. As there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim, a remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion for direct service connection to determine the etiology of hypertension as related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and opinions, to include an adequate TERA opinion as well as a nexus opinion for direct service connection.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and medical opinion. 

A January 2023 VA examination found that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) caused by or a result of an event in military service. The VA examiner explained that the Veteran's entrance and separation exams were within normal limits with no shifts in hearing threshold levels. The VA examiner concluded that the claimed condition was less likely than not the result of military noise exposure.

The Board finds the January 2023 VA examination inadequate for adjudication purposes. The VA examiner opined that, because there was no hearing threshold shift in service, the Veteran's current hearing loss disability was not related to active service, including in-service noise exposure. The absence of a hearing loss disability in service is not fatal to a claim for service connection for hearing loss. Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). Rather, the proper inquiry is whether the Veteran's current hearing loss is related to in-service noise exposure. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 164 (1993). As the VA examiner solely relied on the absence of a threshold shift in service to support the negative nexus opinion, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA examination in order to determine the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 312.

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error an obtain an adequate VA examination and nexus opinion for bilateral hearing loss.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her hypertension. Any indicated evaluations, studies, or tests deemed necessary by the examiner should be accomplished. The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, should be made available to the examiner designated to provide an opinion and the examination report should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented medical history and assertions. The examiner must address the following:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension was incurred in or caused by active service. 

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension was incurred in or caused by toxic exposure in service. In so opining, the examiner is required to consider the synergistic, combined effects of the Veteran's exposure to any and all toxins in service.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her bilateral hearing loss. Any indicated evaluations, studies, or tests deemed necessary by the examiner should be accomplished. The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, should be made available to the examiner designated to provide an opinion and the examination report should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented medical history and assertions. The examiner must address the following:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is related to her active service, to include military noise exposure. As stated above, the examiner should take note that the absence of a hearing loss disability in service is not fatal to a claim for service connection for hearing loss.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brostowski, Leyna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.