Citation Nr: A25032545
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231228-403603
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

A total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted, subject to the regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude his ability to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.151, 3.155, 3.340, 3.341, 3.400, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1995 to March 1999 and from April 1999 to April 2002. He served as a machine gunner and an infantryman with service in Bosnia.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim for TDIU that was addressed in an April 2023 rating decision. In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which reviewed the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision and continued the denial of TDIU.

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 supplemental claim decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to TDIU

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id. 

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether they are capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

During the period at issue, the Veteran was service-connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and traumatic brain injury (TBI) with intermittent dizziness, rated 70 percent disabling; migraine headaches, rated 30 percent disabling; tinnitus, rated 10 percent disabling; and hypertension, rated noncompensable (from May 30, 2023). The combined rating was 80 percent. Therefore, at all relevant times, the Veteran met the schedular requirements for a TDIU rating and the Board may consider the claim for a TDIU on a schedular basis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The Veteran has a high school education, one year of college, and training as an air conditioning technician. Following separation from service, he worked in security from 2012 to 2017 (earning at most $31,200 per year), and then as a school bus driver (earning at most $600 per month) from 2018 to 2020. He stopped worked in February 2020 because of his service-connected PTSD and TBI with intermittent dizziness, migraine headaches, and tinnitus. See December 2022 VA Form 21-8940. The Veteran reported that the cumulative effect of all his service-connected disabilities results in discomfort and pain; impaired sleep; poor memory; poor concentration; difficulty performing mental tasks; irritability; and an inability to handle workplace stress and decisions. Additionally, he stated, "my mental health disability has played a key role in my inability to maintain long term employment, related to my mood instability, anger issues, inability to 'connect' to people, and lack of motivation to accomplish things." See December 2022 Statement in Support of Claim. Regarding his PTSD, he reported, "the following activate my fight or flight modes in my brain and make me hypervigilant and dangerously aggressive: large crowds of people around me; loud noises, anyone yelling at me, doors opening surprisingly without notice, anyone wearing [M]uslim religious attire covered up, piles of garbage on the side of road. See December 2022 VA Form 21-8940.

The Board finds the Veteran's ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation is impacted by the mental and physical effects of his service-connected disabilities.

VA treatment records dated in 2022 note the Veteran regularly attended group and individual psychotherapy for PTSD. In August 2022 he was seen in the emergency department for migraines and dental pain from an infection that had been present for two weeks. A September 2022 VA primary care secure messaging note shows the Veteran's complaints of nightmares, uncontrollable crying, forgetting to eat, hypervigilance, and migraines with blurred vision. He reported "smelling burn barrels and chemicals burning all around me and not understanding at all what in the world was I sent to Bosnia and Serbia for these UN peacekeeper reasons that I don't understand at all and now I'm 46 yrs old and I am barely hanging on."

In a December 2022 private opinion, CMB, PA-C, noted that he had reviewed Veteran's claims file and concluded that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and TBI with intermittent dizziness, migraine headaches, and tinnitus rendered him unable to perform gainful employment. Specifically, CMB discussed the mental health deficits caused by the Veteran's PTSD, which included impaired cognitive abilities (memory, concentration, attention, executive functioning), and difficulty with social interactions and completing tasks. CMB stated that headaches caused sensory hypersensitivity that made it difficult for the Veteran to direct his attention to work duties and to remain on task. Additionally, his tinnitus was more noticeable in quiet environments, caused anxiety, interrupted sleep leading to fatigue, and affected his ability to hear conversations. CMB opined that the Veteran's "limited formal education and lack of certifications further substantiate [his] inability to secure and maintain gainful employment. In this regard, the private clinician stated that the Veteran had not been able to work in his usual occupation in security since December 2017: 

because he is unable to adequately and safely perform his job duties due to debilitating symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Traumatic Brain Injury and Intermittent Dizziness, Migraine Headaches, and Tinnitus with functional impairment related to pain, physical deficits, physical and cognitive limitations, and associated symptomatology (i.e. fatigue). . . . This veteran has documentation of cognitive dysfunction and pain with functional loss related to his service-connected disability conditions. The pain, limited physical ability, depression, cognitive impairments, and sleep deprivation he must deal with daily makes it very difficult for him to be around others, concentrate, or complete daily tasks in the workplace. He has a very limited vocational background, having worked/served 7 years in the military. He has limited education, with the highest attained degree being that of a High School Diploma. He does not have any certifications or special skills or trades that promotes his ability to secure or maintain employment in the current job market within a sedentary-light work level. Given consideration for these factors . . . this veteran is more likely than not unable to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment related to his service-connected disability conditions.

A January 2023 VA Residuals of TBI Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) notes the Veteran's history of TBI with migraine headaches and residual vestibular dysfunction. The examiner noted the Veteran's symptoms of daily headaches, occasional dizziness and sensitivity to light. Specifically, the Veteran reported continued persistent episodes of headaches daily (at least two to three times per day) described as pulsating head pain with associated sensitivity to light and sound. The Veteran said that when he experienced headaches he needed to rest in a quiet room and take Aleve and/or ibuprofen. The Veteran also reported random episodes of dizziness occurring at least two to three times per day, lasting 10-15 minutes each time.

A January 2023 VA Ear Conditions DBQ notes the Veteran's history of vestibular dysfunction (dizziness). The Veteran reported random episodes of dizziness that occurred two to three times per day and lasted 10 to 15 minutes. The examiner opined that vestibular dysfunction did not impact the Veteran's ability to work. 

A January 2023 VA Headaches DBQ notes the Veteran's complaints of persistent headaches two to three times per day. These headaches were characterized by pulsating head pain and sensitivity to light and sound, and necessitated resting in a quiet room and taking medication. The examiner opined the Veteran's headaches impacted his ability to work. Specifically, he had decreased concentration and focus, as well as an inability to work, during the episodes of severe headaches. 

A January 2023 VA PTSD DBQ notes the Veteran's diagnosis of "PTSD by history and in context of noncredible self-report." The VA examiner stated that he found the Veteran's stressor report of enemy combatant engagement to be noncredible. He specifically noted that although the Veteran "reported on an incident in which he witnessed another individual impaled from a parachute jump, that event's veracity [was] called into question given the exceptional nature of the non-plausible/inconsistent report of his Bosnia experience . . . ." The examiner noted that the Veteran took notes in a notebook "all the time," texts himself at times, and sets alarms for reminders. The Veteran reported that he can be driving and lose track of where he was going in the moment." He also reported problems with focus and concentration. The examiner did not conduct any formal memory testing. Other psychiatric testing was noted to be invalid. The examiner found the Veteran to be malingering and concluded that while a mental condition had been formally diagnosed, its "symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication." 

A February 8, 2023, VA mental health note shows the Veteran sought psychotherapy treatment for intrusive memories, nightmares, hypervigilance, flashbacks, and avoidance of trauma reminders. He reported having increased symptoms due to a recent triggering situation at a stoplight and witnessing two Middle Eastern women jogging across the street. The Veteran reflected that he would previously be approached by individuals with bombs attached to their bodies. The Veteran was directed to review the Safety Module handout before the next session and complete one Challenging Beliefs Worksheet each day, with at least one of these daily worksheets addressing Safety. On February 22, 2023, the Veteran attended a VA individual psychotherapy session for symptoms of intrusive memories, nightmares, hypervigilance, flashbacks, and avoidance of trauma reminders. The examiner noted he had not completed assignments from the previous session and introduced a mobile app as an alternative. Veteran was agreeable to completing his assignments via the mobile app and be prepared to discuss his work at the beginning of the next scheduled session.

A March 2023 VA outpatient treatment records show the Veteran was seen for various complaints, including increased forgetfulness and loss of train of thought, migraines with tingling fingers, and poor balance resulting in more falls. He was seeing occupational therapy to help; he also requested a shower chair. In the past week, he had experienced memory lapses, balance problems or dizziness, sensitivity to light, irritability, headaches, and sleep problems. The Veteran also complained of episodes of spinning sensation with nausea and blurred vision short episodes duration.

In a March 2023 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus DBQ, the Veteran reported his tinnitus caused occasional difficulty hearing people. The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus "would not impact his ability to function in an occupational environment or activities of daily living with the exception of some intermittent impact on [his] ability to sleep at times."

An April 2023 VA audiology consultation notes the Veteran was seen for a comprehensive vestibular evaluation, as referred by the TBI/Polytrauma clinic. The Veteran reported dizziness that began during his military service, particularly after several incidents of head trauma. He described the dizziness as episodes of "ship moving sensation," blurry vision, and increased tinnitus that might last minutes to hours. He also reported constant imbalance when walking. He had not been able to identify any triggers to his dizziness. The treatment provider noted the Veteran's history of migraines, with four to five headaches daily. The Veteran endorsed light and sound sensitivity with the headaches. The treatment provider also noted the Veteran's history of psychiatric disability, for which he was most recently treated in February 2023. On examination, dizziness symptom profile revealed a positive endorsement greater than 60% for all conditions: vestibular migraine, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, unsteadiness, chronic subjective dizziness, vestibular neuritis/ labyrinthitis, and superior canal dehiscence. Hospital anxiety and depression scale was abnormal for both anxiety and depression. 

In an April 2023 opinion, a private nurse practitioner (PLD) concluded (after review of the Veteran's lay statements and application for TDIU) that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and TBI with intermittent dizziness, migraine headaches, and tinnitus caused an inability to secure and follow substantially gainful employment. The opinion also discussed pain from the Veteran's musculoskeletal disabilities which causes function impairment. 

A June 2023 VA Hypertension DBQ notes the Veteran's hypertension was being managed with medication and caused no symptoms. The examiner opined that hypertension did not impact the Veteran's ability to work.

In a June 2023 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus DBQ, the examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus caused loss of sleep and irritability and could make working with others and driving difficult. Having tinnitus caused the Veteran to isolate.

After reviewing the evidence, the Board acknowledges that the January 2023 VA PTSD examiner opined the Veteran's PTSD did not impact his ability to work. The examiner focused on the veracity of the Veteran's stressors (which were conceded in the October 2015 award of service connection) and did not address the symptoms noted in the most recent treatment records, including those from August and September 2022. Again, the examiner noted that the Veteran's complaints of concentration and focus problems, as well as his routine of taking notes in a notebook, texting himself, and setting alarms for reminders; however, the examiner did not conduct any formal memory testing.  

Given the probative evidence of record, including the April 2023 private opinion which indicates the Veteran was unable to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment as a result of his service-connected disabilities, and the outpatient treatment records, January 2023 VA Headaches DBQ, and December 2022 which note the Veteran's fatigue and decreased concentration and focus as a result of his service-connected disabilities, the Board finds the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude him from the ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with his education, skills, training, and work history. Accordingly, a TDIU is granted.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fletcher, Kathleen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.