Citation Nr: A25032405
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230607-353443
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent from March 25, 2023 to the present for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

From March 25, 2023 to the present, the more persuasive evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's PTSD does not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent from March 25, 2023 to the present for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from November 1999 to July 2002.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the June 7, 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

When the Veteran filed her appeal, she also submitted additional evidence, in the form of two June 2023 lay statements, that were not previously of record.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f), the Board sought clarification as to whether the Veteran wished to switch to either the evidence submission or hearing dockets to have the additional evidence considered.  See January 2025 AMA notification letter.  The Veteran did not respond to that letter.  Accordingly, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the case under the direct review docket.

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent from March 25, 2023 to the present for PTSD

The Veteran asserts that her PTSD is worse that her current evaluation reflects.  Specifically, the Veteran reports that her PTSD caused symptoms of overeating, nightmares, paranoia, heart palpitations, heavy breathing, difficulty sleeping, and being startled out of her sleep.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  She also asserts that she met the criteria for a higher evaluation based on her symptoms of impaired impulse control (unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  See June 2023 VA Form 10182. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

The veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  Where an increase in the level of a service-connected disability is at issue, the primary concern is the present level of disability.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  Nevertheless, the Board acknowledges that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-510 (2007).  

From March 25, 2023 to the present, the Veteran's PTSD has been currently evaluated as 50 percent disabling, effective March 25, 2023, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Under Diagnostic Code 9411, which is governed by a General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a noncompensable rating is warranted for a mental condition that has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.  

A 10 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  

A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and/or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and/or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and/or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

According to the applicable rating criteria, when evaluating a mental disorder, the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission must be considered.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126; see Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).  The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based upon all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely upon the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  Id.  When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment.  Id.

The "such symptoms as" language means "for example," and does not represent an exhaustive list of symptoms that must be found before granting the rating of that category.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  The list of examples provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating.  Id.  However, this fact does not make the provided list of symptoms irrelevant.  See Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The Veteran must still demonstrate either the particular symptoms associated with the rating sought, or other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Id. at 117.

VA must engage in a holistic analysis that assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the psychiatric disability; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

At an April 2023 VA mental health clinic visit, the Veteran reported how she had mental health treatment in the past "many years ago for a short period of time."  The VA provider noted that records showed that the Veteran had mental health treatment through VA in 2010.  She reported that she lived with her husband of eight years (known for 20 years) and two of her three children (14 and 16 years old).  Her oldest child (21 years old) was away at college.  She described her overall mental health as: "I go through phases when I feel like I am losing it, not to hurt anyone or myself, more on an emotional level, I don't have total control, I want to see somebody then I don't want to see somebody (for therapy), I go through moments where I just want to shout everything out that I feel and have been through, but I don't and I stay closed in, I bury my feelings and lash it out in other ways."  The Veteran said that she buried herself at work and at home with work and errands.  She described her mood as "up and down," being "very moody" and wanting to be left alone, which was hard on her marriage.  She said that she experienced episodes of increased anxiety and felt overwhelmed in those moments.  When she felt anxious, she "shut down" and tended to stay by herself.  About once a month, due to her anxiety, she took Benadryl to help her take "the edge off" and sleep.  She reported that she worked in law enforcement where she conducted investigations for children who were physically or emotionally abused.  She had a shift schedule at work which alternated week to week from a 4 p.m. to 1 a.m. shift to an 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. shift.  She felt tired during the day.  She was diagnosed with sleep apnea in 2016.  She said that she had close relationships with family and co-workers.  For recreation, she went to the gym.  During an objective evaluation, the VA provider found that the Veteran was alert and oriented to person, time, and place.  She appeared her stated age and was appropriately groomed and dressed.  Her speech was normal, and her eye contact was good.  Her mood was euthymic, and her affect was appropriate to content with normal range.  She denied having any suicidal or homicidal plan or intent.  Her thought process was clear, coherent, and logical.  There was no evidence of psychotic symptoms, including auditory or visual hallucinations, paranoid ideation or ideas of reference.  Her insight or judgment appeared good.  The VA provider diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with anxiety.  

At an April 2023 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran reported that she was still married, but her reluctance to discuss her trauma history with her husband had caused some marital strain.  She had a low libido and some difficulty with sexual intimacy that her husband could not fully understand.  Due to her snoring and restless sleep, she and her husband did not sleep in the same room.  She had a good relationship with her children, two of whom lived at home and her oldest who was still in college.  She said that she had some associates, but no close friends.  She did not share personal details about her life with other people and tended to keep to herself.  She worked out regularly at the gym.  She described herself as a compulsive cleaner at home, feeling the constant need to keep busy to distract herself from her thoughts.  She had used shopping as an escape, but she had to stop when she spent too much money.  She was independent with activities of daily living and instrumental activities of daily living.  Since 2014, she has been working as a police officer.  She had previously worked in the domestic violence unit and was now working in the special victims unit.  Although the Veteran said that the work was triggering at times, she explained that "[it]'s tough work and there are moments where I want to break down.  But it's really gratifying to help people talk through situations and their feelings because I don't have the courage to do it myself."  She denied having any performance or interpersonal problems at work.  The April 2023 VA examiner noted that during the Veteran's annual comprehensive examination in November 2022 through VA, the VA provider noted that the Veteran had a history of panic or anxiety.  The VA provider noted that the Veteran was not currently in mental health treatment and was not prescribed psychiatric medication.  Presently, the April 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran's reported symptoms were consistent with PTSD and consistent with symptoms she had reported during her last VA examination.  The April 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported having sleep difficulties and recurring nightmares "always about the same guy who is coming to kill me."  Her nightmares would wake her from her sleep and then she was afraid to go back to sleep, so she would eat something in an effort to stay awake.  She also described waking up often with panic symptoms, like a pounding heart and trouble catching her breath.  She sometimes used Benadryl to help her sleep.  She denied currently using any alcohol or having a history of illicit drug use.  She had started to reach out several times for mental health treatment, but she would always find an excuse to avoid it.  She had recently attended the first part of a mental health intake and her second appointment was for later that week.  

During an objective evaluation, the April 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran had PTSD symptoms including: recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s); recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s); intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s); marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s); avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s); avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s); persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world (e.g., "I am bad,: "No one can be trusted,: "The world is completely dangerous,: "My whole nervous system is permanently ruined"); persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame); hypervigilance; exaggerated startle response; and sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).  The April 2023 VA examiner also found that the Veteran had additional mental health symptoms including: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  For the Veteran's episodes of overeating, the April 2023 VA examiner concluded that those symptoms did not meet the criteria for an eating disorder diagnosis.  The April 2023 VA examiner observed that the Veteran was appropriately groomed and casually dressed; demonstrated no abnormal movements; had good eye contact; was polite and cooperative throughout the interview; displayed a normal tone, volume, frequency, and spontaneity of speech; had an euthymic mood with a full range and appropriate affect; had coherent, logical, and goal-directed thought processes; exhibited normal thought content; denied any current suicidal and homicidal ideation or intention; had an intact to person, place, time, and situation sensorium; and showed an intact insight, judgment, and impulse control.  The Veteran was capable of managing her financial affairs.  The April 2023 VA examiner found that there was no change in the Veteran's established diagnosis of PTSD and it had been confirmed on examination.  The April 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's mild obstructive sleep apnea contributed to her current sleep disturbances.  Overall, the April 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. 

In April 2023, the Veteran participated in three separate self-reported assessments related to PTSD, anxiety, and depression as part of her evaluation for individual therapy through VA.  

During the self-report of symptoms related to PTSD, the Veteran responded indicating the level of distress the symptoms caused her.  She responded "extremely" to the following: repeated, disturbing, and unwanted memories of the stressful experience; suddenly feeling or acting as if the stressful experience were actually happening again (as if you were actually back there reliving it); feeling very upset when something reminded you of the stressful experience; having strong physical reactions when something reminded you of the stressful experience (for example, heart pounding, trouble breathing, sweating); avoiding external reminders of the stressful experience (for example, people, places, conversations, activities, objects, or situations); having strong negative beliefs about yourself, other people, or the world (for example, having thoughts such as: I am bad, there is something seriously wrong with me, no one can be trusted, the world is completely dangerous); having strong negative feelings such as fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame; feeling distant or cut off from other people; being "superalert" or watchful or on guard; feeling jumpy or easily startled; and having difficulty concentrating.  She responded "moderately" to the following: trouble experiencing positive feelings (for example, being unable to feel happiness or have loving feelings for people close to you).  She responded "quite a bit" to the following: repeated, disturbing dreams of the stressful experience; avoiding memories, thoughts, or feelings related to the stressful experience; irritable behavior, angry outbursts, or acting aggressively; and trouble falling or staying asleep.  She responded "not at all" to the following: trouble remembering important parts of the stressful experience; blaming yourself or someone else for the stressful experience or what happened after it; loss of interest in activities that you used to enjoy; and taking too many risks or doing things that could cause you harm.  

During the self-report of symptoms related to anxiety, the Veteran responded with the frequency that the symptoms occurred.  She responded "nearly every day" to the following: worrying too much about different things; and becoming easily annoyed or irritable.  She responded "more than half the days" to the following: feeling nervous, anxious or on edge; not being able to stop or control worrying; trouble relaxing; being so restless that it is hard to sit still; and feeling afraid as if something awful might happen.  

During the self-report of symptoms related to depression, the Veteran responded with the frequency that the symptoms had occurred over the last two weeks.  She responded "nearly every day" to the following: feeling tired or having little energy; poor appetite or overeating; trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the newspaper or watching television; and moving or speaking so slowly that other people could have noticed, or the opposite being so fidgety or restless that you have been moving around a lot more than usual.  She responded "several days" to the following: feeling down, depressed, or hopeless; and trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping too much.  She responded "not at all" to the following: feeling bad about yourself or that you are a failure or have let yourself for your family down; and thoughts that you would be better off dead or of hurting yourself in some way.  She responded "not difficult at all" to the following: how difficult have these problems made it for you to do your work, take care of things at home or get along with other people.  

During the Veteran's initial evaluation with the VA clinician in April 2023, she reported that she was seeking therapy to address her feeling of anxiety and irritability.  She indicated that it was difficult to discuss to talk about her past experiences.  An objective evaluation revealed that the Veteran was appropriately groomed and dressed; had normal speech and good eye contact; displayed an anxious mood; had an appropriate affect to content which was in normal range; expressed a clear, coherent, and logical thought process; showed no evidence of psychotic symptoms, including auditory or visual hallucinations; and had good insight and judgment.  The VA clinician diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with anxiety.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Based on a careful review of all the subjective and clinical evidence, the Board finds that from March 25, 2023 to the present, the Veteran's PTSD does not warrant a higher 70 percent evaluation under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  In other words, the Veteran's PTSD does not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  The Board recognizes that the Veteran experienced debilitating symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, depressed mood, suspiciousness, lack of motivation, difficulty falling asleep, social isolation, obsessive and compulsive behavior, avoidance behavior, recurring nightmares, hypervigilance, and exaggerated startle response.  However, the Veteran repeatedly denied having suicidal ideation.  She articulated how she was reluctant to share her trauma experiences with her husband and had a low sexual libido, but recognized that it was affecting her marital relationship.  The Veteran appeared to have good insight into her symptoms and how they affected her relationship.  She also described how she had used shopping, overeating, and cleaning as coping mechanisms, but she had stopped shopping due to overspending.  While this behavior is indicative of the Veteran's obsessive and ritualistic behavior, this recognition demonstrated her good insight into the behavior.  Further, her willingness and ability to stop overspending demonstrated that she had control over at least this aspect of her behavior.  Finally, the April 2023 VA examiner's finding that her overeating episodes did not meet the criteria for an eating disorder diagnosis suggests that she had some degree of control in that respect as well.  While the Veteran described having no close friendships and failing to share any personal details with her co-workers, she denied having any interpersonal problems at work.  Indeed, the Veteran described how, despite working as a police officer with victims of trauma, which triggered her own symptoms at times, she found it gratifying to help people talk through their situations, even while finding it difficult to do that for herself.  Overall, the Board finds that from March 25, 2023 to the present, the evidence does not support that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms are more consistent with the frequency, severity, and duration identified by the 70 percent rating criteria.  Therefore, the Board concludes that from March 25, 2023 to the present, the Veteran's PTSD is no more than 50 percent disabling.

In summary, the evidence is neither evenly balanced or approximately so with regard to whether the Veteran's claim for a higher evaluation for PTSD from March 25, 2023 to the present is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against a higher evaluation for PTSD from March 25, 2023 to the present.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).  Accordingly, the higher evaluation claim for PTSD from March 25, 2023 to the present is denied.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Journet Shaw, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.