Citation Nr: A25032675
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230829-372775
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervicalgia is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee degenerative joint disease is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in his favor, the Veteran's cervicalgia was related to his active service.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in his favor, the Veteran's right knee degenerative joint disease was related to his active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are met for entitlement to service connection for cervicalgia. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria are met for entitlement to service connection for right knee degenerative joint disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army from January 1969 to January 1971.

The issue comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In August 2023, the Board received VA Form 10182 (NOD), from the Veteran selecting Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge. The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a link between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013).

Service connection may also be granted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervicalgia is granted.

For the following reasons, service connection for cervicalgia is granted.

VA has conceded that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of cervicalgia. See February 2022 rating decision. Therefore, the first element of service connection has been met. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.104(c).

Next, the Board finds that the second element has also been met. The Veteran asserts that he incurred cervical spine pain in the military that he continues to experience today. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report the onset of the pain he experienced in service because it is based on his own direct observations. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994) (holding that a lay witness is competent to testify to that which the witness has observed and is within the realm of her personal knowledge). 

Turning to the nexus element, the Board finds persuasive the December 2022 positive nexus private medical opinion. See December 2022 positive nexus private medical opinion. The examiner opined that the Veteran's cervicalgia was more likely than not the progression of and/or continuation of his cervical spine pain during active duty. This opinion was based on an in-person examination and treatment of the Veteran. See id. Therefore, the Board finds it entitled to significant probative weight.

There is also no negative nexus opinion of record.

Hence, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, entitlement to service connection for cervicalgia is granted. Wise v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 517, 531 (2014) ("By requiring only an 'approximate balance of positive and negative evidence' to prove any issue material to a claim for veterans' benefits, 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), the nation, 'in recognition of our debt to our veterans,' has 'taken upon itself the risk of error' in awarding such benefits.").

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee degenerative joint disease is granted.

For the following reasons, service connection for right knee degenerative joint disease is granted.

VA has conceded that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right knee degenerative joint disease. See February 2022 rating decision. Therefore, the first element of service connection has been met. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.104(c).

Next, the Board finds that the second element has also been met. The Veteran asserts that he incurred right knee pain in the military that he continues to experience today. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report the onset of the pain he experienced in service because it is based on his own direct observations. See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469-70.

Turning to the nexus element, the Board finds persuasive the December 2022 positive nexus private medical opinion. See December 2022 positive nexus private medical opinion. The examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee degenerative joint disease was more likely than not the progression of and/or continuation of his right knee pain during active duty. This opinion was based on an in-person examination and treatment of the Veteran. See id. Therefore, the Board finds it entitled to significant probative weight.

There is also no negative nexus opinion of record.

Hence, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, entitlement to service connection for right knee degenerative joint disease is granted. Wise, 26 Vet. App. at 531.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Unfortunately, a remand is required in this case to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. In this regard, the Veteran has asserted that his right ankle, right elbow, right wrist, bilateral hips, left and right shoulder disabilities stem from service. See, e.g., January 2023 private medical opinions.  

VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining a medical examination or opinion in certain circumstances. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). In this case, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination and opinion in connection with these claims, particularly to assess the existence of any current diagnoses associated with these claimed disabilities.  The Board notes that the Veteran submitted private positive nexus opinions; but the opinions do not identify and current diagnoses.  Rather, the private medical opinions refer to right ankle, right elbow, right wrist, bilateral hips, left and right shoulder conditions generally.  

The Board finds that the RO committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to order VA examinations and opinions to address the existence of any current diagnoses, as well as the natures and etiologies of these disabilities.  As such remand is required under the AMA. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations to determine the existence of any current diagnoses, as well as the natures and etiologies of his right ankle, right elbow, right wrist, bilateral hips, left shoulder, and right shoulder disabilities. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review of the case. All examination findings, along with the complete rationale for all opinions expressed, should be set forth in the examination report. All tests and studies deemed necessary should be conducted.

After reviewing the claims folder and examining the Veteran, the examiner is specifically instructed to provide the following information:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal), if not higher that the Veteran's disability BEGAN IN or is otherwise related to his time in the service, yes, or no?

The examiner must also explicitly address and consider the January 2023 private medical opinions on file.  

The examiner is advised that, even in the absence of a diagnosis, pain, in and of itself, may constitute a disability if it reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity. So, if a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" in providing the above requested medical opinion.  

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.J. Cho

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.