Citation Nr: A25032928
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-468801
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

An initial 50 percent rating, but not higher, for unspecified mood disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Without good cause, the Veteran failed to report for a VA examination that was necessary to determine the current severity of his service-connected unspecified mood disorder.

For the appeal period, the Veteran's unspecified mood disorder has been productive of symptoms of suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a 50 percent rating, but not higher, for unspecified mood disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1991 to September 1995.

In the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the appellant elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for unspecified mood disorder.

In an October 2022 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for an unspecified mood disorder and assigned a 10 percent disability rating, effective July 6, 2022.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim requesting an increased rating for his unspecified mood disorder, thereby continuously pursuing his July 6, 2022 claim by filing within one year of the AOJ's October 2022 rating decision.

The Veteran's unspecified mood disorder is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435. Psychiatric impairment is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).

Under the General Formula, a 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in July 2022.  The Veteran was diagnosed with mood disorder due to known physiological condition, unspecified.  The examiner indicated the Veteran experiences irritability, poor concentration (which leads to forgetfulness), and chronic sleep impairment.  

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement regarding his mood disorder symptoms.  The Veteran reported he has been married for 35 years but that his mental health symptoms have caused a strain on his marriage due to being withdrawn, and angry outbursts with his significant other, along with decreased sexual desire and performance.  He described experiencing bouts of shortness of breath, a tight chest, and an overwhelming sense of anxiety 3 times per month.  He reported feeling scared, confused, and needing to find a safe place until it passes, during these times.  The Veteran stated that he had difficulty remembering things like names, recent events, directions, and completing tasks.  He reported having difficulty sleeping and concentrating.  Additionally, he reported difficulty completing work tasks efficiently and concentrating which has resulted in a decline in his work performance and a suspension due to personal issues.

The Veteran submitted a private mental evaluation in July 2023.  The private opinion is from a clinician who did not physically examine the Veteran, and she based her findings on the Veteran's July 2023 VA 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.  The Board finds this opinion less persuasive because it merely lists the Veteran's symptoms and copies the Veteran's own statements without evidence that she has personally examined the Veteran, and without additional information regarding the frequency and severity of the Veteran's symptoms beyond what the Veteran had previously written in his July 2023 statement.  Therefore, the probative value is no greater than the Veteran's July 2023 statement in Support of the Claim.  

When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  However, when a VA examination was scheduled in conjunction a supplemental claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

The record reflects the Veteran was a "no show" without good cause for a VA examination in August 2023 that was scheduled regarding the Veteran's supplemental claim for an increased rating.  The Veteran has made no attempt to reschedule the examination.  

The Board finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a 50 percent rating.  The Veteran reports experiencing symptoms of suspiciousness, impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks), chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood based upon his July 2023 statement.  The Veteran reported being married for 35 years.  He indicated he experiences anxiety, irritability, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

Additionally, the claims file reflects that the Veteran denied having suicidal or homicidal thoughts or did not report having suicidal ideation.  See February 2022 CAPRI primary care note (received December 20, 2022).

While the Veteran did report experiencing symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating- difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting)- the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating.  As noted above, the Veteran's symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 50 percent rating.

The record does not, however, show that the criteria for the next higher rating (70 percent) are met based on occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking, or mood.  Additionally, the Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal thoughts or ideation.  Further, the claims file does not indicate that the Veteran has symptoms such as speech that is intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; impaired impulse control; near-continuous panic or depression affecting independent, appropriate, or effective function.; impaired spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  It follows that the evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran has total occupational and social impairment, and as such, a 100 percent disability rating is not warranted.

Based on the evidence of record, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's unspecified mood disorder has been most consistent with a 50 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the entire period on appeal.

 

 

David Gratz

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jordan, Jacquelynn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.