Citation Nr: A25032379
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240723-458711
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain with knee instability (claimed as right knee disability) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain with knee instability (claimed as left knee disability) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 2010 until his honorable discharge in June 2018.  See June 2018 DD Form 214 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty). The evidence of record also suggests the Veteran had service in the reserves or National Guard.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in March 2024 and July 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)), Part II.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for bilateral knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Qualifying Service

Active duty for training includes full-time duty with the Reserves, or the National Guard of any State under sections 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505 of title 32 (32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505), or the prior corresponding provisions of law.  See 38 U.S.C. § 101(22)(b) and 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(22)(C); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(c).  Basically, this refers to the two weeks of annual training, which each Reservist or National Guardsman must perform each year.  It can also refer to the Reservist's or National Guardsman's initial period of training.

Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a) provides that any period of active military, naval, and air service, including active duty for training during which the individual was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty, and any period of inactive duty training during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury (but not disease) incurred or aggravated in line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident, in which occurred during such training.

To establish status as a "veteran" for a period of active duty for training, a claimant must establish that he was disabled from disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during that period of active duty for training.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(a), (d); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466, 470 (1995).  The burden to establish "veteran" status for a claim based on a period of active duty for training is on the appellant.  Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 171-75 (2010).  The fact that a claimant has established status as a veteran for other periods of service does not obviate the need to establish that he is also a veteran for purposes of the period of active duty for training where the claim for benefits is based on that period of active duty for training.  Mercado-Martinez v. West, 11 Vet. App. 415, 419 (1998).

When a claim for service connection is based on a period of active duty for training, there must be some evidence that the appellant became disabled as a result of a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during the period of active duty for training.  Smith v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 40, 47 (2010).  In the absence of such evidence, the period of active duty for training would not qualify as "active military, naval, or air service," and the appellant would not qualify as a "veteran" by virtue of active duty for training service alone.  Id.  See also 38 U.S.C. § 101(2), (24); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(d), 3.6(c).

Inactive duty for training includes service with the Reserve (other than full-time duty) that usually indicates weekend drills or training. 38 U.S.C. § 101(23)(A), 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(d).  Inactive duty training also includes service in the National Guard of any State under sections 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505 of title 32 (32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505), or the prior corresponding provisions of law (including drill weekends under 32 U.S.C. § 502(a)). See 38 U.S.C. § 101 (23); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(d).

When a claim for service connection is based on a period of inactive duty for training, there must be some evidence that the appellant became disabled as a result of an injury (not disease) incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during the period of inactive duty for training. Smith v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 40, 47 (2010).  In the absence of such evidence, the period of inactive duty for training would not qualify as "active military, naval, or air service," and the appellant would not qualify as a "veteran" by virtue of inactive duty for training service alone.  Id.  See also 38 U.S.C. § 101(2), (24); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(d), 3.6(d).

In turn, this means that a person is not a veteran for the purposes of applying certain presumptions, including presumptive service connection for chronic diseases, as well as the presumption of soundness at service entrance, unless he is service-connected for disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active duty for training or service-connected for injury, but not disease, incurred or aggravated during inactive duty for training.

VA's Office of General Counsel has defined "injury" as harm resulting from an external trauma, while "disease" is defined as some type of internal infection or degenerative process. VAOPGCPREC 04-2002 (May 14, 2002).

National Guard duty is also distinguishable from other Reserve service in that a member of the National Guard may be called to duty by the governor of his or her state. "[M]embers of the National Guard only serve the Federal military when they are formally called into the military service of the United States [and a]t all other times, National Guard members serve solely as members of the State militia under the command of a state governor."  Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 57 (2007).  Therefore, to have basic eligibility as a veteran based on a period of duty as a member of a state National Guard, a guardsman must have been ordered into Federal service by the President of the United States under 38 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505.  Hence, for the appellant's service in the National Guard, only periods of Federalized service are qualifying service for the purpose of VA compensation benefits.

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain with knee instability (claimed as right knee disability) is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain with knee instability (claimed as left knee disability) is remanded.

Due to the similar dispositions for the above claims on appeal, the Board will address them in a common discussion below.

As a preliminary matter, in the present case, on March 22, 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the Veteran's claims.  On March 27, 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 (Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review) appealing the March 2024 rating decision.  In July 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the Veteran's Higher-Level Review.  Subsequently, on July 23, 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), appealing both the March 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions.  The Board notes that the two decisions on appeal address the exact same issues, stemming from the exact same application, and pertain to the exact same evidence, and the exact same theories of entitlement.  Therefore, the issues on appeal are duplicative and the Board has combined the issues on appeal, to remove the duplicative issues.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral knee disabilities that are due to (a) continuous ruck marching, (b) running multiple miles in combat boots, and/or (c) putting weight and pressure on knees while in full combat gear.  See December 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ (Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits).

Furthermore, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records reflect an August 10, 2017 image that includes "pain locations" on the Veteran's knees.

Where VA provides the veteran with an examination, the examination must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024.  The February 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities are less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran because a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis, noting in the present case that the etiology is overuse due to myofascial injury that did not resolve, creating a continual condition that is confirmed on exam today.   The examiner noted that there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition(s) at issue and the toxic exposure risk activities and there are risk factors outside of military service (the noted myofascial injury) that either far outweigh the factors identified in the toxic exposure risk activities.

However, the February 2024 VA examiner did not (a) identify specific details (i.e., date, severity, right/left/bilateral knee injuries, etc.) of the myofascial injury that they referenced; (b) did not address the Veteran's specific assertion(s) that his bilateral knee disabilities are due to (i) continuous ruck marching, (ii) running multiple miles in combat boots, and/or (iii) putting weight and pressure on knees while in full combat gear.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his bilateral knee disabilities, preferably with a medical doctor.  The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

For each identified knee disability, and with consideration of the Qualifying Service section above, is [the disability] at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including (i) continuous ruck marching, (ii) running multiple miles in combat boots, and/or (iii) putting weight and pressure on knees while in full combat gear.

The examiner must specifically address the August 2022 Service Treatment Records that reflect an image indicating pain (blue areas) in the bilateral knees.

Furthermore, the examiner must specifically address any assertion(s), sign(s), and/or symptom(s) of instability; including discussing if the evidence is supported or contradicted from other evidence of record.

If there is evidence (or assertion(s)) that an identified knee disability was due to a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during the period of active duty for training during service in the Reserve and/or National Guard service, the examiner must identify the evidence (i.e., Line of Duty Determination) that demonstrates that the disability was incurred in or aggravated in the line of duty.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of his in-service symptoms as well as his post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of his current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for all opinions, including citations to any medical and/or scientific research that the examiner has relied upon.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, the examiner must note if the inability is due to a lack of personal knowledge (the examiner does not have the knowledge or training); or a lack of knowledge in the medical community (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts); or a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required).

 

G. William Riggs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Deemer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.