Citation Nr: A25032063
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-423910
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

1. Challenges to the propriety of the creation of an overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward spousal adjustment based on T.E.G. as his dependent spouse are denied.

2. Challenges to the validity of the amount of the overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward spousal adjustment based on T.E.G. as his dependent spouse are granted insofar that the period of the overpayment is reduced from that running from September 1, 2014, to October 31, 2023, to that running from the first day of the month following the month of T.E.G. and the Veteran's divorce to the last day of the month when the overpayment was created.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward spousal adjustment based on T.E.G. as his dependent spouse did not arise from a sole administrative error on the part of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

2. The amount of the Veteran's overpayment should be calculated based on the period that ran from the first day of month following the month of the Veteran's divorce from T.E.G. to the last day of the month during which the overpayment was created.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The overpayment arising from the Veteran's receipt of an upward spousal adjustment based on T.E.G. as his dependent spouse was properly created. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.500, 3.501.

2. The period underlying the calculation of the Veteran's receipt of an upward spousal adjustment based on T.E.G. has been improperly selected insofar that the date of September 1, 2014, rather than the first day of the month following the month of T.E.G. and the Veteran's divorce has been selected as the date of the onset of the overpayment period. 38 U.S.C. § 5112(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.501(d)(2).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, a VA compensation beneficiary with combined rating of 90 percent awarded effective August 2014, had active duty from June 1988 to July 2014. These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on his appeal from the November 2023 demand letter issued by the VA Debt Management Center (DMC). The demand letter informed the Veteran that the AOJ had calculated the amount of his overpayment debt as $16,119. Underlying the AOJ's calculations was the AOJ's November 3, 2023, notification letter reflecting the AOJ's final action taken based on the Veteran's failure to confirm the fact that T.E.G. remained his dependent spouse: that final action taken by the AOJ created the overpayment. 

The Board notes, in passing, that - since the Award Print reflecting the AOJ's final action was issued on November 2, 2023, and the AOJ's notification letter was dated November 3, 2023 - the Board cannot determine with certainty whether the overpayment ended at the end of October 2023 or at the end of November 2023 since the relevant VA payment could have been disbursed right before or right after the issuance of the Award Print. In sum, the record before the Board does not allow a determination whether the Veteran was overpaid in November 2023. Hence, the Board refers to the last day of the month when the Veteran received an upward spousal adjustment as the date when his overpayment ended without identifying a particular date since it could be October 31, 2023, or November 30, 2023.          

Since the last time when the Veteran had confirmed that T.E.G. was his dependent spouse was in his application for VA compensation, and since the AOJ's award of such compensation was effective September 1, 2014, the AOJ retroactively removed T.E.G. from the Veteran's VA account effective the date when T.E.G. had been added, i.e., September 1, 2014. Therefore, the AOJ calculated the $16,119 amount of the Veteran's debt based on the period that ran from September 1, 2014, to the date when his overpayment ended upon the AOJ taking its final action. 

The DMC demand letter clarified that the Veteran's $16,119 overpayment debt would be recouped by incremental withholdings from the recurrent disbursements of his VA compensation but pointed out that the Veteran had the right to seek a waiver of the recoupment of the aforesaid debt. The demand letter did not clarify the period of limitations applicable to waiver claims but noted that the Veteran could use VA Form 21-5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), as a vehicle to seek a waiver. In March 2024, the Veteran filed his VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) and selected the direct appeal docket, but accompanied his NOD with a copy of his divorce decree and his lay statements challenging the propriety of the creation of his debt. The Veteran's lay statement "request[ed] that [T.E.G.] be added as [his] dependent" until the date of their divorce, plus asserted that the Veteran "notified the VA, DFAS, SBR and DEERS at the time of [his] divorce." In addition, the Veteran's lay statement asserted:

Based on my communications with the Veterans Administration, I have been informed that the overpayment is due to a failure to respond to 1 September 2014 dependency verification request. My failure to respond was due to not receiving the request. I am currently not employed and rely on VA disability payments to pay my daily living expenses.

However, the Veteran's selection of the direct appellate docket in his NOD bars the Board from considering any evidence the Veteran has filed after the date of the issuance of the decision on appeal, i.e., the demand letter issued by the DMC on November 16, 2023. Hence, the Board cannot consider the actual date of the Veteran's divorce, as reflected in his and T.E.G.'s divorce decree, same as the Board cannot consider the Veteran's assertions of the lack of receipt of VA Form 21-0538 or his assertions of the Veteran's notices about his divorce since these evidentiary facts were raised in his submissions filed after the DMC issuance of its demand letter. Thus, the best the Board can do is to touch on these concepts in dicta. Indeed, if the Veteran wished the Board to consider the contents of his divorce decree or the Veteran's allegations made in his lay statements as facts, he had to select the evidence appeal docket. 

Further, the Veteran's statements reflect his confusion as to the claims he had raised. A challenge to a VA overpayment debt may encompass up to three claims: a challenge to the propriety of the creation of the overpayment, a challenge to the amount of the overpayment, and the claim for a waiver of the overpayment debt. Johnson v. Wilkie, No. 19-5789, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1205, at *5 (Vet. App. June 25, 2020) (mem. dec.); see also Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge memorandum decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain). While these challenges do not have to be raised jointly, if either one of the first two challenges is raised by the time the claim for a waiver is addressed, then these challenges must be resolved prior to addressing the waiver claim. Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991). 

Notably, challenges to the creation of an overpayment addresses the conceptual propriety of the creation of an overpayment without focusing on the amount of dollars and cents. In contrast, challenges to the validity of the debt amount focus on these dollars and cents, as well as on the period of the overpayment because the longer the period is, the higher the overpayment. The Board - mindful of the Veteran's pro se litigant status - construes his claims at bar liberally, Comer v. Peake, 552 F.3d 1362, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2009), and reads the Veteran's assertions as raising challenges to the creation of his debt and the validity of its amount. 

Finally, while VA promulgates forms enabling beneficiaries to address almost any scenario associated with VA benefits, the Board is mindful that VA has no specific form that VA debtors must use to raise a waiver. VA's election not to have such a form was intentional in light of the equitable nature of the waiver analysis. Edwards v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 57, 60 (2008). Hence, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's statement, "I am currently not employed and rely on VA disability payments to pay my daily living expenses" was sufficient to trigger a waiver claim by the VA Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC). 

Moreover, the Board is mindful that the Veteran's March 2024 lay statement was timely for the purposes of the 180-day limitation period triggered by the DMC demand letter. 38 U.S.C. § 5302(a); 38 C.F.R. § 1.963(b)(2). Accordingly, the Board refers his waiver claim to the AOJ for an initial adjudication.

With that, the Board now turns to the Veteran's claims at bar. The record shows that - during the period falling within the Board's evidentiary window - the AOJ mailed a blank VA Form 21-0538 to the Veteran's address at 1***0  H.C.D.W., J., FL,  3***8, i.e., the address that the AOJ and DMC have utilized for the purposes of all VA communications, and also the address the Veteran stated as his mailing address in the NOD that gave rise to the appeal at bar. In light of the foregoing and since the record contains no mailing that has been returned to VA as undeliverable, the presumption of regularity prompts the Board to find that the VA Form 21-0538 mailed by the AOJ reached the Veteran. 

Moreover, the Veteran's impression that he was "penalized" by the AOJ for his failure to file VA Form 21-0538 is incorrect. The Veteran was charged with the debt based on the AOJ's presumption that - since the Veteran had failed to respond to the AOJ's request to complete VA Form 21-0538 - the Veteran's failure to respond meant that T.E.G. stopped qualifying as his dependent spouse sometime between March 7, 2014, the date when he had filed his VA Form 21-526EZ and August 31, 2014, i.e., the effective date of the Veteran's compensation award: since T.E.G. and the Veteran could have divorced, or T.E.G. could have died, or their marriage could have been annulled during that period. Since the AOJ did not know the answer to this question due to the Veteran's failure to file VA Form 21-0538, the AOJ was obligated to go by the earliest date relevant to the award of the Veteran's upward spousal adjustment, and that date was September 1, 2014.

Critical here, in September 2014, when the AOJ granted the Veteran's claims for VA compensation benefits, the AOJ notified him of the Veteran's reporting obligations, stating, "We are currently paying you as a Veteran with one dependent. Let us know right away if there is any change in the status of your dependents." (Emphasis in original.) Thus, the Veteran's failure to notify the AOJ of his and T.E.G.'s divorce even for just one month after his divorce had necessarily rendered his overpayment properly created. This conclusion flows from the sole-administrative-error analysis applicable to challenges to the propriety of the creation of overpayment debts.

The key word in the phrase "sole administrative error" is the word "sole" since the phrase is a legal term of art that has nothing in common with a mere clerical error. To establish that an overpayment arose from such an error, a VA debtor is first required to show that his/her actions or failure to act neither caused nor even contributed, no matter to how small a degree, to the creation of his/her overpayment, and then - and in addition - (s)he is also required to show that the debtor neither subjectively knew nor could have objectively known (i.e., that a reasonable person standing in the debtor's shoes would not have known) that the monetary benefits at issue were disbursed in error. 38 U.S.C. § 5112(b)(9), (10); 38 C.F.R. § 3.500(b)(2); Jordan v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 171 (1997). The test cannot be sufficed unless all aspects of both prongs have been met by the debtor. Id.

Since the Veteran was informed by the AOJ's September 2014 notification letter of his obligation to promptly inform the AOJ of any changes in the status of T.E.G. as his dependent spouse, the Veteran's failure to so notify or any delay in notifying demonstrates that he cannot meet the first prong of the sole administrative error. This is so because such a failure/delay necessarily caused or, at the very least, contributed to the creation of his debt, rendering the debt at bar properly created. 

Plus, if the Board were to touch, in dicta, a scenario where the Veteran "notified the VA, DFAS, SBR and DEERS at the time of [his] divorce," such a hypothesis would not warrant a remand for further development. This is so because the DoD is an agency distinct and different from VA, and the Veteran's report of his divorce from T.E.G. to the DoD, even if accurate, would be as irrelevant for the purposes of the analysis at hand as if he had reported his divorce to the CIA, FBI, NASA, etc. 

And, given that the Defense Finance Accounting Service (DFAS) is a component of the DoD, the Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS) is just a computerized system utilized by the DoD, the Statement of Budgetary Resources (SBR) is just a tool used by the DFAS to manage the DoD budget, the Veteran's entries of the fact of his divorce into the systems operated by the DoD or DFAS would also be as irrelevant for the purposes of the analysis at hand as if he had reported his divorce to the CIA, FBI, NASA, etc. Further, if the Board were to touch in dicta the scenario where the Veteran reported his divorce to the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), a remand to the AOJ for further development would also be unwarranted since such a hypothetical is too inapposite to the inquiry at hand.

This is so because a notice to a VHA employee about an issue related to an AOJ, i.e., an entity within the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) is substantively indistinguishable from informing an employee of the Department of Navy about an issue related to the Department of the Air Force and then expecting the Navy to take an action affecting the operations of the Air Force just because they both operate under the umbrella jurisdiction of the DoD. To top it off, the doctrine of constructive possession cannot be relevant here since the evidence falling within the Board's evidentiary window establishes that the Veteran did not notify the VBA of his divorce in a fashion obligating the AOJ to act, i.e., either by notifying the AOJ directly or by referring the AOJ's attention to a VHA document of record containing information about the Veteran's divorce. Indeed, the record not only lacks any document generated by the VHA that referred to the Veteran's divorce but lacks any VHA document of any sort. Thus, even had such facts been before the Board, they would not have lent support to the Veteran's challenges. 38 U.S.C. 5103A(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii); Conyers v. McDonough, 91 F.4th 1167, 1171 (Fed. Cir. 2024); Euzebio v. McDonough, 989 F.3d 1305, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Lang v. Wilkie, 971 F.3d 1348, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2020).

And, had the Veteran properly notified the VBA of his divorce but the AOJ failed to record the Veteran's notice, such a scenario would have meant that the Veteran subjectively knew that the AOJ's removal of T.E.G. from his VA account should have affected his VA compensation: otherwise, there was no reason for the Veteran to notify the VBA. Since the Veteran's VA compensation has not changed in terms of his combined rating (that has always been 90 percent), and the Veteran knew that the amount of his recurrent pay was only increasing with the cost-of-living adjustments, without a single decrease, it means that the Veteran knew - or, at the very least - a reasonable person standing it his shoes would have known - that T.E.G. was not removed from his VA account, and he continued receiving an upward spousal adjustment after his divorce without a legal right to such additional compensation. In sum, no matter how the Board were to review the facts, the Veteran's overpayment was properly created. Accordingly, this line of the Veteran's challenges is denied. 

In contrast, since - under 38 U.S.C. § 5112(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.501(d)(2) - the effective date of reduction of compensation based on a divorce is the last day of the month during which such divorce occurs, the amount of the Veteran's debt should be calculated based on the period triggered on the first day of the month following the month of his divorce. In other words, the AOJ did not commit an error by calculating the amount of the Veteran's overpayment based on the period that was triggered on September 1, 2014, since - at the time - the AOJ simply had no information when the Veteran divorced due to his failure to file the VA Form 21-0538. However, the circumstances at bar allow the Board to grant the Veteran relief without denying his challenges to the validity of the amount of his debt and merely advising him of his right to file a supplemental claim, even though the Board cannot consider his divorce decree and thus, cannot calculate the amount of his debt on the Board's own: in light of his selection of the direct appeal docket. 

Therefore, in the interests of judicial economy, the Veteran's challenges to the validity of the amount of his overpayment are granted insofar that the period of the overpayment is reduced to the period from the first day of the month following the month of his and T.E.G.'s divorce to the last day of the month during which the overpayment was created. 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna Kapellan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.