Citation Nr: A25032372
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-417251
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a skin disorder of the neck is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 1980 to December 2003.

This matter comes before the Board on appeal of a January 12, 2024 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO/AOJ) that denied service connection for nonspecific neck disfigurement of unknown etiology, claimed as burn scars based on the evidence of record as of that date.  The Veteran appealed by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in February 2024. He elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, consideration may only be given to the evidence of record at the time of the January 12, 2024 decision, i.e., the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted after the decision on appeal (i.e., after January 12, 2024), the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the issue on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran maintains that he has a skin disorder affecting his neck that is due to his service-connected tinea versicolor. In particular, he claims that a topical medication used to treat his tinea versicolor resulted in burn scars affecting the skin of the right side of his neck. The Veteran's claim is recharacterized as for a skin disorder of the neck to encompass symptoms identified during development of his claim, regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  

An August 2003 rating decision granted service-connected for tinea versicolor of the shoulders, back, and buttocks.

An August 2022 examiner noted that the Veteran had discontinued use of a topical medication prescribed for tinea versicolor because he reported it had "burned his skin," as well as that he had reported tinea versicolor worsened during the summer months.  The examiner found symptoms including scaling and abnormal pigmentation (white patches) located on the "right of the neck."  The examiner diagnosed tinea versicolor and explained that, since his last evaluation, it had progressed to involve the skin of the neck.  

An October 2022 VA examination shows that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of nonspecific neck disfigurement of unknown etiology.  Examination revealed abnormal pigmentation (hyperpigmentation) on the right side of the neck.  The examiner stated such nonspecific neck disfigurement was not "a characteristic look of tinea versicolor" but rather of "unknown etiology."  The examiner also stated there was no evidence of "the claimed burns to the neck."  

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

The Veteran underwent two VA examinations two months apart, with two different diagnoses affecting the skin of the right side of neck-one of "unknown etiology," the other a progression of already service-connected tinea versicolor.  This calls into question whether the diagnoses pertain to two distinct disorders, and if so, whether there is any relationship between the two.  

The medical evidence necessary to decide the Veteran's claim for service connection for a skin disorder of the neck is not of record.  Consequently, failure to return the October 2022 VA examination report as inadequate prior to adjudicating the Veteran's claim for service-connection for a skin disorder of the neck constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

Remand is thus required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error of not obtaining a medical opinion adequate to address conflicting medical evidence as to whether the Veteran's skin symptoms of the neck are a progression of tinea versicolor or a separate and distinct disorder.  

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no credibility findings as to the lay evidence of record. Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA opinion addressing the conflicting medical evidence as to whether the Veteran's skin disorder of the neck is a progression of tinea versicolor or a separate and distinct disorder.  It is left to the examiner's discretion to determine whether the requested opinion can be based on an in-person examination, video telehealth examination, interview, or Acceptable Clinical Examination (ACE) process.  The examiner must address the following:

1. Identify/diagnose any skin disorder of the neck that presently exists or existed during the appeal period.  The examiner must state whether any identified skin disorder of the neck represents a separate or distinct skin disorder or a progression of the Veteran's tinea versicolor. 

2. For each identified/diagnosed skin disorder of the neck that is separate and distinct from the Veteran's tinea versicolor, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that:

(a)	 was caused by or the result of his tinea versicolor to include medications used to treat his tinea versicolor.

(b)	 underwent any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence, due to his tinea versicolor to include medications used to treat the same. 

The examiner must fully explain the rationale for all opinions, with citation to supporting data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate, including:  

"	Veteran's lay reports, including description of worsening tinea versicolor symptoms during summer months.  

"	August 2022 VA examination noting white patches with some scaling diagnosed as tinea versicolor located on the anterior chest, bilateral upper arms, and "right side of the neck."  

"	October 2022 VA examination noting hyperpigmentation diagnosed as "nonspecific neck disfigurement of unknown etiology" located on "right lateral neck."  

"	August 2022 VA opinion that the Veteran's service-connected tinea versicolor had progressed, "currently involving right side of the neck."  

The examiner is advised that proximate cause is not required for secondary service connection. Rather, the question is whether the Veteran's service connected conditions are a "but for cause" of his currently diagnosed conditions and would have been less severe but for any such service connected conditions.

The term "incremental increase in disability" means additional impairment of earning capacity. Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability. Moreover, any "incremental increase in disability" need not be permanent.

 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Dwyer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.