Citation Nr: A25032549
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-438099
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with limitation of abduction/adduction is REMANDED.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for right hip trochanteric pain syndrome with limited extension is REMANDED.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran had active service in the Armed Forces from October 2010 to November 2010, from June 2011 to September 2011, from November 2011 to February 2012, February 2013 to March 2013, from January 2014 to March 2014, and from June 2014 to September 2014, with additional service in the Air National Guard.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Right Hip - Abduction/Adduction and Extension

The Veteran seeks compensable disability ratings for his service-connected right hip abduction/adduction and extension disabilities.

During the pendency of the appeal, on March 12, 2025, in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) determined that because applicable diagnostic codes and special regulations pertaining to musculoskeletal disabilities do not explicitly contemplate medication use, the Board must discount the beneficial effects of medication when assigning an evaluation of a musculoskeletal disability.  The Court affirmed the central holding in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012), when a Diagnostic Code is silent as to the effects of medication, VA may not deny entitlement to a higher disability rating based on the relief provided by medication.

Here, in November 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA hip and thigh conditions examination.  He reported episodes of flare-ups, which present once a week for 30 minutes characterized by increased pain treated with ibuprofen and rest.  However, the examination did not consider the ameliorative effects of medication when evaluating the severity of the right hip disability.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error; the examination is inadequate and remand is necessary to cure the error.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of service-connected right hip abduction/adduction and extension disabilities.  

The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

In so doing, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

Additionally, the reviewing examiner is asked to specifically address the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication, to include ibuprofen, on right hip symptoms. In doing so, the clinician must examine the related impairment that would be present without the relief provided by medications used to treat the Veteran's right hip.

A complete rationale, including citation to appropriate medical principles, for all opinions reached must be provided.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Amanda Baker, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.