Citation Nr: A25032522
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 191017-465757
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army from January 2008 to June 2012.

The rating decision on appeal was issued by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) in June 2019 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the October 2019, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A hearing was scheduled for December 10, 2024, but on November 20, 2024, the Veteran through his attorney, withdrew the hearing request. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2019 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or his attorney, within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. The Veteran's attorney submitted evidence within 90 days following the receipt of his request to withdraw his hearing that was considered by the Board.

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran asserts that his current right and left knee disabilities are related to his active duty service.

The Veteran was afforded a VA Knee Conditions examination in April 2019, where he was diagnosed with bilateral patellofemoral pain syndrome. He reported gradual onset of bilateral knee pain during his time in service and that he got steroid injections in the right knee during his time in service. The examiner opined that the conditions claimed were less likely than not related to the Veteran's time in service. The examiner's rationale was that "STR's do not substantiate chronic knee complaints, evaluation, or treatment during his time in service, that would support service-connection for this condition." See April 2019 C&P Examination.

The Board finds the opinion inadequate for adjudicative purposes. First, the April 2019 examiner provided a negative opinion based primarily on the lack of medical records to support that the claimed knee disabilities are related service. The Board notes that the absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence in the treatment records is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. See, Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992).

Second, the April 2019 VA examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements of continuity of symptomatology since service. An examination that does not address credible and relevant lay evidence does not include enough detail to inform the Board's decision and thus is inadequate. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258 (2020).

Accordingly, remand for new etiology opinion addressing the relationship between the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities and service is required, to cure the pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Board acknowledges the holding in Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007), that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed right and left knee disabilities. Following a review of the record, to include the Veteran's lay statements, the examiner should:

Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities began during service or is related to an incident of service, to include his military occupational specialty (MOS) duties as a wheeled vehicle mechanic.

In offering any opinion, the examiner must consider the full record, to include the Veteran's lay statements regarding in-service incurrence and continuity of symptomatology. The examiner's opinion must reflect consideration of the Veteran's reports as to his history and symptomatology. If the examiner chooses to reject his reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so, and his lay statements must not be rejected due solely to an absence of contemporaneous or corroborating medical evidence, although this may be considered together with the other evidence of record.

A clearly stated rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rogers, Nyella M. (she/her/hers)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.