Citation Nr: A25032463
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-451003
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis was caused by or related to military service.

2. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, to unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder, is related to his military service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1120, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317, 3.320.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include and unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1154(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1988 to March 1992.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the issues of service connection for a bilateral foot disability and an acquired psychiatric disability, most recently addressed in a January 2023 rating decision denying both claims. In July 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for his bilateral plantar fasciitis. 

Service connection may be granted for any current disability that is the result of a disease contracted or an injury sustained in the line of duty during active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). 

Service connection on a direct basis generally requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. This standard does not require the evidence to be exactly equal; rather, it includes "scenarios where the evidence is not in equipoise but nevertheless is in approximate balance. Put differently, if the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's service treatment records contain a Report of Medical History and Report of Medical Examination completed for the purposes of enlistment in January 1988. The Veteran reported no history of foot issues. The medical examiner assessed the victim's feet as normal. During service, the Veteran received treatment for foot-related issues on only one occasion. In August 1988, he was seen for blisters on his heels accompanied by mild swelling. He was told to abstain from running for three days, march at his own pace, and wear soft shoes. The next day, he was seen for a follow-up, where the blisters were still mildly swollen. However, the issue appears to have been acute and transitory in nature, and resolved, as there are no further complaints in the records. The records do not contain a separation Report of Medical History or Report of Medical Examination. 

After separation from service, the Veteran does not appear to have sought treatment for foot pain or any other foot-related medical issues. 

In connection with his claim for service connection, the Veteran underwent a VA medical examination in June 2023. The Veteran was examined in person, and a review of the VA e-Folder was noted. The Veteran complained of bilateral foot pain, ache, soreness, and swelling beginning in 1990, which he believed to be due to strenuous military activities. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral plantar fasciitis. Due to the Veteran's service in the Persian Gulf, the examiner was asked to provide an opinion on the nature of the Veteran's disability pattern, and if the etiology of the disability could be at least partially explained, to opine on whether the disability was more likely than not due to any potential toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) identified by the evidence of record. The examiner opined that the Veteran's foot disability was a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis-plantar fasciitis-and opined that the condition was "likely due to wear and tear of the feet with aging," noting that the treatment records contained no complaints of "chronic feet pain during active duty, immediately after discharge, or within a year of discharge." The examiner also noted that plantar fasciitis is not linked to environmental exposure and therefore was less likely than not due to any toxic exposure. 

The claims file does not contain any further medical opinions or probative medical evidence. The Veteran has also not submitted any lay evidence other than the statements made to the medical examiners noted above.   

The Board will first address whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection on a direct basis.

Regarding the first prong of service connection, a currently diagnosed disability, in its July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made a positive finding that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis. This finding is supported by the June 2023 VA examination and is sufficient to satisfy the first prong of service connection. 

Regarding the second prong of service connection, an in-service disease or injury, the Veteran contends that his foot pain began during service due to strenuous physical activity. As a layperson, the Veteran is competent to report experiencing symptomatology, including pain. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). Additionally, the Veteran's service treatment records contain complaints of foot blisters aggravated by running and marching, which support the Veteran's contentions that he participated in physical activity during service that was at times strenuous on his feet. Accordingly, the Board finds sufficient evidence to support the existence of an in-service incurrence and satisfy the second prong of service connection. 

The remaining question is whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed plantar fasciitis is etiologically related to his in-service physical activity. 

Having considered the available evidence, the Board finds that the record does not support a finding of a nexus between the Veteran's plantar fasciitis and his in-service physical activity. As noted above, the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for complaints of chronic foot pain during service. While the Veteran did complain of blisters, this complaint occurred prior to 1990, the Veteran's reported date of onset of plantar fasciitis symptoms. Additionally, the in-service complaints related to the blisters were not chronic and appeared to resolve after the initial complaint; and they are also not the type of complaint-aches, soreness, swelling-that the Veteran now associates with his plantar fasciitis. Finally, the Veteran did not complain of or seek treatment for foot pain at any other time during service, immediately following service, or at any time between service and the filing of his claim. This lack treatment history for chronic foot pain was noted by the June 2023 medical examiner, who provided a reasoned alternative explanation for the Veteran's plantar fasciitis: wear and tear due to aging. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the third prong of direct service connection is not satisfied, and that service connection on a direct basis is not warranted. 

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection under other theories reasonably raised by the record.

Specifically, the Board has considered whether the Veteran is entitled to any presumptions based on his service in the Persian Gulf during the Gulf War. 38 U.S.C. § 1117. However, because the Veteran's plantar fasciitis has an identifiable etiology and diagnosis, it is not an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness, nor is it an infectious disease. Therefore, it does not qualify for presumptive service connection pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.317. Additionally, plantar fasciitis is not one of the enumerated diseases entitled to presumptive service connection for exposure to fine particulate matter under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320. Further, the Veteran's plantar fasciitis is not one of the enumerated conditions entitled to presumptive service connection for exposure to burn pits and other toxins pursuant 38 U.S.C. § 1120. Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection on a presumptive basis is not warranted.

Finally, the Board has considered whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection due to TERA on a direct basis. However, although TERA has been conceded, the June 2023 examiner opined that, because there is no known link between plantar fasciitis and environmental exposure, the Veteran's plantar fasciitis was less likely than not a result of his toxic exposure. There is no other credible evidence of record supporting a connection between the conceded TERA and the Veteran's plantar fasciitis. Therefore, the Board finds that service connection on this basis is not warranted.

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim for service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis on either a direct or presumptive basis. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for bilateral fasciitis is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder.

The Veteran further contends that he is entitled to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Board will begin by addressing its characterization of this issue. In his April 2023 VA Form 20-0995, the Veteran characterized his claim as one for service connection for "sleep disturbances." However, a Veteran's claim for a psychiatric disability "cannot be limited only to that diagnosis but must rather be considered a claim for any mental disability that may be reasonably encompassed." Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). As discussed in further detail below, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, during which his sleep disturbances were characterized as a symptom of two psychiatric diagnoses: unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder. Accordingly, pursuant to Clemons, the board has recharacterized the issue as shown on the title page to reflect these diagnoses. 

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's service treatment records contain a January 1988 enlistment Report of Medical History and Report of Medical Examination. The Veteran indicated no history of frequent trouble sleeping, depression, or excessive worry. The medical examiner assessed the Veteran's psychiatric condition as normal. The records are silent for complaints of or treatment for sleep or mental health issues during service. The Veteran's service treatment records do not contain a separation Report of Medical History or Report of Medical Examination.

Following separation from service, the Veteran does not appear to have sought medical treatment for mental health or sleep issues. 

In connection with his claim for service connection, the Veteran underwent a VA medical examination in June 2023. The Veteran was examined in person, and a review of the VA e-Folder was noted. The Veteran reported that he began to experience fractured sleep and anxiety while deployed to the border of Iraq and Kuwait. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder and noted his symptoms as anxiety and chronic sleep impairment. The examiner then gave the following opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric conditions: 

The veteran stated he developed anxiety due to deployment to Iraq near the Kuwait border 1990-1991. [...] He reported that sleep disturbances started when he slept in his Bradley Fighting Vehicle during deployment to Iraq due to fracture sleep from austere conditions and sleeping in a Bradley. [...] [Diagnoses] are more likely than not due to the veteran's deployment.

The claims file does not contain any further medical opinions or probative medical evidence. The Veteran has also not submitted any lay evidence other than the statements made to the medical examiners noted above.   

The Board will first address whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection on a direct basis. 

Regarding the first prong of service connection, a currently diagnosed disability, in its July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made a positive finding that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder. This finding is supported by the June 2023 VA examination and is sufficient to satisfy the first prong of service connection. 

Regarding the second prong of service connection, an in-service disease or injury, the Veteran contends that his sleep issues and anxiety began during service due to the circumstances of his deployment to Iraq. The Veteran contends that he was sent to the border with Kuwait and made to sleep in his Bradley vehicle due to his unit not having access to tents, and that these conditions caused him to develop anxiety and difficulty sleeping. As a layperson, the Veteran is competent to report experiencing symptomatology, including inability to sleep and feelings of anxiety. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). The Veteran's service records also confirm a presence in Southern Iraq during the Gulf War. See Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record, January 2023.  Additionally, the Veteran's Form DD-214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty shows the Veteran's Military Occupational Specialty as "Cavalry Scout/Bradley Fighting Vehicle System" and confirms service in Southwest Asia from December 1990 to May 1991, during which time there were hostilities between Iraq and coalition forces. Accordingly, the Board finds sufficient evidence to support the existence of the reported in-service incurrence and satisfy the second prong of service connection. 

The remaining question is whether the Veteran's currently acquired psychiatric conditions are etiologically related to this in-service event. 

Where a veteran is seeking service-connection for any disability, due consideration shall be given to the places, types, and circumstances of such veteran's service as shown by such veteran's service record, the official history of each organization in which such veteran served, such veteran's medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence. 38 U.S.C § 1154(a).

As noted above, the Veteran's treatment records are silent for complaints of mental health or sleep concerns during or immediately following service. However, the Veteran provided lay testimony that while deployed to Iraq, he was sent to the border of Kuwait and forced to sleep inside his Bradley vehicle, and that these "austere and dangerous" conditions caused him to develop anxiety and sleep issues that continue to persist. The Board finds that the lay reports of his in-service symptoms are credible and consistent with the circumstances of his service, as indicated in the official military records discussed above. See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). Further, the June 2023 VA medical examiner provided a positive nexus opinion, opining that the Veteran's diagnosed conditions are "more likely than not due to the veteran's deployment." Therefore, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran's psychiatric disorders are caused by or related to the conditions of his deployment to Iraq. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the criteria for service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders, to include unspecified anxiety disorder and unspecified insomnia disorder, are met. Service connection for these conditions is granted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Utter, Margaret M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.