Citation Nr: A25032587
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-459414
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent disabling for service-connected migraines, is denied. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's migraines most nearly approximate migraines with prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over several months, without more severe symptomatology more nearly approximating very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent disabling for service-connected migraines have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1979 to September 1983.  The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2023 after a Higher-Level Review of an April 2022 rating decision.  In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating Claim 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where the appeal arises from the original assignment of a disability evaluation following an award of service connection, the severity of the disability at issue is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  While the Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination, where service connection has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is a present level of disability that is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  The Court has held that, in determining the present level of a disability for any increased evaluation claim, the Board must consider the application of staged ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  In other words, where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibited diverse symptoms meeting the criteria for different ratings during the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings would be necessary.

Consideration is given to the potential application of the various provisions of 38 C.F.R. Parts 3 and 4, whether or not they are raised by the Veteran, as required by Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  All benefit of the doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In view of the number of atypical instances it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified.  Findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom, and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will, however, are expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a Veteran's service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  It is possible for a Veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent disabling for service-connected migraines, is denied. 

The Veteran contends that his migraines are worse than is reflected by his currently assigned rating.  As the Veteran's claim for an increased rating stems from the original grant of service connection, the entire record is for consideration. 

The Veteran's migraines are evaluated as 30 percent disabling effective November 15, 2010, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

Diagnostic Code 8100 provides that migraines with less frequent attacks warrant a noncompensable rating.  Migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months warrant a 10 percent rating.  Migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months warrant a 30 percent rating while migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability warrant a 50 percent rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

The rating criteria do not define "prostrating;" nor has the Court. Cf. Fenderson (in which the Court quotes Diagnostic Code 8100 verbatim but does not specifically address the matter of what is a prostrating attack).  By way of reference, the Board notes that, according to WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY OF AMERICAN ENGLISH, THIRD COLLEGE EDITION (1986), p. 1080, "prostration" is defined as "utter physical exhaustion or helplessness."  A very similar definition is found in DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY 1367 (28th Ed. 1994), in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's VA treatment records show that he routinely complained of headaches.  In addition, he noted sensitivity to light and sound. In addition, he stated that pain medications did little to relieve his pain and that he would have to "sleep [his headaches] off."  The Board notes that the Veteran's treatment records fail to reflect any prostrating attacks.

In February 2011 the Veteran underwent a VA Neurological Disorders examination. The examiner found that the Veteran had a diagnosis of migraines. The Veteran stated that he began to experience headaches during his active service, but never sought medical attention.  He reported that he continued to have headaches 3-4 times a week which were holocranial and caused pressure and throbbing pain as well as nausea and sensitivity to light and sound.  He noted that most of his attacks were prostrating.  The examiner found that the Veteran's headaches impacted his ability to work in that they caused pain, decreased his ability to concentrate and interact socially, and increased his absenteeism.   

In March 2020 the Veteran underwent a VA Headaches examination with an accompanying disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of migraines.  The Veteran reported that he began to experience headaches in 1990-1991 during his active service.  He stated that his headaches consisted of daily throbbing and pulsating pain.  Upon examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's migraines involved headache pain to include pulsating or throbbing head pain located on both sides of the head.  In addition, the examiner found that the Veteran experienced non-headache symptoms associated with his migraines, to include nausea and sensitivity to light.  The examiner further found that the Veteran experienced characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain once in 2 months.  However, the examiner found that the Veteran did not experience very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The examiner noted no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the Veteran's migraines.  Finally, the examiner found that the Veteran's migraines impacted his ability to work as they caused debilitating headaches which lead to missing work once every two months or so.  

In February 2022 a VA Medical Opinion in regard to the Veteran's disabilities and his service in Southwest Asia was obtained. The examiner found that the Veteran's disabilities, in pertinent part his headaches, arose after his exposure to burn pits, oil/chemical burns, and sand/dust storms during the Veteran's service.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran's disabilities were chronic, recurrent conditions and common sequelae of Southwest Asia exposures.  However, the Board notes that the examiner did not discuss the severity and/or frequency of the Veteran's migraine headaches.   

Throughout the appeal, the Veteran has submitted lay statements in support of his claim.  Specifically, that his migraines warrant a rating higher than that which has been assigned. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent disabling is not warranted for the Veteran's service-connected migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100.  In this regard, the evidence reflects that while the Veteran experienced daily headaches, which were described as severe at times, with nausea and photophobia, such caused at most characteristic prostrating attacks once a month, and not very prostrating and prolonged attacks which produced economic inadaptability.  During the February 2011 examination, while the Veteran reported that most of his attacks were prostrating, he did not report their length or frequency.  Furthermore, the March 2020 VA examiner specifically found that the Veteran's headaches caused characteristic prostrating attacks once every two months, but not very prostrating and prolonged attacks.  Furthermore, while both the February 2011 and March 2020 VA examiners found that the Veteran's headaches impacted his ability to work as they "increased [his] absenteeism," or "often led to missing work," the February 2011 examiner did not indicate how often the Veteran missed work.  And the March 2020 examiner stated that it occurred only "once every two months or so."  Finally, the March 2020 VA examiner specifically found that the Veteran did not experience prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  As such, a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's service-connected migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100.

The Board further finds that separate or higher ratings are not warranted under any other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes related to the Veteran's headaches.  In this regard, the evidence, to include VA examination reports and treatment records, does not show, nor did the Veteran contend, that his headaches result in or cause additional neurological conditions or convulsive disorders.  Consequently, higher, or separate ratings are not warranted under any other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes.

In conclusion, the Board finds that higher ratings for the Veteran's service-connected migraines are not warranted.  In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine, however, the evidence of record is against the Veteran's claim.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and the increased rating claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

Other Considerations

The Board has considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra and Hart, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected migraines; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable for his headaches throughout the appeal.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings for his migraines is not warranted.  Furthermore, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In assessing the severity of the Veteran's migraines under consideration, the Board has considered the Veteran's assertions regarding his symptoms, which he is certainly competent to provide.  See, e.g. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) and Grottveit v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 91, 93 (1993).  However, the criteria needed to support higher ratings require medical findings that are within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134 (1994).  As such, the lay assertions are not considered more persuasive than the objective medical findings which, as indicated above, do not support assignment of any higher or separate ratings pursuant to any applicable criteria at any point pertinent to this appeal.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence of record is against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53-56.

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Unger, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.