Citation Nr: A25032510
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453895
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for radiculopathy left lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for radiculopathy right lower extremity is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1972 to February 1977 and from September 1981 to January 1984.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to a September 2023 higher-level review request.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for radiculopathy left lower extremity is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for radiculopathy right lower extremity is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy warrants a rating of 20 percent for each extremity.  In this regard, the Veteran disagreed with the development and consideration of his claim, noting that he submitted a March 2023 magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI) report showing he had neural severe foraminal stenosis on his right and left side.  The Veteran stated he believed his condition should be rated as at least moderate to severe.

The Veteran felt that his testimony was discounted and under-appreciated during the informal conference.  Furthermore, the Veteran disagreed with the decision to afford more weight to an April 2023 VA examination by a nurse practitioner rather than the MRI report by a neurologist.  Alternatively, the Veteran felt that the April 2023 examiner appeared to appreciate the severity level of the Veteran's bilateral radiculopathy more than the Decision Review Officer.  See January 2024 HLR - Informal Conference; July 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement; July 2024 Appellate Brief.

These claims stem from an April 2023 increased rating claim, to include the one-year look-back period.  

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted private medical records from February 2023 wherein he reported that his low back pain radiated to his hips and thigh with occasional numbness and tingling.  The examiner noted that a lumbar spine evaluation demonstrated full motor strength in the bilateral lower extremities with no deformity felt.  March 2023 imaging showed that at L2-L3, a right foraminal protrusion resulted in severe right neural foraminal stenosis, and at L5-S1, a synovial cyst associated with the right facet joint that abuts the right S1 nerve root in the subarticular zone.  See April 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his low back in April 2023.  The Veteran reported that his current symptoms included chronic pain in the low back and lower extremities, which he treated with a Medrol pack and physical therapy.  The Veteran had difficulty with sitting, standing, walking, and bending.  The VA examiner noted diagnoses of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy from 1970, as well as diagnoses of lumbar spondylosis and lumbosacral synovial cyst from 2023.

Regarding the Veteran's bilateral radiculopathy, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran's radiculopathy affected the sciatic nerve, and he had no bilateral constant pain; moderate intermittent pain; mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias; and mild numbness.  The examiner indicated that the likely cause of radiculopathy was lumbar degenerative arthritis, in which the Veteran used a brace constantly for locomotion.  

The examiner noted that the diagnoses of the bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and lumbar degenerative joint disease were changed and were a progression of the previous diagnosis.  The new lumbar spondylosis and lumbosacral synovial cyst diagnose represented a progression of the lumbar degenerative arthritis with bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  

There were no further VA or private treatment records that addressed the level of severity of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy during the period on appeal.

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is warranted in order to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  In this regard, while a back conditions disability benefits questionnaire was associated with the file that addressed some of the Veteran's radiculopathy symptoms, the Veteran did not undergo a specific examination in association with his radiculopathy.  As a result, the Board finds the examination inadequate for the purpose of determining the nature and severity of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  Therefore, the AOJ should have obtained an additional examination prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal, and the failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain such evidence.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the specific nature and severity of his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  The record, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  All necessary testing should be conducted.

(a.) The examiner is asked to identify the nature and severity of all manifestations of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, to include whether such disabilities more nearly approximate mild, moderate, or severe incomplete paralysis or complete paralysis of the nerves involved, previously identified as the sciatic nerves.  

(b.) The examiner also should specifically indicate whether the Veteran has foot drop in either extremity.

(c.) The examiner should also comment upon the functional impairment resulting from the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.

(d.) The examiner is asked to address the March 2023 imaging that showed that at L2-L3, a right foraminal protrusion resulted in severe right neural foraminal stenosis, and at L5-S1, a synovial cyst associated with the right facet joint that abuts the right S1 nerve root in the subarticular zone.  

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

M. M. CELLI

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Garey

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.