Citation Nr: A25032472
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-430157
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for pes planus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for his bilateral pes planus.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for bilateral pes planus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.71a, DC 5276.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2019 to August 2023.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from separate rating decisions in January 2024 and March 2024, of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the January 2024 rating decision (pertaining to pes planus) and the March 2024 rating decision (pertaining to a left knee disability), the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. Regarding the issue the Board is remanding, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand. Regarding the issue the Board is deciding, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptoms with the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based upon average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. However, where an increase in the disability rating, rather than the propriety of the initial rating, is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance, and past medical reports should not take precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Regardless of whether an appeal stems from disagreement with the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection or from disagreement with the rating assigned following a claim for increase, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007) (citing Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999)).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion (ROM) testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).

Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").

In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, painful motion is an important factor of disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. The intent of the schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or particular pathology as productive of disability. Id. Joints that are actually painful, unstable, or malaligned, due to healed injury, should be entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. Id. Special note should be taken of objective indications of pain on pressure or manipulation, muscle spasm, crepitation, and active and passive range of motion of both the damaged joint and the opposite undamaged joint. Id.; see also Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011) (holding that section 4.59 applies to all forms of painful motion of joints, and not just to arthritis).

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for pes planus

The Veteran seeks a higher initial rating for his service-connected bilateral pes planus. The Veteran's bilateral pes planus is evaluated as 50 percent disabling under DC 5276, acquired flatfoot, effective August 27, 2023. 

DC 5276 provides that a 50 percent rating is warranted for pronounced acquired flat feet which includes: marked pronation; extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet; and marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achillis on manipulation, not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances. This 50 percent rating represents the highest schedular rating for pes planus, as well as for any condition of the foot.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2024. The examiner diagnosed him with bilateral pes planus, only, noting that the condition onset in 2020 and has since stayed the same. The Veteran reported that he has had foot pain since 2020 and that his feet ache if he stands for a long time. He did not report flareups. The examiner noted the Veteran does not use arch supports or built-up shoes. The examiner found the Veteran to have pain on the use of his feet during the examination, and also found the Veteran had no pain on manipulation of the feet, no swelling, no characteristic calluses, no extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces on one or both feet, and the weight bearing line was not over or medial to the great toe. The examiner further found the Veteran to have decreased longitudinal arch height of both feet on weight bearing; and noted objective evidence of marked deformity on the left foot; and marked pronation of the left foot that is not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances. See January 2024 Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).

The rating code encompasses the Veteran's difficulties due to his symptoms. Not only is he in receipt of the highest rating, but the lower ratings specifically note that pain on manipulation and use is contemplated. The Veteran has not asserted, and the evidence does not show, that he has symptoms which are not considered in the rating code for flatfoot (pes planus), and the Board further notes that this listed condition may not be rated by analogy. Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336 (2015) (where a condition is listed in the rating schedule, rating by analogy is not appropriate). 

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record is persuasively against entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for bilateral pes planus, and the claim for increase must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain 

The Veteran seeks a higher initial rating for his service-connected left knee disability. In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for left knee strain, awarded an evaluation of 10 percent, and assigned an effective date of August 27, 2023, the day after his discharge from active duty service. Although the Veteran's range of motion did not reach the level of impairment to warrant a compensable rating, the AOJ granted a 10 percent rating for painful motion under DC 5260 (flexion). 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.59, 4.71a.

The Veteran was afforded a VA knee examination in February 2024, but it is inadequate for rating purposes. Specifically, the examiner noted that the Veteran had pain on flexion and extension, pain on passive range of motion, and evidence of pain on weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, active motion, and passive motion. See February 2024 Knee and Lower Leg Disability Benefits Questionnaire. However, the degree at which pain occurred was not noted in the examination report. 

Additionally, the examiner failed to provide estimated range of motion measurements for the Veteran's left knee after repeated use over time. In that regard, the examiner initially noted that the Veteran had functional loss or impairment of the joint, including but not limited to after repeated use over time, based on the Veteran's described impairment. However, the examiner subsequently noted the Veteran was not being examined after repeated use over time and checked the box indicating that functional ability was not limited with repeated use over time. No explanation for this apparent inconsistency was provided. 

In short, the February 2024 VA examination report did not contain all findings necessary to rate the severity of the Veteran's left knee disability, and the AOJ erred by failing to obtain an additional examination prior to adjudicating the claim. A remand is necessary in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule an examination with an appropriate clinician to evaluate the Veteran's left knee disability. The claims file must be reviewed by the clinician. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. In connection with completion of the applicable disability benefits questionnaire, examiner is asked to specifically address the following:

(a)	When documenting ranges of motion of the left knee, please note the degree at which pain begins.

(b)	Please estimate functional loss that occurred as a result of repeated use over time in terms of range of motion. Please use information procured from relevant sources of record in addition to examination reports, including lay statements from the Veteran, to include his description of functional loss/impairment in Section 2C of the February 2024 Knee and Lower Leg Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

Please include a complete rationale for the opinions provided. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions without speculation, please state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts); a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required); or is because you do not have the requisite knowledge or training.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hampl, Samantha

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.