Citation Nr: A25032185
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230310-333963
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and panic disorder without agoraphobia with traumatic brain injury (TBI) is remanded.  

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU rating) due to service-connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia with TBI, alone, is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from December 2004 to December 2008.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2022 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a request for a Higher-Level Review of the February 2022 rating decision.  In November 2022, the RO continued the denial of the claim.  In March 2023, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), selecting Direct Review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  Thus, the Board will review evidence as of the date of the February 2022 rating decision.  

1. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 70 percent for service connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia with traumatic brain injury TBI is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 70 percent for service connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia and TBI.  However, it is unclear whether the current medical evidence accurately accounts for all symptoms/manifestations associated with his TBI.

A December 2021 VA treatment record (VATR) shows that an audiologist noted that the Veteran reported tinnitus and difficulty hearing while watching television and in general conversation.  The record reflects that a puretone audiometry was completed of which a re-test was recommended as the Veteran had to be reinstructed several times.  The audiometry result is not associated with the claims file.  The Board observes in this regard that the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that VA is on constructive notice of all documents generated by VA, even if the documents have not been made part of the record in a claim for benefits.  See Bell v. Derwinski, 2?Vet. App.?611, 613 (1992).  Efforts must be undertaken to obtain any outstanding records associated with this treatment.

The Veteran underwent a VA PTSD examination in December 2021 at which time diagnoses of PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia were confirmed.  The psychologist found that while the Veteran has more than one mental disorder diagnoses, it is not possible to differentiate the symptoms attributable to each diagnosis.  

The psychologist noted medical diagnoses of TBI, sleep apnea and hearing loss as relevant to the understanding or management of the mental health disorder.  The psychologist confirmed that the Veteran has a diagnosis of TBI and found that it is not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to TBI and any non-TBI mental health diagnosis.  

The Veteran underwent a TBI examination in January 2022, at which time a physiatrist confirmed a diagnosis of TBI.  Upon documenting the Veteran's medical history, the physiatrist noted that the Veteran had difficulty recalling the details of the event during which he was exposed to an improvised explosive device (IED).  

The physiatrist noted that the Veteran currently complains of daily headaches, constantly being in a fog of which the pain is brought on by physical activity.  The physiatrist noted that the Veteran reported pain radiates to the neck.  The physiatrist noted that the Veteran is sensitive to light and sound.  The physiatrist also noted that the Veteran reported poor sleep of which he was diagnosed with sleep apnea.  

The physiatrist found that the Veteran has three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family or other close relationships described as headaches, poor focus, attention, concentration and sleep.  

Here, the Board notes that in regard to the Veteran's service connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia and TBI, relevant subjective symptoms include decreased hearing, sleep impairment and migraine headaches for the period on appeal.  The record reflects that the Veteran has been service-connected for sleep apnea and migraine headaches, effective November 30, 2021.  

However, the Veteran previously underwent a VA hearing loss and examination in December 2012, at which time a hearing impairment for VA purposes was not found.  A March 2013 rating decision reflects that the Veteran was denied entitlement to service connection for hearing loss.  The Veteran was notified of such action in a March 2013 VA notification letter, but did not appeal the determination.  

The Veteran's December 2021 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) requests service connection for hearing loss.  However, a December 2021 VA notification letter was provided to the Veteran instructing the Veteran to file this claim on the proper form.  

Nonetheless, in this instance the December 2021 VATR notes the Veteran's report of decreased hearing and the VA psychologist found as relevant hearing loss when evaluating the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia and TBI.  

In this regard the Board notes that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia with TBI is evaluated under 8045-9411.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the rating assigned.  The additional code is shown after the hyphen.  

In this regard, 38 C.F.R.§ 4.124a Schedule of ratings - neurological conditions and convulsive disorders Diagnostic Code (8045) Residuals of traumatic brain injury (TBI) governs evaluation of the residuals of TBI.  Of note, the diagnostic criteria instruct to evaluate subjective symptoms that are residuals of TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified."  The Board notes that the criteria explain to, however, separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table.  

Here, paramount, the Board is not at liberty to disregard subjective symptoms in the evaluation of residuals of TBI.  A review of the January 2022 TBI examination and the February 2022 rating decision do not discuss the Veteran's reported decreased hearing as a subjective symptoms facet, given that the December 2021 VA PTSD psychologist denotes hearing loss as relevant to the mental health condition.  

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, remand is required only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  As part of its duty to assist, VA is required to make reasonable efforts to assist a Veteran in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  As part of the assistance provided, VA shall make reasonable efforts to obtain relevant private records that the claimant adequately identifies and VA will make as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records from a Federal department or agency.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  Also, the assistance provided shall include providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d).  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

The Board finds that such is the case with the current appeal.  Specifically, the Veteran's December 2021 claim for service connection of a TBI resulted in a grant of service connection for a TBI by way including the TBI rating with the already service-connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia.  Yet, the AOJ failed to develop or discuss whether this rating all reported TBI symptoms, to include decreased hearing.  The Board thus finds that the scope of the Veteran's claim for service connection of TBI includes development of whether decreased hearing is a reported subjective symptom of residual of TBI.  While the AOJ provided a December 2021 VA notification letter instructing the Veteran to file the claim for hearing loss on a proper form, a Supplemental claim, incumbent on VA is the duty to ensure that a provided examination is adequate.  A VA examination is adequate if it is thorough and contemporaneous, considers the Veteran's prior medical examinations and treatment, and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation is a fully informed one.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 311 (2007).  As such, failure to obtain an examination that discusses the entirety of the Veteran's subjective symptoms, including decreased hearing, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand for correction.  Id.  Upon remand, development as to whether decreased hearing is a subjective symptom of residuals of TBI should take place.  In so doing, the Veteran should again be invited to apply for a claim of hearing loss in conjunction with the instant claim on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  

2. Entitlement to a TDIU rating due to service connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia with TBI, alone, is remanded.  

While the Board observes that the Veteran is at a 100 percent combined disability evaluation rating effective November 30, 2021, the Board notes that a grant of a 100 percent schedular rating does not necessarily render the issue of entitlement to a TDIU moot, as the TDIU could in certain circumstances render the Veteran eligible for special monthly compensation (SMC).  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  SMC may be warranted if the Veteran has a 100 percent disabling rating for a single disability, and VA finds that TDIU is warranted based solely on disabilities other than the disability that is rated at 100 percent.  See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242 (2011); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008).  

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating for the single service connected disability of PTSD and panic disorder with TBI has been reasonably inferred from the evidence of record.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  A request for a TDIU, whether expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate "claim" for benefits, but rather, can be part and parcel of a claim for an initial or increased rating for a disability.  Id.  

The December 2021 VA PTSD examination reflects that occupationally, the Veteran reported that while he was previously working as a financial regulator in the financial industry, he has since gone on disability in June of 2021, following a decline in functioning and exacerbation of PTSD symptoms including but not limited to affective changes, decreased work performance due to decreased cognition and emotional dyscontrol impacting employment relationships as well as job security.  

The January 2022 TBI physiatrist noted that the Veteran is not currently working of which the Veteran explained that due to migraines, he had difficulty completing his daily tasks, remembering his daily tasks and grogginess throughout the day due to poor sleep.  

While entitlement to a TDIU rating was previously not awarded in an August 2013 rating decision, the RO has not since developed a claim of entitlement to a TDIU for the period on appeal, including as due to only service connected PTSD and panic disorder without agoraphobia with TBI.  

The record reflects that in the August 2013 rating decision, the RO indicated that the Veteran was pursuing vocational rehabilitations benefits and was instructed to reapply for individual unemployability if denied.  The record reflects that the Veteran was approved for vocational rehabilitation benefits in April 2016 and completed in September 2020 at which time employment was obtained through the vocational rehabilitation and employment (VR & E) program.  The record reflects that the Veteran then again applied for the Veteran readiness and employment (VR & E) program in April 2023 and was denied in April 2023.  Although on appeal, the record reflects that the Veteran has since been denied entitlement to vocational rehabilitation benefits.  

Accordingly, on remand, TDIU development should be completed.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain any outstanding VA treatment records, including the December 2021 audiometric evaluation, that are not already associated with the claims file in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  If any record identified cannot be obtained, the Veteran and his representative should be notified of this in writing, to include all efforts taken by VA to attempt to obtain any such record.  The Veteran should also be offered the option to provide any such record himself.  

2. Forward the claims file to an appropriately qualified VA clinician and request the clinician to determine the current level of severity of the Veteran's service-connected TBI condition.  The clinician is asked to provide an addendum to the January 2022 VA TBI examination and discuss the entirety of the Veteran's subjective symptoms, including whether decreased hearing is a reported subjective symptom of residual of TBI.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the clinician.  

A complete rationale for all opinions provided is required.  

3. Provide the Veteran with an additional opportunity to submit a claim for hearing loss on the proper form in conjunction with the instant appeal.  

4. Undertake appropriate development with respect to the claim for TDIU, to include providing the Veteran with a VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability) and ask that she complete and return the form.  

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.