Citation Nr: A25032084
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210720-173747
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for sleep apnea secondary to the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish service connection for sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from June 1981 to June 1984, and had additional service in the National Guard.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2020 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held in December 2024 before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge. A transcript of the hearing is in the record.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2020 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. In this appeal, the Board has considered medical evidence submitted by the Veteran within the 90-day evidentiary window following the Board hearing.

The Veteran contends that he has sleep apnea due to or the result of his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder.

Service connection may be granted for a current disability arising from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Sleep apnea is not one of the identified chronic diseases.

A disability can also be service connected on a secondary basis if it is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Secondary service connection, as contemplated by 38 U.S.C. § 1110, is warranted when a service-connected disability directly causes a nonservice-connected disability (a pure direct etiological cause), or when the nonservice-connected disability becomes functionally worsened due to an inability to treat the condition because of a service-connected disability (broad, indirect causation or "resulting from" but not proximately due to). Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023). The Federal Circuit explained that the phrase "resulting from" in the statute refers to "but-for" causation and is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction. Id. Secondary service connection may also be established for a nonservice-connected disability that is aggravated by a service-connected disability. In such an instance, the Veteran may be compensated for the degree of disability over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (b); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). Any worsening need not be chronic or permanent. Instead, any flare-ups of the claimed disorder that impair earning capacity and are due to a service-connected disability is sufficient to prove a secondary claim. See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019).

At the December 2024 Board hearing the Veteran testified that he did not have any sleep apnea symptoms in service and that he was diagnosed with sleep apnea after service. 

Service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a sleep disorder. The Veteran completed a June 1980 Report of Medical History for enlistment and denied ever having frequent trouble sleeping. An evaluating physician completed a corresponding Report of Medical Examination in a clinical setting and noted normal findings, except for a foot condition. A medical report at the time of separation from active service is not in the record. However, in February 1986 when the Veteran was in the National Guard, he completed a Report of Medical History where he indicated that he did not then or previously have frequent trouble sleeping.

At the Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he did not have symptoms of OSA during service. The medical evidence does not show that the Veteran's OSA was incurred in service. Service treatment records during active service and the post-active-duty February 1986 medical examination report is evidence that he did not have OSA during active service. As discussed below, he was not diagnosed with sleep apnea until decades after service. Finally, there is no medical opinion suggesting his OSA is directly related to service.

At a November 2005 VA primary care visit the physician's medical assessment included sleep apnea and obesity, and it was noted that the Veteran had a CPAP machine. In February 2006 an administrative note states that the Veteran had a sleep study at a medical center with a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). A September 2013 VA respiratory therapy progress note states a diagnosis of OSA. A September 2014 VA neurology consultation note states a medical history including obesity/OSA.VA respiratory therapy outpatient notes in 2018, 2019, and 2020 state a diagnosis of OSA and that the Veteran received a CPAP machine and associated CPAP supplies from VA.

At an April 2018 VA mental disorders examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran had chronic sleep impairment and experienced recurrent distressing dreams and sleep disturbances due to his PTSD.

A June 2021 private examination report was submitted from a psychologist, Dr. E.T. In the report, the psychologist noted that the Veteran reported taking medication to help him fall asleep. The Veteran reported waking up at times due to dreams or nightmares regarding his military experience. He also reported waking up swinging, as if he were in a fight. He reported that his wife told him that he is a very restless sleeper. The psychologist noted that the Veteran's symptoms included generalized anxiety with occasional panic attacks, flashbacks/intrusive thoughts, insomnia, and other sleep disturbances. In a Disability Benefits Questionnaire, Dr. E.T. noted that the Veteran had recurrent distressing dreams and sleep disturbances (such as difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep) related to his PTSD, and chronic sleep impairment. Dr. E.T. noted there is much research indicating a link between PTSD aggravating or exacerbating OSA. The psychologist opined that the Veteran's OSA is aggravated by his PTSD due to his erratic sleep patterns. 

A January 2023 report was submitted from Dr. M.S., a certified physician with over thirty-six years' experience in internal medicine. In part, Dr. M.S. referenced multiple medical studies which supported his opinion and showed an association between OSA and PTSD. The physician referenced a 1994 study that indicated sleep fragmentation, such as is prevalent in PTSD, increased the propensity for upper airway collapse in patients with OSA, and a 1981 study that showed sleep deprived patients have increased frequency and length of apneic events. The physician stated that the American Academy of Sleep Medicine noted that a 2015 study of U.S. veterans showed a high risk of OSA in the setting of PTSD, and a 2014 study that showed the risk of OSA increased with PTSD symptom severity. Dr. M.S. stated that medical literature shows that prolonged sleep deprivation, sleep fragmentation, and hyperarousal are associated with military service and are definitive contributing factors to OSA. He stated that chronic stress associated with PTSD has been shown to increase the likelihood of developing OSA and, bi-directionally, sleep disturbances of OSA increased the likelihood of PTSD. 

Dr. M.S. also stated that researchers have hypothesized that there is an association between OSA and PTSD and that it arises because obstructive apneas are often more common during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep when the decreased tone of airway muscles leads to partial or complete airway obstruction and, consequently, multiple awakenings or microarousals from sleep. He stated that the fragmented and lighter sleep documented with PTSD can potentially lead to an unstable upper airway and subsequent sleep disordered breathing. These frequent sleep disruptions disrupt the emotional reprocessing of traumatic memories, promoting greater recall of disturbing dreams with a consequent anxiogenic effect. He stated that the mechanism of dysfunctional REM sleep is one of the likely causalities existing between the two disorders since studies show that cohorts of patients with both illnesses have a positive correlation between the percentage of REM sleep and the number of recurrent nightmares.      

In addition, Dr. M.S. stated that medical literature shows that connections between OSA and PTSD can be attributed to the fragmented sleep pattern with arousals, coinciding with decreased airway muscle tone typical of OSA, that is also common for the disturbing dreams and unstable upper airways of PTSD, the dysfunctional rapid eye movement sleep mechanism and nightmare episodes found in the two disorders, and other causes. Dr. M.S. opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is clinically correlated to his PTSD and not merely explainable by structural changes in his oropharynx, becoming aged, or the development of obesity. He opined that it would now be considered an antiquated view of OSA to ascribe the etiologic factors related only to structural changes in the neck, age, and obesity.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is secondary to his service-connected PTSD. Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board will grant service connection for OSA secondary to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023) clarified the standard to award service connection on a secondary basis. Specifically, secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disability was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Id. The but-for causation standard in a secondary service connection case is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction. Id. Also, secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability was not caused by a service-connected disability but would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id.

The January 2023 narrative report of Dr. M.S. is probative evidence that the Veteran's OSA was proximately due to or the result of his service-connected PTSD. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a).  Dr. M.S. opined that the Veteran's sleep fragmentation and hyperarousal associated with PTSD can lead to an unstable upper airway and subsequent sleep disordered breathing. Dr. M.S. opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is clinically correlated to his PTSD and not merely explainable by structural changes in his oropharynx, becoming aged, or the development of obesity. The report of Dr. M.S. is probative medical evidence because the examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical records and provided a detailed rationale, supported by reference to multiple medical studies. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).  The June 2021 examination report of Dr. E.T. is also credible evidence that Veteran's OSA is aggravated by his PTSD due to his erratic sleep patterns. 

Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for the Veteran's OSA secondary to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD is granted. 

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lawrence Hubert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.