Citation Nr: A25032326
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 220830-272590
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1983 to May 2003.

In September 2021, the appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim for service connection for a headaches disability, most recently addressed in a December 2013 rating decision.  In December 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the August 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Veteran submitted evidence after the AOJ decision on appeal, which the Board could not consider.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a headaches disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for a headaches disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he experiences headaches that had their onset on active duty.  July 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ (Fully Developed Claim).  Alternatively, the Veteran asserts his headaches are due to his service-connected conditions, including service-connected pulmonary sarcoidosis and obstructive sleep apnea, medication for service-connected erectile dysfunction, and his service-connected psychiatric disorder.  September 2022 Correspondence, February 2013 VA Form 21-4138 (Statement).

The appeal is remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the December 2021 AOJ rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on the issue of service connection for a headaches disability because no VA examiner has opined whether the Veteran's conceded current headaches disability is related to active service or to a service-connected disability.

The Veteran's service treatment records document headaches in service, listed as a symptom of sleep apnea.  See April 2003 service treatment records.  

The Veteran's post-service VA treatment records demonstrate he is diagnosed with migraines, confirmed by objective imaging, and that he has experienced symptoms for many years.  See September 2015 and September 2021 VA treatment records.  The Veteran's VA medical providers have noted that the symptoms of his headaches disability affect his sleep and mental health and may be related to them.  See August 2021 VA treatment records.

Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in initial service connection claims, the VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.  The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. 

The Veteran's service treatment records and VA treatment records meet that threshold, and an examination and opinion are necessary.  The AOJ erred prior to the December 2021 AOJ decision on appeal when it did not afford the Veteran a VA headaches examination and obtain medical opinions regarding his assertions of direct and secondary service connection.

Accordingly, remand is warranted for a VA examination and opinion that corrects the pre-decisional duty to assist errors described above.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician for the headaches disability.  The examiner must review the entire claims file.  

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Is any headache disability related to active service, including onset during active duty?

(b.) If the Veteran is diagnosed specifically with migraines, as opposed to another headaches disability, were these migraines (1) manifest during active service, (2) manifest within one year after discharge from service, or (3) noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?  

(c.) Is any headache disability due to any service-connected disability, including pulmonary sarcoidosis, sleep apnea, erectile dysfunction, a psychiatric disorder, or the medications taken for any service-connected disability? Note that separate reasoning and opinions must be provided for secondary causation and secondary aggravation.

(d.) Is any headaches disability aggravated, i.e., made worse, by any service-connected disability, including pulmonary sarcoidosis, sleep apnea, erectile dysfunction, a psychiatric disorder, or the medications taken for any service-connected disability?  Note that separate reasoning and opinions must be provided for secondary causation and secondary aggravation and that permanent worsening is not required for a finding of aggravation.

The clinician's attention is drawn to April 2003 service treatment records documenting symptoms of headaches related to sleep apnea, as well as VA treatment records from September 2015, August 2021, and September 2021 regarding the history of the Veteran's headache symptoms and any relationship to his service-connected disabilities.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Provide a rationale to support each opinion.  If the clinician cannot provide a requested opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should so state and explain why.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carmichael, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.