Citation Nr: A25032267
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240331-429595
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for headache condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right hand condition, including rheumatoid arthritis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand condition, including rheumatoid arthritis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lower back condition, including lumbar strain; lumbar degenerative joint disease (DJD); and thoracolumbar scoliosis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle condition, including rheumatoid arthritis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right foot condition, including rheumatoid arthritis and calcaneal spurs, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left foot condition, including rheumatoid arthritis and calcaneal spurs, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a headache condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for headache condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran was a member of the United States Marine Corps Reserve. He had a period of initial active duty for training (IADT) from October 1988 to March 1989 as well as periods of active duty training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty training (INACDUTRA).  The Veteran served on active duty from December 1990 to September 1991.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In a March 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

For the Board's denial of service connection for headache condition, the AOJ has duties to notify and assist claimants in substantiating a claim for VA benefits.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5100, 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5126; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.326(a).  These duties have been satisfied in this case.  Appropriate notice was provided in an August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

The AOJ also associated the Veteran's service records and private treatment records with the claims file.  All released or submitted private treatment records have been associated with the claims file.  No other relevant records have been identified and are outstanding.  

Although the AOJ did not provide a VA examination, an examination was not required because the claims file lacked evidence showing a current disability, as discussed below.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The Board therefore finds that the AOJ has satisfied its duty to assist with the procurement of relevant records.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any issues with the duties to notify and assist.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a headache condition.  After reviewing the claims file, the Board has determined that there is insufficient evidence of a current disability.

The Veteran did not mention headaches or a headache condition in the August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, which is the only claim form associated with the claims file.  Many private treatment records noted "no headache" or "[d]enies [h]eadache" in their review-of-systems sections (December 2010, March 2012, August 2012, September 2012, June 2016, April 2018, August 2019, November 2019, March 2020, September 2021, March 2022, April 2022).  This includes two private treatment records from November 2023 and January 2024 - during the period on appeal - which listed "Denies Headache."  While private records do note the Veteran "admits headache" on four occasions between October 2015 and March 2017, apparently in connection with treatment fort a thyroid condition, no chronicity is noted, nor is any neurologic diagnosis made or treatment required.  In other words, these appear to be isolated acute complaints. Overall, there is no lay or medical evidence documenting a headache condition during the pendency of the claim or in the years preceding it.

The evidence is therefore neither evenly nor approximately balanced regarding whether service connection for a headache condition is warranted.  Instead, the evidence persuasively weighs against the existence of a current disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application.  Lynch v. McDonough,?21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) ("[T]he benefit-of-the-doubt rule?does not apply[] when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other").  Entitlement to service connection for headache condition is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Remand is permitted only to correct a pre-decisional error or any other failure to fulfill a statutory or regulatory duty, the correction of which raises a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  In this case, remand is necessary to obtain VA examinations and opinions, which will correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors.  

Right Hand, Left Hand, and Right Ankle Conditions

September 2023 VA examinations diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis of the bilateral hands and right ankle but then stated that the diagnosis was based solely on the Veteran's report, with "no documentation [of rheumatoid arthritis] in the medical records provided for review today."  The Board notes that the AOJ obtained these examinations (and the accompanying September 2023 VA medical opinions) before it received private treatment records, which span more than a decade, on February 23, 2024.  Thus, VA examinations are needed on remand that rely on current observations and medical evidence to diagnose any current condition.  In support of this, the private treatment records must be reviewed on remand.

Lower Back Condition

A September VA examination diagnosed lumbar strain, lumbar DJD, and thoracolumbar scoliosis.  A concurrent September 2023 VA medical opinion was insufficient on several fronts.  First, it relied solely on the lack of treatment records for its opinion.  Second, it did not apply the correct standard for determining whether a condition was aggravated during the periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA following a motor vehicle accident (MVA) on February 7, 1992, that occurred outside of service. Finally, the examiner was not afforded the opportunity to not consider the private treatment records received February 23, 2024. 

Right Foot and Left Foot Conditions

As with the bilateral hands and the right ankle, the September 2023 VA feet examination diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis of the bilateral feet yet stated that the diagnosis was based solely on the Veteran's report and "there is no documentation [of rheumatoid arthritis] in the medical records provided for review today."  The VA examination also diagnosed bilateral calcaneal spurs, with the date of diagnosis listed as the date of examination.  Thus, a VA examination is needed on remand that uses current observations and medical evidence to diagnose any current condition.  In support of this, the private treatment records received on February 23, 2024, must be reviewed.

Hypertension

The private treatment records document a diagnosis of hypertension.  The Veteran has attributed this hypertension to high stress and poor diet during service and training.  Considering his diagnosed disability and his report of potential connections to service, the Board finds that the "low threshold" standard is met to provide a VA examination.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 79.  Because there is no examination associated with the claims file, it is needed on remand.  

Acquired Psychiatric Disorder, Including GAD

A March 2024 VA examination diagnosed GAD, and a concurrent March 2024 VA medical opinion linked the condition to his ankle, knee, back, and hand injuries.  Because claims for these conditions are being remanded to correct pre-decisional errors, this issue is remanded as intertwined with those claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's claimed bilateral hand condition(s).  The clinician must review the claims file, including the private treatment records received February 23, 2024.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion: 

Is any hand condition at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service, including in-service combat training, hiking uneven terrain, falling down during training, picking up heavy equipment, and carrying heavy equipment?

A full and complete rationale to support any opinion expressed is required.

2. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's claimed right ankle condition.  The clinician must review the claims file, including the private treatment records received February 23, 2024.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion: 

Is any right ankle condition at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service or a service-connected disability, including training exercises, walking and hiking on uneven terrain, and repelling? 

A full and complete rationale to support any opinion expressed is required. 

3. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's lower back condition, including lumbar strain, lumbar DJD, and thoracolumbar scoliosis.  The clinician must review the claims file, including the private treatment records received February 23, 2024, then address the following: 

(a.) For the period prior to the MVA on February 7, 1992, is it at least as likely as not that any low back condition is caused or aggravated by service or a service-connected disability, including carrying heavy equipment for long time periods? 

(b.) For the period beginning with the MVA on February 7, 1992, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's low back pain (noted with the February 1992 MVA) increased in severity during periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA service?  The clinician must address August 25, 1993, and September 12, 1993, STRs.  

If the low back pain increased in severity during such period(s), was the increase in severity clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) due to the natural progress of the disease?

A full and complete rationale to support any opinion expressed is required.

4. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's claimed bilateral foot condition, including calcaneal spurs and rheumatoid arthritis.  The clinician must review the claims file and provide the following opinion:

Is any foot condition at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service or a service-connected disability, including combat training exercises, hiking on uneven terrain, carrying heavy equipment, repelling, and boots with poor arch support?

A full and complete rationale to support any opinion expressed is required. 

5. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's hypertension.  The clinician must review the claims file, including the private treatment records received February 23, 2024, then provide the following opinion:

Is any hypertension at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service or a service-connected disability, including high stress and poor diet during service and training? 

A full and complete rationale to support any opinion expressed is required. 

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Ripplinger, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.