Citation Nr: A25032598
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240825-468910
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER 

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service connected disabilities including unspecified anxiety disorder with insomnia, anorexia, and bulimia, headaches, lumbosacral strain, right and left hip strain, and vertigo, have prevented her from securing and maintaining substantially gainful occupation due to symptoms including anxiety, social impairment, constant head pain, trouble with focus and concentration, loss of balance, and pain caused by her service connected musculoskeletal disabilities that limits standing, walking, sitting, bending, squatting, and exercising.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.3, 4.16 (2024). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2017 to June 2018.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the August 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The August 2024 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to TDIU.  While new and relevant evidence is not necessarily a requirement because the Veteran did not file a Supplemental Claim, the Board will proceed to address the claim on the merits.

The Board notes that although the Veteran included April 2023, August 2023, and December 2023 rating decisions along with the August 2024 rating decision on appeal in the VA Form 10182, these decisions are all within the same chain of continuous pursuit, and as discussed above, the December 2023 decision was not a traditional rating decision as it did not include a decision but instead notified the Veteran of the duty to assist error that had occurred and informed her that the issue was returned due to the need to obtain additional evidence to substantiate the claim.  Based on this reasoning, the Board finds that the April 2023, August 2023, and December 2023 decisions are not on appeal.

Also, the Board recognizes that the period to request a docket switch has not expired.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).  However, the Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the requirement that the Board delay issuing a decision until the period to request to switch dockets elapses pursuant to Williams, 37?Vet. App. at?305.  Additionally, as the Board is granting the issue of entitlement to TDIU in full, proceeding with adjudication is not prejudicial to the Veteran.

Entitlement to TDIU.

The Veteran contends that her service-connected disabilities including unspecified anxiety disorder with insomnia, anorexia, and bulimia, headaches, lumbosacral strain, right and left hip stain, and vertigo have prevented her from securing and maintaining substantially gainful occupation.  See December 2022 VA Form 21-8940.

TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the veteran is unable to secure or follow substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  In order to meet the schedular criteria for entitlement, the veteran must have either: (i) one disability rated at 60 percent or more; or (ii) two or more disabilities, with at least one disability rated at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability bringing the combined rating to at least 70 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment and generally shall be deemed to exist when a veteran's earned annual income does not exceed the amount established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person.  Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts found basis (includes but is not limited to employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold.  Id.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  By reasonable doubt is meant one which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran is service connected for unspecified anxiety disorder with insomnia, anorexia, and bulimia rated at 70 percent, headaches rated at 50 percent, lumbosacral strain rated at 20 percent, tinnitus rated at 10 percent, painful scar behind right ear rated at 10 percent, injury to facial nerve VII rated at 10 percent, right hip strain with limited flexion rated at 10 percent, left hip strain with limited flexion rated at 10 percent, and vertigo rated at 10 percent during the appeal period.  Additionally, the Veteran has service-connected disabilities rated as noncompensable during the appeal period including left hip strain with thigh impairment, right hip strain with thigh impairment, conductive hearing loss in the right ear, scar behind right ear, left hip strain with limited extension, and right hip strain with limited extension.  As a result, the Veteran meets the criteria to be considered for schedular TDIU. 

The appeal period for this matter begins in December 2022.  In the Veteran's claim for entitlement to TDIU in December 2022, she reported that her employment since leaving the military consisted of cleaning homes and apartments from June 2019 to November 2019 for 12 hours a week and delivering packages using her personal vehicle from November 2020 to December 2020 for 15 hours a week.  In describing her past work experiences, the Veteran reported that she stopped working as a delivery driver because driving for hours made her service-connected hips hurt to the point that it would become unbearable, and her anxiety was getting worse as she was using her personal vehicle and was afraid of getting in an accident, getting lost, or being robbed.  As a result, the Board finds that the Veteran has not maintained substantially gainful employment during the appeal period.  Related to the Veteran's educational history, the evidence of record indicates that the Veteran is taking college courses as a full-time student. 

The record demonstrates that the Veteran's service-connected mental health disability causes symptoms including anxiety, weekly panic attacks, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  See January 2023 VA Exam.  The Veteran's difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective social relationships is demonstrated by her reports that her anxiety causes her to neglect relationships because she feels like she is bothering others and she self-isolates as she prefers online classes whenever possible to avoid being around others.  See March 2022 VA Exam.  The Veteran described how her mental health disability affects her schooling as she battles daily with conflicting feelings of decreased motivation and the fear of failure that pushes her to maintain good grades.  See March 2022 VA Exam.  

The Veteran's service-connected headache disability also causes constant pressure on the right side of her head, which limits her ability to perform tasks that require focus and concentration like using a computer, reading, writing, typing, and driving.  She reported that her headache symptoms have also increased with her school attendance as it requires her to try to concentrate more and use a computer.  See January 2023 VA Exam.  Additionally, the record shows that her service-connected vertigo impacts her balance and in turn affects her ability to perform activities of daily living like showering and causes difficulty with driving and walking.  See January 2024 VA Exam. 

Related to her service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities, including lumbosacral strain and right and left hip strain, the record demonstrates that the Veteran has severe pain that limits her ability to stand, sit, walk, bend, squat, and exercise.  See January 2023 VA Hip Exam; see also January 2023 Back VA Exam.  Specifically, it was reported that her left hip pain interferes with her ability to sit and stand for more than 20 minutes. 

The evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran is limited in her ability to find work because of her physical impairments that limit her ability to stand, sit, and walk, which limits opportunities for even sedentary occupations or work that is more suitable with her occupational history.  While the Board acknowledges that the Veteran is in college, and appears to be succeeding despite her impairments, the Veteran's educational environment is attuned to her needs whereas many occupational environments would not provide such flexibility, especially in light of her occupational history, and this evidence is outweighed by the functional impairment caused by her various service-connected disabilities as discussed above.

When combining the effects of the impairments caused by her service-connected mental health disability, like her isolative behavior, anxiety, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective social relationships, with the pain and limitations caused by her service-connected physical disabilities as described above, the Board finds that these disabilities including unspecified anxiety disorder with insomnia, anorexia, and bulimia, headaches, lumbosacral strain, right and left hip stain, and vertigo render her unable to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment.  Therefore, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to TDIU based on her service-connected disabilities.  

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Melissa Cook, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.