Citation Nr: A25032213
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210920-186296
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for hypothyroidism is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for multinodular goiter/thyroid nodular disease nonmalignant is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hyperparathyroidism is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hyperthyroidism is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had hypothyroidism at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

?

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for hypothyroidism are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from May 1988 to April 1991.  

In May 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of her claims for service connection for thyroid conditions, most recently addressed in a March 2020 statement of the case.  In February 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  The AOJ's favorable finding regarding VA's receipt of new and relevant evidence is binding on the Board, and thus, the threshold matter will not be addressed further.  

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of her claim for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, most recently addressed in an October 2016 rating decision.  In April 2021, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  The AOJ's favorable finding regarding VA's receipt of new and relevant evidence is binding on the Board, and thus, the threshold matter will not be addressed further.  

In a September 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge lane pursuant to the modernized review system.  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2021 and April 2021 supplemental claim decisions on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

For the claim seeking entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As the Board is remanding the remaining claims for further development, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In the February 2021 rating decision, the AOJ characterized the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for hyperparathyroidism as a "service connection for hyperparathyroidism (also claimed as thyroid condition and transient hyperthyroidism)."  As the record contains diagnoses of hyperparathyroidism and hyperthyroidism, which are separate disabilities under 38 C.R.F. § 4.119, the Board has listed the conditions as such on the title page to ensure the broadest review of the Veteran's claims. 

Lastly, regarding the Veteran's hypothyroidism claim the Board is deciding herein, the Board notes that the Veteran's attorney submitted a written statement in conjunction with the Veteran's September 2021 VA Form 10182.  The Board is cognizant of the decision by the United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) in Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  In Edwards, the Court found that, where the Veteran had submitted additional evidence with a VA Form 10182 electing Direct review, the Board had a regulatory duty to clarify the Veteran's intentions.  This case differs from Edwards in that what was submitted was argument in support of the appeal, rather than evidence, and points to evidence already of record to support of the assertions made.  The Board acknowledges that evidence was also submitted on the same day as the 10182 in conjunction with a separate Supplemental Claim for a different matter.  It is clear from the record that this evidence was submitted in conjunction with the matter included on the Supplemental Claim, rather than with the issues currently on appeal to the Board, as the evidence does not relate to the matters before the Board.  In Edwards, the Board's failure to seek clarification on the Veteran's intent was prejudicial to the Veteran's claim.  Here, by seeking clarification from the Veteran, the Board would only be causing undue delay with no additional benefit to the Veteran.  In reaching its decision, the Court in Edwards emphasized the Board's obligation "'to consider the full context in which veterans' submissions are made,'" and that this framework existed as part of a paternalistic "'statutory and regulatory regime that Congress created to protect veterans.'"  Id. at 69-70 (citing Rivera v. Shinseki, 654 F.3d 1377, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2011); Collaro v. West, 136 F.3d 1304, 1308 (Fed. Cir. 1998).  Given the Board's duties as defined by the Court, the undue delay that further clarification would cause, and the lack of prejudice to the Veteran, the Board finds that proceeding with adjudication of this appeal without seeking further clarification is the appropriate course of action.

Service Connection - Hypothyroidism

The Veteran and her attorney contend the Veteran has hypothyroidism that is related to her service, to include exposure to burn pits during her service in Southwest Asia.  See September 2021 VA Form 10182. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  Generally, service connection requires (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In the February 2021 decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia, so the in-service element of military environmental exposures is conceded.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

?

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of hypothyroidism and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); Holton, 557 F.3d at 1366; Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), (d).

A review of the record illustrates there is no current diagnosis of hypothyroidism.  The Veteran attended a VA examination in February 2020 to evaluate any thyroid condition.  The examination report contains a diagnosis of thyroid enlargement, non-toxic.  The examination report does not contain a diagnosis of hypothyroidism and the examiner specifically noted that the Veteran did not have any findings, signs, or symptoms attributable to a hypothyroid condition.  Notably, private treatment records contain diagnoses of hyperparathyroidism and hyperthyroidism but not hypothyroidism.  Furthermore, a review of the record does not reflect symptoms of hypothyroidism that cause functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (finding that if pain alone results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, such pain can constitute a disability); see also Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020) (finding that to establish the presence of a disability pursuant to Saunders, there must be competent evidence specific to the claimant tending to show that his or her impairment rises to a level to affect earning capacity).    

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's report at the February 2020 VA examination that she was told at one point that she had hyperthyroidism, but on repeat lab testing, was told it was hypothyroidism.  While the Veteran believes she has a current diagnosis of hypothyroidism, she is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case.  The diagnosis of a thyroid condition is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical knowledge.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Moreover, blood testing in November 2020 revealed the Veteran's Free T4 value was 5.11.  November 2020 private treatment records subsequent to these test results reflect a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, rather than hypothyroidism.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence, including the laboratory testing and private diagnoses of hyperparathyroidism and hyperthyroidism.   

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for service connection and VA disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  Evidence must show that the Veteran currently has the disability for which benefits are being claimed.  Here, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran has had hypothyroidism at any point near or during the appeal period.  Additionally, there is no indication the Veteran has had symptoms of hypothyroidism that has caused her any functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356; Wait, 33 Vet. App. 8.  Therefore, the Board cannot grant her claim under any theory of entitlement.

The Board notes that a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) examination pursuant to the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1168 is not necessary for the Veteran's hypothyroidism claim.  In this regard, a TERA opinion will be obtained where there is evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1168.  Here, although there is evidence of participation in TERA, there is no evidence of a hypothyroidism disability; thus, it is not necessary to remand for a TERA opinion.

The Board does not question the Veteran's sincerity in her belief that service connection is warranted for hypothyroidism.  However, without evidence of hypothyroidism, the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).   

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for multinodular goiter/thyroid nodular disease nonmalignant is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hyperparathyroidism is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for hyperthyroidism is remanded.

In the February 2021 decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran has current disabilities of multinodular goiter and hyperparathyroidism and experienced in-service toxic exposures during her service in Southwest Asia.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Additionally, a November 2020 private treatment record contains a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism.  A remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the VA opinions of record prior to the February 2021 decision on appeal are inadequate to evaluate the Veteran's claims.

Following a February 2020 VA examination, the VA examiner opined in February 2020 that direct service connection for a multinodular goiter is not supported by the medical evidence as the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for a multinodular goiter.  In a separate February 2020 opinion, the same VA examiner opined the Veteran's multinodular goiter is less likely than not related to exposures during the Veteran's Gulf War service.  In support of the opinion, the VA examiner cited to medical literature, but the examiner did not address any specifics of the Veteran's disability pattern.  

In May 2020, the February 2020 VA examiner provided an addendum opinion in which the examiner opined the "Veteran's exposure to burn pit toxins during Gulf War service has not been evidenced to have any direct or causal association with her development of a multinodular goiter, claimed as 'hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, multinodular thyroid goiter, thyroid nodule disease non-malignant."'  In support of this opinion, the VA examiner noted the medical literature submitted by the Veteran in May 2020.  Specifically, the examiner noted the conclusions reached and limitations of the medical studies.  However, the examiner again did not actually address any of the specifics of the Veteran's disability pattern.  Notably, the February 2020 VA examination report contains only a diagnosis of thyroid enlargement, non-toxic; however, evidence added to the claims file after the February 2020 VA examination and May 2020 VA addendum opinion contain diagnoses of hyperparathyroidism and hyperthyroidism.  As the diagnoses of hyperparathyroidism and hyperthyroidism were of record prior to the February 2021 decision on appeal, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that the AOJ did not obtain an opinion that addresses the Veteran's three separate diagnosed thyroid conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  Remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is remanded.

A December 2020 private treatment record reflects the Veteran's fatigue is secondary to her toxic nodular goiter and primary hyperparathyroidism.  As a decision on the remanded issues of service connection for multinodular goiter/thyroid nodular disease nonmalignant and hyperparathyroidism could significantly impact a decision on the issue of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, the issues are inextricably intertwined.  Thus, a remand of the claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's multinodular goiter, hyperparathyroidism, and hyperthyroidism claims.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an in-person examination (including via telehealth interview) is needed in order to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

?

After reviewing the claims file, the reviewing clinician should address the following:

(a.) Multinodular Goiter

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's multinodular goiter is attributable to military environmental exposures during her service in Southwest Asia?

In addressing this question, the reviewing clinician is asked to consider the medical literature submitted on May 7, 2020 regarding military environmental exposures and endocrine disorders.  

(b.) Hyperparathyroidism 

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hyperparathyroidism is attributable to military environmental exposures during her service in Southwest Asia?

In addressing this question, the reviewing clinician is asked to consider the medical literature submitted on May 7, 2020 regarding military environmental exposures and endocrine disorders.  

(c.) Hyperthyroidism 

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hyperthyroidism is attributable to military environmental exposures during her service in Southwest Asia?

In addressing this question, the reviewing clinician is asked to consider the medical literature submitted on May 7, 2020 regarding military environmental exposures and endocrine disorders.  

In addressing questions (a) through (c), the examiner must consider: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  The reviewing clinician must fully explain the rationale for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate.  If the reviewing clinician cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Breitbach, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.