Citation Nr: A25032746
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-462332
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, his service-connected disabilities render the Veteran in need of regular aid and attendance. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC based on the need for aid and attendance have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(b), 3.352. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2010 to January 2019.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2023 decision.  In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2023 decision.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance due to his PTSD and vertigo symptoms which cause him to require the help of his wife in the activities of daily living. 

SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the veteran has an anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or of one hand and one foot; has blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less; is permanently bedridden; or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.

"Aid and attendance" means helplessness or being so nearly helpless as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b)(3).

Determinations as to the need for aid and attendance must be based on actual requirement of personal assistance from others.  In making such determinations, consideration is given to such conditions as: inability to dress or undress himself or keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable, frequent need for adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid, inability to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through weakness, inability to attend to the wants of nature, or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the individual from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

All of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) do not have to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  The evidence should establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. Id.; see also Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222, 224 (1996).

The evidence of record does not show, and the Veteran does not allege that he has anatomical loss of both feet or of one hand and one foot, blindness in both eyes, or is permanently bedridden. Thus, the inquiry before the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in the need for regular aid and attendance of another person because of resultant helplessness due to service-connected mental and/or physical impairment.

The Veteran has been service- connected for PTSD (rated as 100 percent disabling), asthma with obstructive sleep apnea, chronic sinusitis, congenital pes planus, right shoulder strain, lumbosacral strain, left shoulder pain, left knee pain, benign paroxysmal vertigo, tinnitus, GERD, right knee pain, allergic rhinitis, anaphylaxis, migraine, left knee scar, and erectile dysfunction associated with PTSD. The Veteran is in receipt of SMC(s) during the entire appeal period. 

Upon VA examination for his PTSD in January 2021, the VA examiner indicated the Veteran's experiences panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impaired judgment, and disturbances of motivation and mood, among other psychiatric symptoms. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran's condition had worsened since examination in 2018. 

In April 2022, the Veteran submitted a written statement explaining the assistance he requires with activities of daily living. The Veteran explained that his wife, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law assist him, with his wife providing the majority of such assistance. He explained that he needs assistance getting dressed in the morning, moving around the house, getting in and out of the shower, and help with housework. He explained that he is not able to do such tasks due to his physical disabilities. Further, the Veteran needs help getting to the restroom and driving to and from appointments as he gets dizzy while driving due to his service-connected vertigo and headaches. He also explained that his family provides crucial support when he has bad days due to PTSD and that without his family's help with activities of daily living, he would struggle to maintain a normal life. 

Upon VA examination for aid and attendance in July 2022, the examiner indicated that the Veteran experiences dizziness and balance issues as a result of his vertigo which affects his ability to ambulate safely and his capacity to protect himself from the hazards/dangers of daily environment. Further, the examiner indicated that the Veteran experiences balance deficits (described as unsteady) and propulsion deficits (described as unsteady with ambulation) due to his vertigo episodes.  The examiner also explained that the Veteran is unable to dress, undress, or bath due to motivation issues related to his PTSD. 

In January 2023, the Veteran's wife submitted a statement in which she explains the assistance she provides the Veteran. She explained that she assists him with in locating his personal items due to his memory loss; she handles the bills and finances as the Veteran forgets names and places. She explained that she cooks all of his meals, drives the Veteran everywhere as he cannot drive due to his frequent vertigo episodes. The Veteran's wife explained that due to the Veteran's severe allergies, she must constantly dust and vacuum and manage their home air filters. She explained that she manages the Veteran's medications. The Veteran's wife also explained that she provides support for the Veteran's PTSD, back pain, hearing loss, tinnitus, migraines, sleep apnea, asthma, and allergic rhinitis.

Upon VA examination in April 2023 for aid and attendance, the examiner indicated the Veteran's reports that he requires assistance from his wife for dressing and cooking due to his vertigo and migraines. The examiner indicated that the Veteran needs assistance to prepare his meals due to his vertigo, migraines, and anxiety; to dress and undress; to manage his medications as he cannot drive to pick them up and cannot dispense them for himself as he is forgetful; and to manage his financial affairs as he feels overwhelmed and anxious doing such task. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran's wife assists him with shaving, does all the shopping, and drives him to all his appointments.    

Based on the foregoing, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are so severe as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a). Based on the procedural history of the appeal, the AOJ will assign the effective date of this award in the first instance.

As a final matter, the Board notes that the Veteran is already in receipt of SMC at the housebound rate. Moreover, SMC for aid and attendance is a greater benefit than SMC at the housebound rate, and one cannot have two levels of SMC based upon the same disabilities. Thus, the AOJ must make proper adjustments and implement this grant subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits. 

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. M. Younan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.