Citation Nr: A25032257
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-468790
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date of September 6, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted, subject to controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral artery disease (claimed as bilateral stint in legs) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis (claimed as stints in neck) is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating, from August 3, 2023, for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for buttocks disability manifested by weakness is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right arm disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cognitive disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral neurological disability of the lower extremities is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for blood disease is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for stroke is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. An "Intent to File a Claim for Compensation and/or Pension, or Survivors Pension and/or DIC" form (Intent to File) was received on September 6, 2022 and a formal claim of service connection for hearing loss was received in August 2023; there is no unadjudicated formal or informal claim of service connection for hearing loss prior to September 6, 2022 and no Intent to File was received prior to that date.

2. The Veteran served on active duty from October 1969 to August 1971, during which he served for at least 30 days at Camp Lejeune.

3. The Veteran's coronary artery disease is related to service.

4. The Veteran's peripheral artery disease is related to service.

5. The Veteran's bilateral carotid artery stenosis is related to service.

6. During the period on appeal from August 3, 2023, the Veteran had at worst level I hearing in both ears.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date of September 6, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155 (in effect prior to and since March 24, 2015), 3.303, 3.385 3.400.

2. The criteria for service connection for coronary artery disease are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307(a)(7).

3. The criteria for service connection for peripheral artery disease are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307(a)(7).

4. The criteria for service connection for bilateral carotid artery stenosis are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307(a)(7).

5. The criteria for an initial compensable rating, from August 3, 2023, for bilateral hearing loss are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1969 to August 1971, which includes service at Camp Lejeune.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision.

In an August 30, 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran appealed the March 2024 decision and elected the Board's Hearing docket. On November 8, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the March 2024 decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for buttocks disability manifested by weakness, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, right arm disability, cognitive disability, bilateral neurological disability of the lower extremities, blood disease, and stroke, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As for characterization of the issues on appeal, an effective date of September 6, 2022 for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is being granted in the decision below. However, with respect to the appeal for a higher initial rating for bilateral hearing loss, the period on appeal before the Board is limited to the period from the initially assigned August 3, 2023 effective date of service connection, which was assigned in the March 2024 rating decision. The AOJ will assign an initial disability rating for bilateral hearing loss during the period from September 6, 2022 through August 2, 2023 in a future decision. If the Veteran subsequently disagrees with any aspect of the AOJ's determination, he may request a separate administrative review of that decision (to include submitting a notice of disagreement to the Board) or may file a supplemental claim with the AOJ. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C (a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a). Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Lastly, in light of the Veteran's reported symptoms and contentions and to encompass all disorders that are reasonably raised by the record, the Board has re-characterized the claims of service connection for buttocks problem (weakness), loss of use of right arm, memory cognitive issue, and left and right peripheral neuropathy of the legs as claims of service connection for buttocks disability manifested by weakness, right arm disability, cognitive disability, and bilateral neurological disability of the lower extremities. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim).

I. Earlier Effective Date

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 3, 2023 for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss

Generally, the effective date of an evaluation and award of pension, compensation or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

VA amended its adjudication regulations on March 24, 2015 to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary, regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises. See 79 Fed. Reg. 57660 (Sept. 25, 2014). The amendments, however, are only effective for claims and appeals filed on or after March 24, 2015.

Under the former legal authority, any communication or action, indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under laws administered by VA, from a veteran or his representative, may be considered an informal claim. Such informal claim must identify the benefit sought. Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim has not been filed, an application form will be forwarded to the claimant for execution. If received within one year from the date it was sent to the veteran, it will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (a) (in effect prior to March 24, 2015).

There is no set form that an informal written claim must take. All that is required is that the communication indicates an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, and identify the benefits sought. Rodriguez v. West, 189 F.3d 1351 (1999).

Under the revised regulations, although informal claims are no longer recognized, a claimant may submit an Intent to File a claim, and VA may recognize the receipt date of the Intent to File a claim as the date of claim so long as VA receives the successfully completed claim form within one year of receipt of the Intent to File a claim. An Intent to File a claim must identify the general benefit (e.g., compensation, pension), but need not identify the specific benefit claimed or any medical condition(s) on which the claim is based. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (b).

The Board finds, for the following reasons, that an effective date of September 6, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is warranted.

The current effective date for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is August 3, 2023, which is the date of receipt of an Intent to File. However, an Intent to File was initially received by VA on September 6, 2022 and a complete claim of service connection for hearing loss was received on August 30, 2023, within one year of receipt of the September 2022 Intent to File (see an August 2023 "Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits" form (VA Form 21-526EZ)). There was no other complete claim that was submitted within one year of receipt of the September 2022 Intent to File.

The effective date of an award based on an original claim is generally the date of receipt of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. The term "date entitlement arose" is somewhat ambiguous. The Board points out, however, that the effective date of an award of service connection is assigned not based on the date the disability appeared or the date of the earliest medical evidence demonstrating the existence of such disability and a causal connection to service. Rather, the effective date is assigned based on consideration of the date that the application upon which service connection was eventually awarded was received by VA. See Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382-383 (1999).

In this case, a March 2024 VA audiological examination report was obtained contemporaneous with the Veteran's September 2022 claim. This evidence reflects that the Veteran experiences bilateral hearing loss disability as defined by VA, and includes medical opinions that the Veteran's left and right ear hearing loss is likely related to service. Overall, the Board finds that the above evidence is sufficient to establish that entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss arose contemporaneous with the Veteran's September 6, 2022 service connection claim. There is no evidence of any unadjudicated formal or informal claim of service connection for hearing loss prior to September 6, 2022, and no Intent to File was received prior to that date. Therefore, an effective date of September 6, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is warranted.

II. Service Connection

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease (claimed as bilateral stint in legs), and bilateral carotid artery stenosis (claimed as stints in neck)

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

As applicable to this case, a veteran who had no less than 30 days (consecutive or nonconsecutive) of service at Camp Lejeune during the period beginning on August 1, 1953, and ending on December 31, 1987 shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to water contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs) during such service, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the individual was not exposed to contaminants in the water supply during that service. For the purposes of this section, contaminants in the water supply means the VOCs trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), benzene, and vinyl chloride. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(7).

The Board finds, for the following reasons, that the Veteran has current diagnoses of coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease (claimed as bilateral stint in legs), and bilateral carotid artery stenosis (claimed as stints in neck), and that these disabilities are all related to service.

As noted by the Veteran's representative in a January 2025 statement, in the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran has current coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease (claimed as bilateral stint in legs), and bilateral carotid artery stenosis (claimed as stints in neck). The Board is bound by these favorable findings of the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

Moreover, the Veteran's DD Form 214 and service personnel records confirm that he served for at least 30 days at Camp Lejeune during service. Therefore, current disabilities have been demonstrated and the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to water contaminated with VOCs during service.

As for whether the Veteran's current coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, and bilateral carotid artery stenosis are related to service, physician R. Patel reported in a January 2025 statement that the Veteran's entire claims file was reviewed and that his diagnosed coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, and bilateral carotid artery stenosis were "linked to his service-related experiences, as well as prolonged exposure to environmental hazards while stationed at Camp Lejeune." Dr. Patel cited medical literature and explained, in pertinent part, that exposure to VOCs such as TCE, PCE, benzene, and vinyl chloride has been associated with various health effects, including cardiovascular disease. VOCs and their metabolites can damage the lining of blood vessels, leading to inflammation and vascular dysfunction. Numerous studies have highlighted the significant impact of VOC exposure on various risk factors for cardiovascular disease, and epidemiological studies have linked ambient VOC compounds with cardiovascular events, such as ischemic heart disease and cardiovascular mortality. Specifically, benzene exposure has been associated with cardiovascular effects, including an increased risk of atherosclerosis, because benzene induces endothelial injury, enhances platelet activation, and increases inflammatory processes, which serve as biomarkers of cardiovascular toxicity. Research indicates that benzene exposure is linked to a 9 percent decrease in circulating levels of angiogenic cells and a positive correlation with hyperlipidemia. 

Moreover, Dr. Patel explained that even low-level exposure to VOCs is associated with a reduction in circulating angiogenic cells, which are critical for endothelial repair and angiogenesis. This impairment can significantly increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and peripheral arterial disease. Also, studies suggest that VOC exposure is closely linked to obesity and dyslipidemia, which not only contribute to coronary artery disease, but also exacerbate the progression of peripheral arterial disease. These findings highlight the comprehensive impact of VOC exposure on multiple vascular conditions. Peripheral arterial disease, characterized by narrowing of peripheral arteries and reduced blood flow, commonly affects the lower extremities. However, it also contributes to vascular issues in other areas of the body. In this case, peripheral arterial disease not only resulted in the Veteran's need for leg stents, but also led to carotid artery stenosis, necessitating stent placement in the carotid arteries. Overall, Dr. Patel opined that it was likely ("at least as likely as not") that the Veteran's neck condition with stents, coronary artery disease, and leg condition with stents were related to his exposure to toxic substances in service at Camp Lejeune.

Dr. Patel's January 2025 opinion is based upon a review of medical literature and the Veteran's claims file, and consideration of his reported history, and it is accompanied by a detailed rationale that is consistent with the evidence of record and the circumstances of the Veteran's service. Thus, the January 2025 opinion is entitled to substantial probative weight. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

In light of the above medical opinion, the Board finds that the evidence is in favor of a conclusion that the Veteran's current coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease (claimed as bilateral stint in legs), and bilateral carotid artery stenosis (claimed as stints in neck) are all related to service. There is no medical opinion that is contrary to this conclusion. Therefore, service connection for these disabilities is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

III. Higher Initial Rating

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating, from August 3, 2023, for bilateral hearing loss

Disability ratings are determined by the application of rating criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (38 C.F.R. Part 4) based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155.

Where service connection has been granted and the assignment of an initial rating is disputed, separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the ratings may be "staged." Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-126 (1999). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In view of the number of atypical instances it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified. Findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom, and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will, however, be expected. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Hearing loss is rated on the basis of examination results including a controlled speech discrimination test (Maryland CNC), and a pure tone audiometric test of pure tone decibel thresholds at 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hz with an average pure tone threshold obtained by dividing these thresholds by four. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85.

Once these test results have been obtained, employing Table VI, a Roman numeral designation of hearing impairment is ascertained based on a combination of the percent of speech discrimination and pure tone threshold average. Once a Roman numeral designation of auditory acuity level for each ear has been determined, Table VII is used to determine the percentage evaluation for bilateral hearing loss by combining the Roman numeral designations of auditory acuity level for hearing impairment of each ear. Id. 

There is an alternative method of rating hearing loss in defined instances of exceptional hearing loss. In such exceptional cases, the Roman numeral designation for hearing loss of an ear may be based only on pure tone threshold average, using Table VIA, or from Table VI, whichever results in the higher Roman numeral. Exceptional hearing loss exists when the pure tone threshold at the frequencies of 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 55 decibels or more; or where the pure tone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz, and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz. In the latter situation, the higher Roman numeral, determined from Table VI or VIA, will then be elevated to the next higher Roman numeral. Each ear will be evaluated separately. 38 C.F.R. § 4.86.

Considering the pertinent evidence in light of the applicable rating criteria and considerations, the Board finds, for the following reasons, that a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal from August 3, 2023.

As a preliminary matter, the Veteran was afforded a VA audiological examination in March 2024. In her January 2025 statement, the Veteran's representative requested that "in light of the fact that the Veteran believes his hearing loss was not accurately addressed in light of the updated treatment he has needed for it, that the Veteran be considered for a new C&P exam for a higher rating assignment." To the extent that the Veteran's representative is contending that the March 2024 examination is inadequate, neither the Veteran nor his representative have specifically challenged the qualifications or competence of the examiner who conducted the March 2024 examination, and they have not requested the curriculum vitae or other information about the qualifications of the examiner. Such a specific challenge is required to warrant further discussion of the examiner's competence or the provision of such information. Francway v. Wilkie, 930 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2019) ("whether an examiner is competent and whether he has rendered an adequate exam are two separate inquiries") (quoting Mathis v. McDonald, 834 F.3d 1347, 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (Hughes, J., concurring in denial of rehearing en banc), modified on other grounds by Francway v. Wilkie, 940 F.3d 1304 (Fed. Cir. 2019) (en banc).

Furthermore, the March 2024 examination is the product of an in-person examination, a review of the Veteran's treatment records, and consideration of his reported symptoms and history. The March 2024 examination report sets forth detailed findings in a manner which allows for informed appellate review under applicable VA laws and regulations and the Board finds the examination report to be sufficient for appellate review and of high probative value. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (holding an examination is considered adequate when it is based on consideration of the appellant's prior medical history and examinations and also describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the disability will be a fully informed one). Hence, the Board finds that the March 2024 VA audiological examination report is adequate, and that this report, along with the other evidence of record, provides sufficient information for resolution of the appeal for a higher initial rating for bilateral hearing loss.

Moreover, to the extent that the Veteran's representative contended in the January 2025 statement that the Veteran's hearing loss has worsened and/or that there are additional relevant treatment records that have not been obtained, a remand for a new examination is not warranted in this instance because the Board is limited to considering the severity of the Veteran's hearing loss during the period on appeal prior to the March 2024 rating decision, and the fact that a new examination has not been conducted on the basis of the January 2025 report of potential worsening of the Veteran's hearing loss is not a pre-decisional duty to assist error or any other error on the part of the AOJ. Also, the January 2025 statement does not indicate that any additional relevant symptoms were present during the period prior to the March 2024 decision. Moreover, a remand is also not warranted to obtain any additional treatment records because these records were not identified prior to the March 2024 rating decision. Therefore, the fact that these records were not sought by the AOJ during the period on appeal is not a pre-decisional duty to assist error or any other error on the part of the AOJ.

During the March 2024 VA audiological examination, the Veteran reported that as a result of his hearing loss, he had to turn everything up to hear it, and that his family sometimes had to repeat things. Examination revealed that his pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	1000	2000	3000	4000	Average

RIGHT	20 	25	60	55	40

LEFT	20	25	45	55	36

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 96 percent in the right ear and 94 percent in the left ear. Using Table VI, the March 2024 examination revealed level I hearing in both ears. Combining level I hearing for both ears according to Table VII yields a rating of 0 percent.

The Veteran has expressed his belief that the severity of his hearing loss warrants a higher rating. He is competent to report the symptoms of his hearing disability and the Board has no legitimate basis to challenge the credibility of his contentions. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). However, ratings for hearing loss are determined by a mechanical application of the VA rating schedule to the numeric designations assigned based on audiometric test results. Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345 (1992). The lay statements of record do not show that the Veteran met the specific pure tone thresholds and/or speech discrimination percentages required for a higher rating for hearing loss at any time during the period on appeal from August 3, 2023.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is warranted during the period on appeal from August 3, 2023. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against a higher rating. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), is therefore not for application as to this matter. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

As a final point, the Board notes that in conjunction with the appeal for a higher initial rating for bilateral hearing loss, no other related issues have been raised by the Veteran or his representative, and no other such issues have been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the claimant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Entitlement to service connection for buttocks disability manifested by weakness, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, right arm disability, cognitive disability, bilateral neurological disability of the lower extremities, blood disease, and stroke are remanded

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022), defines a "toxic exposed veteran" as, in pertinent part, a veteran who served on active duty at Camp Lejeune for not fewer than 30 days during the period beginning on August 1, 1953 and ending on December 31, 1987. 38 U.S.C. § 101 (38); 38 C.F.R. § 1710 (e)(1). In this case, the Veteran's service personnel records reflect that he served for at least 30 days at Camp Lejeune during the applicable period. Therefore, he had military service that warrants a presumption of toxic exposure and he is a toxic exposed veteran under the PACT Act. See 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

Under the PACT Act, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). For such claims, absent a specific exception that does not apply here, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when a veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, has evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. Under 38 U.S.C. § 1710 (e)(4), a TERA is defined as any activity that required a corresponding entry in an exposure tracking record system, to include any system used by the Secretary of Defense to track how veterans or members of the Armed Forces have been exposed to various occupational or environmental hazards. See also 38 U.S.C. § 1119 (c) (2). As explained above, the Veteran is a toxic exposed veteran under the PACT Act based on his service at Camp Lejeune, and the TERA examination requirements under 38 U.S.C. § 1168 are implicated.

The Veteran has not been afforded examinations to determine whether he has any current buttocks disability, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, right arm disability, cognitive disability, lower extremity neurological disability, blood disease, or stroke residuals and whether any such disabilities are related to service. Although Dr. Patel references these disabilities in her January 2025 opinion, there is currently no medical evidence of any such diagnosed disabilities in the claims file and it is unclear what treatment records, if any, Dr. Patel reviewed. Therefore, a remand based on this pre-decisional duty to assist error is necessary to afford the Veteran appropriate examinations and obtain appropriate opinions. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Moreover, the PACT Act requires an individual longitudinal exposure record (ILER) report for all veterans who were subject to toxic exposure risk activities. In this case, a TERA memorandum was prepared in March 2024, but it indicates that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA. As explained above, the Veteran is a toxic exposed veteran based on his service at Camp Lejeune. Also, no ILER report has been prepared and associated with the claims file. Therefore, a remand based on this pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted to prepare an accurate TERA memorandum and an ILER report. Id.

Lastly, a September 2022 treatment record from The University of Kansas Hospital System indicates that the Veteran received relevant treatment at that location. The AOJ has not attempted to obtain these outstanding records. As this was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is required to allow VA to obtain authorization and request these relevant outstanding private treatment records. Id.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Prepare a TERA memorandum and an ILER report for the Veteran, and associate these documents with the claims file.

2. Ask the Veteran to identify the location and name of any VA or private medical facility where he has received treatment for buttocks disability, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, right arm disability, cognitive disability, neurological disability, blood disease, and stroke, to include the dates of any such treatment.

Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for all records of his treatment for buttocks disability, erectile dysfunction, hypertension, right arm disability, cognitive disability, neurological disability, blood disease, and stroke from The University of Kansas Hospital System and any other sufficiently identified private treatment provider from whom records have not already been obtained. Make two requests for any authorized records, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current buttocks disability is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any buttocks disability manifested by weakness experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; (2) manifested within one year after discharge from active service (in the case of any currently diagnosed organic disease of the nervous system); OR (3) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

4. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current erectile dysfunction is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any erectile dysfunction experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; OR (2) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

5. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current hypertension is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any hypertension experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; (2) manifested within one year after discharge from active service; OR (3) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and the elevated blood pressure reading of 120/90 recorded during his August 1971 separation examination.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

6. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current right arm disability is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any right arm disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; (2) manifested within one year after discharge from active service (in the case of any currently diagnosed arthritis or organic disease of the nervous system); OR (3) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

7. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current cognitive disability is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any cognitive disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; OR (2) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

8. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current lower extremity neurological disability is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any lower extremity neurological disability experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; (2) manifested within one year after discharge from active service; OR (3) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

9. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current blood disease is related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any blood disease experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; (2) manifested within one year after discharge from active service; OR (3) is related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

10. After a TERA memorandum and ILER report have been associated with the claims file and all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current stroke and/or stroke residuals is/are related to service.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any stroke and/or stroke residuals experienced by the Veteran since approximately September 2022 (1) began during service; (2) manifested within one year after discharge from active service; OR (3) is/are related to an injury or disease during service, including his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

In forming these opinions, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must provide reasons for each opinion given.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Elwood, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.