Citation Nr: A25032479
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 200827-453471
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an equipment purchase of a Tempur-pedic or sleep number mattress is remanded.

Entitlement to an equipment purchase of an ergonomic chair is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1976 to March 1987.   

In the August 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an equipment purchase of a Tempur-pedic or sleep number mattress is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an equipment purchase of an ergonomical chair is remanded.

The Veteran stated in his VA Form 10182 he was appealing the denial of prosthetic items.  He supplied two separate determination letters without dates from Veterans Health Administration (VHA) prosthetics.  The letters state that the Tempur-pedic and/or sleep number mattress and ergonomic chair are not considered prosthetics items and are not medically indicated.  The letter regarding a Tempur-pedic and/or sleep number mattress stated the provision of a mattress is beyond the scope of the Prosthetic and Sensory Aids Service department.  

In this case, the Board does not have before it the evidence upon which the decision was based.  It is also unclear under whether all regulations were considered for eligibility.  The only evidence of record are the determination letters provided by the Veteran.  The record does not contain the Veteran's initial claim to VHA nor any other VHA records.  The Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to associate the Veteran's VHA claims file pertaining to his claim with the electronic record.

The Board shall remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Here, the Board finds that due process requires that the AOJ ensure that a copy of the record before it is made available for the Board's review in connection with the appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103 (requiring notice to claimants of required information and evidence), 5104 (requiring specific information in the notice of a decision), 5107 (requiring the Secretary to consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case).

In light of the above, the Board finds that remand is warranted for the AOJ to associate with the electronic claim file all relevant notices, the initial claim filed by the Veteran, adjudicatory documents, and evidence considered in connection with the claims on appeal.  If such records are unable to be located, the AOJ should make a formal finding of unavailability and provide the appellant with notice of the unavailability of records.  

The Veteran is notified that under the modernized appeal system, remands do not automatically return to the Board for additional adjudication.  Should the AOJ deny the claim in whole or in part and the appellant wish to continue their appeal before the Board, the appellant should file an appropriate NOD (VA Form 10182) within the applicable appeal period after the AOJ's readjudication of the claim.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. The AOJ must reconstruct the Veteran's VHA claims file and associate it with the electronic record, to include the initial claim(s) for prosthetics, any records relating to the prosthetics claims, and any other relevant documents received or generated in connection with the claim.

The AOJ should make a formal finding of unavailability if the records are unable to be obtained.

2. Issue the Veteran a decision and notice of decision on this matter which adheres to the content requirements of 38?U.S.C. §?5104, including but not limited to a summary of the applicable laws and regulations, identification of findings favorable to the claimant.

Clarification as to which regulation and program the claim was evaluated under must also be provided. 

Ensure that all evidence upon which the decision is based is identified in the notice and made part of the electronic record.

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Mouzakis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.