Citation Nr: A25032453
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210930-188420
DATE: April 8, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the finger tips, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

2. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral feet, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

3. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral legs, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

4. Entitlement to service connection for neurosarcoidosis-fatigue, variously claimed as muscle weakness in the left lower extremity, and as due to herbicide exposure.

5. Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the ankles, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

6. Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the finger joints, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

7. Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the knees, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

8. Entitlement to service connection for partial removal of the thyroid nodules, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

9. Entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence-neurogenic bladder, claimed as due to herbicide exposure.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the finger tips, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral feet, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral legs, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neurosarcoidosis-fatigue, variously claimed as muscle weakness in the left lower extremity, and as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the ankles, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the finger joints, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the knees, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for partial removal of the thyroid nodules, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence-neurogenic bladder, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from November 1973 to January 1979, with an additional National Guard and Reserve component.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2021 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The rating decision considered the evidence of record on that date.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board by requesting the AMA Evidence Submission docket.  The RO accepted some remote diagnosed disability, but no nexus.  The RO is bound by the favorable findings.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Herbicide exposure has not been conceded.  

Duties to Notify and Assist

The Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA) and implementing regulations impose obligations on VA to provide claimants with notice and assistance.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156(a), 3.159, 3.326(a).

In the September 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or her attorney within 90 days from receipt of the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the VA Form 10182 was received, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the VA Form 10182 was received.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  

In light of the Veteran and her attorney's contentions, as advanced in the June 2022 Brief hearing, a remand is necessary for development so that the Veteran is afforded consideration.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  There are allegations backed by historical documents of herbicide use where the Veteran reports to have served, however, such has not been conceded.  Moreover, it is not clear to an approximate as likely as not degree whether the claimed disabilities are attributable to service, or whether they may be presumptively linked to service.  These deficiencies in the record render the evidence insufficient for adjudication purposes.  The Board also observes that the AMA provides that remands are warranted based on VA's duty to assist prior to the AOJ decision.  Pub. L. No. 115-55, § 2(d)(2).  The AMA structure allows remand only where VA has committed error in the duty-to-assist (DTA) prior to the decision on appeal.  In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

1. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the finger tips, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral feet, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral legs, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for neurosarcoidosis-fatigue, variously claimed as muscle weakness in the left lower extremity, and as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the ankles, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the finger joints, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for sarcoid arthritis in the knees, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for partial removal of the thyroid nodules, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for urinary incontinence-neurogenic bladder, claimed as due to herbicide exposure, is remanded.

The Board incorporates its discussion from the section above by reference.

To establish service connection a Veteran must generally show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service."  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

For the showing of chronic disease in service there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word "Chronic."  When the disease identity is established (leprosy, tuberculosis, multiple sclerosis, etc.), there is no requirement of evidentiary showing of continuity.  Continuity of symptomatology is required only where the condition noted during service (or in the presumptive period) is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b).  

We note that arthritis and organic disease of the nervous system are chronic diseases, and as such, additional presumptive theories of entitlement are relevant in addition to direct service connection.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b), service connection may be established by demonstrating continuity of symptomatology.  Continuity may be established if a claimant can demonstrate (1) that a condition was "noted" during service; (2) evidence of post-service continuity of the same symptomatology; and (3) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of a nexus between the present disability and the post-service symptomatology.  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b) only apply to diseases recognized by VA as "chronic."  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (b), 3.309(a).  Chronic diseases that become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of termination of active duty may be presumed to have been incurred in service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

If a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service, the following diseases shall be service-connected if the requirements of §3.307(a)(6) are met even though there is no record of such disease during service, provided further that the rebuttable presumption provisions of § 3.307(d) are also satisfied.  AL amyloidosis, chloracne or other acneform disease consistent with chloracne, type 2 diabetes (also known as Type II diabetes mellitus or adult-onset diabetes), Hodgkin's disease, ischemic heart disease (including, but not limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction; atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease (including coronary spasm) and coronary bypass surgery; and stable, unstable and Prinzmetal's angina), all chronic B-cell leukemias (including, but not limited to, hairy-cell leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia), multiple myeloma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Parkinson's disease, early-onset peripheral neuropathy, porphyria cutanea tarda, prostate cancer, Respiratory cancers (cancer of the lung, bronchus, larynx, or trachea), soft-tissue sarcoma (other than osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, or mesothelioma).  38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). 

The diseases listed at § 3.309(e) shall have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more at any time after service, except that chloracne or other acneform disease consistent with chloracne, porphyria cutanea tarda, and early-onset peripheral neuropathy shall have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within a year after the last date on which the veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(6)(ii).

VA has determined there is no positive association between exposure to herbicides and any other condition for which the Secretary has not specifically determined that a presumption of service connection is warranted.  See Notice, 68 Fed. Reg. 27630-27641 (2003). 

The Board observes that in Combee v. Brown, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that when a Veteran is found not to be entitled to a regulatory presumption of service connection for a given disability the claim must nevertheless be reviewed to determine whether service connection can be established on a direct basis.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed.Cir.1994), reversing in part Combee v. Principi, 4 Vet. App. 78 (1993).

By way of background, the claims file includes a series of March and August 2021 VA examinations with medical opinions.  They feature various negative nexus opinions for causation and aggravation, with rationales citing to evidence in the claims file.

Days later, in the August 2021 rating decision, the RO only accepted remote disability, but no nexus to service.  There is no mention of herbicide exposure.

On appeal, counsel essentially raises that the initial consideration of the presumption of exposure to herbicide agents was overlooked by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Counsel highlights in the June 2022 Brief that the Veteran's service included seven weeks of basic training at Fort McClellan (FTMC) from November 1973 to January 1974, after which time she began experiencing the claimed symptoms around 2000.  During this time, she drank tap water and the training regimen exposed her to the ground.  Counsel alleges that studies have since revealed evidence of herbicide use where the Veteran served, therefore entitling her to a presumption of herbicide exposure.  On page 3 counsel clarifies that this is not a claim based on "Agent Orange" and tactical herbicides, but rather "herbicide agents" as referenced in VA's controlling regulations.  Counsel cites a March 2021 Report from Dr. H. M., an environmental scientist and professor.  Dr. M. concludes that it is more likely than not that those serving at FTMC were exposed to herbicide agents, the same ones used in Vietnam.  

Counsel explicitly asserts later on page 6 that presumptive service connection is warranted based on exposure to herbicide agents.  Counsel cites diagnosed peripheral neuropathy and hypothyroidism.  The Board notes that the cited regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e), encompasses "Early-onset peripheral neuropathy" (emphasis added) and does not include hypothyroidism.  In addition, on page 7, counsel avers that 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e) only requires exposure to an herbicide agent during active military, navy, or air service.  Counsel cites chemical compounds listed in the regulation that were purportedly used as commercial herbicides at FTMC.  He provides a thorough history. 

Also in June 2022, VA received a VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, from the Veteran.  She recounts serving in the Army from November 21, 1973 to September 24, 1979.  Her basic training was at Fort McClellan (FTMC) beginning on November 21, 1973.  The Veteran recalled staying there until after the Christmas holiday break.  She was housed in the barracks, where she showered, drank water, and ate food prepared only using the local tap water.  The intense physical training included crawling in dirt and grassy fields.  During this time, the meals were also heated up in a large pot of water, and canteens were filled from a hose attached to the barracks structure.  Years later, the Veteran's disabilities began to interfere with her stamina, ability to stand, walk, and tactical skills.  The Veteran reports she was diagnosed in 2009 with sarcoidosis and neurogenic bladder at the Kansas City VA Medical Center (VAMC). 

Under these circumstances, the Board finds counsel's argument persuasive to the extent he has submitted evidence of possible herbicide or other toxic chemical use at Fort McClellan.  Although the application of this presumption depends on the location and time of a Veteran's service, exposure to herbicide agents can be shown on a facts-found basis as well.  Hence a remand is necessary in order to contact Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC), National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), or another appropriate agency, to attempt to verify the claimed herbicide exposure.  If a limited time period is necessary to request development (such as a 60-day period), multiple requests should be made to cover the entire time period claimed by the Veteran.  See Gagne v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 397, 404 (2015).  All attempts should be documented in the claims file.  Accordingly, a remand is necessary for the AOJ to undertake these initial verification efforts and reach formal findings regarding claimed herbicide exposure.  In requesting additional development in this case, the Board notes that the basis for this remand arises from deficiencies in the record existing prior to the appealed AMA decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please undertake development to determine if herbicide agents were used when and where the Veteran served at Fort McClellan.  Contact the Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC), National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), or any other appropriate agency or organization for verification of the Veteran's exposure to herbicide agents.  

Specifically, the JSRRC should attempt to verify whether the circumstances of the Veteran's service at Fort McClellan would have exposed her to herbicides.

The Board calls the AOJ's attention to the argument and evidence submitted concerning the Veteran's service, as compiled in the June 2022 Brief. 

All records and/ or responses received should be associated with the claims file.  The non-existence or unavailability of the information and/or records must be verified by each Federal department or agency from which they are sought.  Such verification should be documented for the record and the Veteran should be provided notice of that fact.  Efforts to obtain these records should only end if they do not exist or further efforts to obtain them would be futile.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(2).

2.  If more details are needed, contact the Veteran and her attorney to request the information.  If there is still insufficient information to verify exposure to herbicide agents, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran and her attorney of VA's inability to verify the alleged in-service herbicide agent(s) exposure.

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Bodi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.