Citation Nr: A25032716
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-438278
DATE: April 9, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to service connection for headaches.

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED).

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disorder.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right hand disorder.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder.

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is DENIED.

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for ED is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hand disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disorder is REMANDED.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record does not show a diagnosis of chronic headaches during the pendency of this appeal.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the Armed Forces from October 2011 until July 2013. 

The matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of a November 2023 rating decision.  In April 2023, the RO issued the higher-level review decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its Decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for ED, and left elbow, left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

For the claim decided, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision.

The Board has reviewed all evidence of record regardless of whether it is discussed in detail in the Decision.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDING AND CONCLUSION

I.

Legal Criteria - Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in active military service.  This means that the facts establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces, or if preexisting such service, was aggravated therein.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Establishing direct service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service event, disease, or injury and the present disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge). Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.  

When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

A veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise.  Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

II.

Analysis - Headaches

The Veteran has asserted that he has chronic headaches which are a result of a cervical spine disorder which he had asserted was also due to service.  

The evidence does not establish the first element of service connection, a current disability.  The medical evidence of record post-service spans decades and includes both VA and private treatment records and there is no evidence of a chronic disability of headaches, nor any reasonably attributable symptoms.  Instead, the only mention of headaches in the available post-service treatment records show the Veteran denying headaches.  

Therefore, after a careful review of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for service connection fails because the most probative evidence of record does not show a diagnosis of headaches.  Where the record evidence does not establish that the Veteran currently has the disorder for which service connection is sought, service connection for that disorder is not authorized under the statutes governing veterans' benefits.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 144 (1992).

Accordingly, the Board finds that there is no disability during the relevant appeal period.  As the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claim is denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

III.

ED, Left Wrist, Right Hand & Right Shoulder

The Veteran has been diagnosed with ED, and left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders.  He asserts that his ED is secondary to his service-connected musculoskeletal pain, to specifically include his right elbow disorder, as well as his service-connected psychiatric disorder.  He also contends that his left elbow, left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders are secondary to his service-connected right elbow disorder.  

During the pendency of the appeal, the law of secondary service connection changed materially.   The regulations adopted after, and because of, Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc), provide that service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  And that secondary service connection may be granted for aggravation of a disease or injury by a service-connected disability.  Id. § 3.310(b).  

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) had recent occasion to consider matters relevant to the instant case and their holding illuminates the Board's way (and the RO's on remand). 

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held that: 

§ 1110 [of Title 38 of the United States Code] plainly requires compensation when a service-connected disease or injury is a but-for cause[ ] of a present-day disability.  This broad language applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability.  Stated another way, § 1110 provides for compensation for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause.  Nothing in the statute limits § 1110 to onset or etiological causes of a worsening in functionality.  

Id. at 1364 (alterations added).  

The Federal Circuit concluded the causation standard "proximately due to" under section 3.310(b) of the regulations is inconsistent with section 1110 of the statute and, therefore "unlawful."  Consequently, for "aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities" it is enough to show that "but-for" the service-connected disability the incremental increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury would not have occurred.  Id. at 1364-66.

Here, the record contains etiological opinions for the Veteran's ED, left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders obtained from VA examinations conducted in October 2023.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's ED was not proximately caused by, or due to, his service-connected right elbow disorder, reasoning that a "[r]eview of the available medical literature fails to demonstrate a consensus demonstrating a cause-and-effect relationship between ED issues pathology" (alteration added).  No opinion was rendered with regard to any possible etiological relationship between ED and his service-connected psychiatric disorder.

With regard to the Veteran's left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders, the October 2023 VA examiner provided opinions that it was less likely than not that the disorders were proximately caused by, or due to, his service-connected right elbow disorder.  The examiner provided identical reasoning, noting that a review of the available medical literature failed to demonstrate a consensus demonstrating a cause-and-effect relationship between a right elbow disorder and left wrist, right hand, or right shoulder pathology.  

After careful review, the Board concludes that the October 2023 VA opinions in the record did not address the correct legal standards and the holding in Spicer.  61 F.4th at 1364-66.  The October 2023 VA opinions used the proximate cause standard from the previously controlling regulation, now struck down by the Spicer court.  Accordingly, the Board finds these opinions inadequate because they are premised upon a standard which has departed the firmament; that is to say, it is no longer good law.  

And, so, the claims are remanded for new VA medical opinions in accord with the holding in Spicer.   Id.

IV.

Left Elbow

The Veteran has asserted that he has a left elbow disorder which is secondary to his service-connected right elbow disorder.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2023 and reported that he began experiencing left elbow pain in 2012, which had progressed and worsened over time.  He reported that the pain had gotten more intense and frequent in the preceding ten years.  He denied any pain at the time of the examination, and had a normal range of motion; however, he reported that he treated his pain with over-the-counter pain medications.  He also reported flare-ups daily, lasting approximately one to two hours per day, consisting of aching pain to the medial side of the left elbow.  The Veteran stated that the pain was moderate in intensity, and precipitated by lifting items, reaching for items, opening doors, typing, driving, and writing.  He also reported functional impairment during a flare up in the form of limitations in driving, lifting, reaching, and typing.  Despite the description of these symptoms, the examiner found that the Veteran had no left elbow diagnosis or chronic disorder and did not render an etiological opinion.

In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit concluded that the term "disability", as used in section 1110 of Title 38 of the United States Code, "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability."  Id. at 1363-64.  The case reversed years of precedent that had held that "pain alone is not a disability for the purposes of VA disability compensation."  Sanchez-Benitez v. West, 13 Vet. App. 282 (1999).  In other words, where pain alone results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability.  Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1367-68.

So, the question for the Board is whether deciding the claim without obtaining an addendum VA opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, for which the Board must remand the claim to cure.  Accordingly, the locus of the inquiry is on what was before the RO at the time of the decision on appeal.

In this case, the Board concludes that the October 2023 examination is inadequate for adjudicative purposes as it did not provide an etiological opinion that addressed the holding in Saunders.  For the reasons set forth above, based only on the evidence of the record at the time the RO issued the rating decision on appeal, the Board concludes that an addendum VA opinion should have been obtained prior to a decision being made on this claim.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (holding that once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought).  

The Board concludes that the error must be cured, on remand, by obtaining an addendum VA opinion, as outlined below to include addressing the holding in Saunders.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain addendum opinions to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's ED, left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Another VA examination(s) should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner.  Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to specifically include his psychiatric and right elbow disorders, are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) a "but-for" cause (caused an increase in the severity of, or an inability to treat) of the Veteran's ED, left wrist, right hand, or right shoulder disorders. 

That is, would the Veteran's ED, left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disorders have been less severe "but for" the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the condition resulted in the inability to treat the ED, left wrist, right hand, and right shoulder disability.  Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1364-66.

The clinician is advised there is no temporal requirement to secondary service connection.  In other words, the mere fact that one disorder was diagnosed before the other cannot be the sole reason for a negative opinion.  

In considering any lay statements of record, the clinician should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by a thorough supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed.  

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

They should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion to address the nature and etiology of the claimed left elbow disability.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand Decision, must be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the opinion.  Another examination should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner.  The examiner is asked to offer opinions as to the following:

(a.) The examiner must determine whether any left elbow pain noted during the pendency of this appeal reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity.  Evidence of pain alone that causes functional impairment, even without a specific diagnosis or identifiable disease, may constitute a disability for VA purposes.

(b.) For each diagnosed pain disorder, to include any finding of pain that results in functional impairment of earning capacity, whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to specifically include his right elbow disorder, are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) a "but-for" cause (caused an increase in the severity of, or an inability to treat) of the Veteran's left elbow disorder. 

That is, would the Veteran's left elbow disorder have been less severe "but for" the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the condition resulted in the inability to treat the left elbow disability.  Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1364-66.

The clinician is advised there is no temporal requirement to secondary service connection.  In other words, the mere fact that one disorder was diagnosed before the other cannot be the sole reason for a negative opinion.  

In considering any lay statements of record, the clinician should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by a thorough supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed.  

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

They should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yacoub, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.