Citation Nr: A25032314
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-428415
DATE:    April 8, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the rating for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), from 10 percent to noncompensable, is void ab initio; a rating of 10 percent disabling is restored.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In adjudicating the reduction of the rating for his service-connected GERD, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) did not make a specific determination that there was any improvement in the Veteran's ordinary conditions of his life and work.

2. The Veteran's GERD had at least two of the higher-level symptoms, but his symptoms did not include arm or shoulder pain productive of a considerable impairment of health, as required for a 30 percent rating.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction of the rating for GERD is void ab initio, and the criteria for restoration of the 10 percent rating for this condition are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent rating for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7399-7346. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2009 to December 2009, with additional periods of service in the Air Force Reserve. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the AOJ. 

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 rating decision. In December 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2023 rating decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 rating decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, which was subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Rating Reduction

To properly reduce a disability rating requires VA to meet both procedural and substantive requirements.

Procedurally, where the reduction in the rating of a service-connected disability is considered warranted and the lower evaluation would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, a rating proposing the reduction or discontinuance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). The beneficiary will be notified at their latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level. Id. The veteran must also be informed that he or she may request a pre-determination hearing prior to the reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(1). Following this 60-day period, a final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. Id.

Reducing a rating also brings concurrent substantive requirements that must be followed. Generally, a rating reduction is warranted where reexamination of the disability discloses improvement of that disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c). In making this determination, VA is required to comply with several regulations applicable to all rating-reduction cases, regardless of the rating level or the length of time that the rating has been in effect. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13; Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 213, 413, 420 (1993). 

These provisions impose a clear requirement that VA rating reductions be based upon review of the entire history of the Veteran's disability. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991). Such review requires VA to ascertain, based upon review of the entire recorded history of the condition, whether the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability and whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations. Thus, in any rating reduction case, not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, but also that that improvement actually reflects an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10, 4.13; Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 350 (2000).

Reduction - GERD

VA received the Veteran's service connection claim for GERD on December 17, 2020. A June 2022 HLR rating decision granted service connection, effective December 17, 2020, and assigned an initial 10 percent rating. The Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim in January 2023; an April 2023 rating decision reduced the rating for GERD from 10 percent disabling to noncompensable, effective March 15, 2023.

Here, there was no decrease in the Veteran's overall, combined disability rating as a result of the rating reduction; both before and after the reduction, the Veteran was in receipt of a 70 percent combined rating. As such, the due process requirements outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e) do not apply. However, reducing a rating also brings concurrent substantive requirements that must be followed. Here, it also appears that the rating reduction for the Veteran's GERD was based exclusively on findings made at the March 15, 2023, VA examination. Although the examination may have shown some improvement, the record has not shown sustained improvement under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Indeed, whether there had been improvement under the ordinary conditions of life and work was not at all addressed in the April 2023 rating decision. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420-21 (1993). Instead, the April 2023 rating decision appears to have analyzed the issue of reduction of the rating as it would a claim for an increased rating. The AOJ did not discuss the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 in its analysis; at no time did it address whether there was "an actual improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work." Id.

The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has stated that both decisions by the AOJ and by the Board that do not apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344, when applicable, are void ab initio (i.e., at their inception). Lehman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 339 (1991); Hayes v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1996). As the rating decision reducing the rating for the Veteran's GERD did not properly apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344, the reduction is void. The appropriate remedy in this case is a restoration of the 10 percent rating for GERD, effective on the date of the reduction. Hayes v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1996). The Board thus finds that the Veteran's 10 percent rating for the service-connected GERD was improperly reduced, and previous rating should be restored.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged" rating is required. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999). VA adjudicators must consider whether to assign different ratings at different times during the rating period to compensate the Veteran for times when the disability may have been more severe than at others. The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) since has extended this practice even to established ratings, not just initial ratings. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Increased Rating - GERD

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a compensable rating for the service-connected GERD.

A June 2022 rating decision granted service connection for GERD and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective December 17, 2020, the date of the Veteran's original claim for service connection. Following the January 2023 supplemental claim, an April 2023 rating decision decreased the 10 percent rating to noncompensable (0 percent). Following the December 2023 HLR rating decision, the Veteran's April 2024 VA Form 10182 showed disagreement with the December 2023 rating decision. As the Board has found the rating reduction void and restored the 10 percent rating, and the Veteran's claim was continuously pursued since his original date of claim, it will adjudicate whether the Veteran is entitled to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent disabling from December 17, 2020. 

VA recently amended the Rating Schedule for evaluating digestive system disabilities effective May 19, 2024. See 89 Fed. Reg. 19735 (March 18, 2024). These revisions apply to all applications for benefits received by the VA or that are pending before the AOJ on or after May 19, 2024. Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both the old and new rating criteria and the criteria which is more favorable to the Veteran's claim will be applied. However, the Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise. See Kuzma v. Principi, 241 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). The Board is not precluded from applying the prior version of an applicable regulation to the period on or after the effective date of the new regulation if the prior version was in effect during the pendency of the claim (as in this appeal).

At the time of the rating decision on appeal, GERD was not listed specifically in the Rating Schedule. When an unlisted disease or injury is encountered, it will be rated by analogy under a diagnostic code built up using the first 2 digits from that part of the Rating Schedule most closely identifying the body part or system affected and by using "99" for the last 2 digits. Id. Here, the most analogous diagnostic code is Diagnostic Code 7346 for hiatal hernia. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.20 (Analogous ratings). Thus, the Veteran's GERD is rated under Diagnostic Code 7399-7346.

Diagnostic Code 7346 assigns a 10 percent rating when GERD manifests with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent rating of less severity. A 30 percent rating is assigned when GERD manifests as persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. A maximum 60 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7346. The Rating Schedule does not define "considerable" impairment of health; however, for reference, "considerable" is defined as "large in extent or degree." MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 267, 1140 (11th ed. 2012). 

Beginning May 19, 2024, GERD is rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7206, and assigns a 10 percent rating for documented history of esophageal stricture(s) that require daily medications to control dysphagia otherwise asymptomatic. A 30 percent rating is warranted for documented history of recurrent esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than 2 times per year; a 50 percent rating is warranted for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires at least one of the following (1) dilatation 3 or more times per year, (2) dilatation using steroids at least one time per year, or (3) esophageal stent placement; and an 80 percent rating is warranted for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia with at least one of the symptoms present: (1) aspiration, (2) undernutrition, and/or (3) substantial weight loss as defined by § 4.112(a) and treatment with either surgical correction of esophageal stricture(s) or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube). Note (1) states the findings must be documented by barium swallow, computerized tomography, or esophagogastroduodenoscopy. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7206.

The criteria are conjunctive, meaning that each element of the criteria is needed to meet the requirements for the specified evaluation. See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision means that all the conditions listed in the provision must be met).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2020. The Veteran reported impaired sleep from a burning throat, and burping with regurgitation. He noted having diet modifications. The examiner noted the following GERD symptoms: pyrosis, regurgitation, and sleep disturbances caused by reflux. There was no evidence of esophageal stricture, spasms of the esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus. The examiner specifically indicated that there was no substernal or arm or shoulder pain, or symptoms productive of considerable impairment of health.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2021. The Veteran reported reflux, regurgitation, and sleep disturbances. The examiner noted the following GERD symptoms: pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, and sleep disturbances caused by reflux. There was no evidence of esophageal stricture, spasms of the esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus. The examiner specifically indicated that there was no substernal or arm or shoulder pain, or symptoms productive of considerable impairment of health.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2023. The Veteran reported reflux and heartburn. The examiner noted the following GERD symptoms: pyrosis and reflux. There was no evidence of esophageal stricture, spasms of the esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus. The examiner specifically indicated that there was no substernal or arm or shoulder pain, or symptoms productive of considerable impairment of health. The examiner noted that the diagnosis had changed from GERD to reflux esophagitis.

The Veteran provided a written statement regarding his GERD symptoms in January 2023. He reported having heartburn, acid reflux, regurgitation, a feeling like there is a lump in his throat, and upper abdominal pain. He reported avoiding certain foods and could not eat late in the day or at night because his regurgitation would be worse. He also noted having chest pain when having a GERD flare-up. He also noted having vitamin deficiencies. He also reported having to raise the head of his bed to fall asleep. Even with such accommodations, he reported still being unable to sleep well, and noted that his lack of sleep caused daytime fatigue, mood changes, and difficulty concentrating and handling stressful situations.

The Veteran provided a private examination report from January 2023. The private examiner noted a review of Diagnostic Code 7346, the June 2022 rating decision, and the Veteran's January 2023 written statement. The examiner found that the Veteran's GERD symptoms included physical symptoms of GERD and emotional, psychological, and spiritual impacts, to include daytime fatigue, weight gain, social impairment, personality changes, difficulty concentrating, impaired thought processes, impaired judgment, memory difficulty, disturbances of motivation and modo, difficulty with fluid communication, mood changes, flattened affect, impaired impulse control, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, paranoia, sexual disinterest, weakened immune system, poor balance, increased risk for accidents, and increased risk for diseases. The examiner noted the Veteran's January 2023 written statement and found that his GERD symptoms most closely approximated the criteria for a 60 percent rating, based upon his symptom combination productive of severe impairment of health. 

A review of the Veteran's post-service VA treatment records shows that he was being followed for GERD. In October 2022, he denied nausea or vomiting. In February 2023, he denied heartburn and problems with swallowing. In December 2022, he reported having heartburn. In March 2023, he denied nausea and vomiting. 

Here, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD is not warranted. While the claims file establishes that the Veteran experienced persistently recurrent epigastric distress, in the form of pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, and sleep disturbances caused by reflux, neither the VA examiners of record, the private examiner, nor the Veteran have indicated that dysphagia was a symptom of the Veteran's GERD. In this regard, the Veteran denied problems with swallowing in February 2023, and there was otherwise no indication that he has ever had trouble swallowing. Further, there has been no showing that the Veteran's persistently recurrent epigastric distress is accompanied by substernal, arm, or shoulder pain, or that it is productive of considerable impairment of health. As discussed, Diagnostic Code 7346 requires all of the listed symptoms to he shown. Melson, supra. Given that dysphagia and arm or shoulder pain have not been shown, and the chest pain noted by the Veteran in his lay statement is not shown by the record to result in considerable impairment of health, the criteria for a 30 percent rating are not met. 

Regarding the amended criteria, the Board recognizes that as the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket, and as such, the Board's consideration of evidence is limited to what was in the record at the time of the April 2023 rating decision. However, in considering that evidence, the competent evidence of record also does not show a documented history of recurrent esophageal strictures causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than 2 times per year, dilation using steroids, esophagal stent placement, aspiration, undernutrition, substantial weight loss, surgical correction of esophagal strictures, or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube). As such, an increased rating based on the amended criteria, as of the date the amended criteria went into effect, is also not warranted. 

To that end, the Board acknowledges the report of the private provider but affords it very little probative weight because its findings are not supported by the record. In this regard, the provider did not conduct an interview or examination of the Veteran. The provider essentially relied on the Veteran's January 2023 written statement to conclude that the Veteran's GERD included physical symptoms of GERD, with emotional, psychological, and spiritual impacts. However, the provider did not explain how he came to such conclusions. The clinical evidence of record is void of any indication that the Veteran's GERD caused the significant symptoms outlined by the private provider. Even to the extent that the Board could accept the provider's finding that the Veteran's GERD caused emotional, psychological, and spiritual impacts, the fact remains that the criteria under Diagnostic Code 7346 are conjunctive, and the criteria for a higher rating are not demonstrated. 

The Board is sympathetic towards the Veteran's assertion that a 60 percent rating is warranted for the service-connected GERD. The Board recognizes that his GERD causes him hardship and impairment. However, as discussed, he has not met the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent. While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability of his GERD according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1995); Cartwright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991). To that end, evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him during the current appeal, deemed competent by the Board's review, and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings directly address the criteria under which these disabilities are evaluated. Without competent, probative evidence showing that the Veteran's GERD results in dysphasia or considerable impairment of health, the criteria for a 30 percent rating are not met. As such, an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD is not warranted.

The Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is inapplicable, because the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of higher ratings beyond that awarded by this decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fu, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.