Citation Nr: A25032790
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231012-383898
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

An increased initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left-sided lumbar radiculopathy is remanded.

An increased initial rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army during the Gulf War Era from November 1990 to February 1995.

In August 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (Appeals Modernization Act or AMA), which created a new claims and appeals process for pursuing VA benefits. All initial rating decisions issued after February 19, 2019, are promulgated under the AMA. The rating decision preceding this appeal is a Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision issued in August 2023 following a May 2023 HLR Request in response to an August 2022 rating decision (the rating decision on appeal). Thus, the August 2022 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the AMA applies. 

In his timely October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. If the evidence was submitted after this time, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims, any evidence the Board could not consider with respect to those issues will be considered by the AOJ on remand. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Disability Evaluation of Left-Sided Lumbar Radiculopathy

Disability Evaluation of Degenerative Arthritis of the Lumbar Spine

The Veteran contends that the symptoms of his left-sided lumbar radiculopathy and degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine are worse than contemplated by their currently assigned initial 20 percent evaluations.

After a review of the record, the Board determines that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

VA's duty to assist includes providing an adequate medical examination and opinion. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Estimated ranges of motion (ROM) should be provided during flare-ups, if feasible, even if the Veteran is not experiencing one during the examination. See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2022. The examiner did not provide estimations for ROM measurements during a flare-up. While it is unclear whether the Veteran told the examiner that he experiences flare-ups, his post-service medical records clearly evidence that he does experience them. See January 2022, June 2021, May 2021, and April 2020 Treatment Notes; June 2017 VA Examination. Thus, the box checked "No" as to whether the Veteran reports flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine is contrary to the evidence of record and the examiner's failure to provide estimated ROM measurements during flare-ups in light of such evidence renders the examination report inadequate under Sharp.

Therefore, the Board finds it is necessary to remand the Veteran's claims to correct this duty to assist error and obtain a new medical opinion and, if necessary, a new medical examination.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. The AOJ must obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician (and examination if deemed necessary by the clinician), to determine the severity of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar disabilities. The clinician should provide a full description of the disabilities and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disabilities under the rating criteria.

The claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be provided to, and reviewed by, the VA clinician. The VA clinician is asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Describe/discuss the severity (i.e., manifestations and symptoms) of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar disabilities throughout the appeal period (from March 26, 2021, to the present).

(b.) Discuss whether the Veteran's lumbar disabilities resulted in any functional impairment during the pendency of the claim AND if these disabilities impacted any activities of daily living. If so, please describe the functional impairment and impact.

(c.) Obtain the ROM Measurements, or provide an opinion ESTIMATING the ROM measurements, of the Veteran's lumbar disabilities during FLARE-UPS.

All opinions must be accompanied by a thorough explanation that is consistent with the evidence of record. A discussion of the pertinent evidence, including the Veteran's statements, any relevant medical treatises, and generally accepted medical principles, is requested.

If the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must provide an explanation as to why that is so. In so doing, the clinician should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of the need for additional information, or whether he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer.

The clinician is reminded that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which the Veteran has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptoms. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

2. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's appealed issues in light of the totality of evidence of record. If any benefit sought is not granted to the fullest extent, the AOJ must provide the Veteran and his attorney with a copy of the readjudication and afford them an appropriate period to respond.

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Samantha A. Meadows

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.