Citation Nr: A25032509
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240913-473720
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

The weight of the evidence persuasively demonstrates that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder began during military service and continued since then.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for unspecified depressive disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1111, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from October 1965 to February 1969.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

This appeal has been advanced on the docket. 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).

Service connection for unspecified depressive disorder

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for unspecified depressive disorder because it began in service. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he had a "love affair that had gone sideways." He also asserts that he witnessed three plane crashes during service. See March 2024 VA examination.

For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that unspecified depressive disorder began in military service. Entitlement to service connection for the unspecified depressive disorder is warranted.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In adjudicating these claims, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of the Veteran. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology and "may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection." Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 405 (1995).

Evidence Review

The service treatment records (STRs) are silent as to any in-service treatment, diagnosis or complaint of symptoms.

The Veteran was provided a March 2024 VA mental disorders examination, in which examiner K.M. determined a diagnosis of unspecified depressive disorder. The Veteran reported that he became depressed while in service. The Veteran indicated he had a "love affair that had gone sideways." He also reported that he witnessed three plane crashes while in service and did not realize at the time how much these incidents bothered him. The Veteran reported that he has mild, ongoing symptoms of depression, including difficulty with sleep, low motivation, low energy and fatigue.

In the related March 2024 medical opinion, examiner K.M. opined that it was less likely than not that the unspecified depressive disorder was related to service. The examiner provided this rationale: "Though Veteran gave credible account of development depression during service, there are no corresponding STRs described treatment for depression or other mental illness. All entrance and in-service documents are silent for mental health concerns or complaints. Further, there are no post-service treatment records citing symptoms or treatment related to depression."

The Veteran provided an October 2024 private medical opinion by J.B., PhD, psychologist. J.B. reviewed the entire file, including the March 2024 VA examination and conducted a video examination of the Veteran. The Veteran reported onset of symptoms in service. "During military service he stated others observed emergent behavioral and mood changes and he did 'see someone' but did not describe any on-going military mental health care or prescription of medications. Since military separation he described some limited mental health care around 2005 but with no consistent mental health care since this time. Regarding the absence of mental health care in the military the claimant stated that in his experience and era of service admitting to or seeking mental health care was highly looked down upon. He was at time very aware that both supervisors as well as military peers would frown upon doing so." The Veteran reported that since military separation, he experienced pervasive symptoms of depression that were present well before the death of his spouse from cancer in 2001 and made coping with the loss more difficult. The Veteran reported that his coping mechanism is emotional and physical withdrawal and avoidance. The Veteran reported that while he met all basic expectations at work, it was primarily because he was allowed to work alone, to start and stop as needed, and work more when less symptomatic to make up for periods of less productivity and come in after hours to complete work. The Veteran reported mood as dysphoric but stable.

Analysis

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ noted a diagnosis of unspecified depressive disorder. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. Therefore, the first element for service connection has been met.

Turning to the second element of service connection, the Board observes that the STRs are silent. Because his military occupational specialty (MOS) required flight status, the Veteran had a periodic flight examination every two years while he was in active service and while he was in the Air Force Reserves after transferring out of active service.

The Veteran provided lay statements at the March 2024 VA examination, and to the private examiner that his symptoms of depression began in service.

The Board finds the Veteran's statements about experiencing depression in service credible. The Veteran is competent to report on the presence of his own observable symptomatology.

Significantly, in the private opinion, the Veteran provided a lay statement that reasonably explained the silence of the STRs: "Regarding the absence of mental health care in the military the claimant stated that in his experience and era of service admitting to or seeking mental health care was highly looked down upon. He was at time very aware that both supervisors as well as military peers would frown upon doing so." That the Veteran would be discouraged from seeking mental health care by the expectations of superiors and peers is reasonable on its face. Because the Veteran was still able to successfully complete assigned tasks by working more when less symptomatic to make up for periods of lower productivity, he would have been generally able to conceal the effect of his depression, including during routine examinations. It is also noteworthy that his MOS required regular examinations to maintain flight status. Reporting his symptoms might have resulted in revocation of his flight status.

Thus, the Board finds that the second element, an in-service event of symptoms of depression is met, based on the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements.

As for the third element, a causal relationship between the present disability and the in-service event, there is both evidence for and against a relationship (nexus).

Evidence for a relationship includes the Veteran's lay statements and the private medical opinion. Evidence against a relationship is the March 2024 VA medical opinion which found that the unspecified depressive disorder was less likely than not related to military service.

Considering first the March 2024 medical opinion, the Board finds it insufficient as it relied impermissibly on an absence of contemporaneous medical evidence. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (stating that an examiner's opinion failed to consider whether lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of the Veteran's disability such that his claim could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence).

It is well established in Veterans' law that lay statements constitute evidence and must be evaluated like any other evidence in the record. That is, they are subject to determinations of credibility and competence and given weight. But the absence of medical evidence, by itself, does not demonstrate the absence of a disability. That is, it must be established first why the silence of the medical record matters before attempting to show that the silence of the record is substantive proof of the disability not existing. Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 272 (2015) (stating that the Board must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation); see also, Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011) (stating that "[w]hen assessing a claim, the Board may not consider the absence of evidence as substantive negative evidence.").

As noted above, the Veteran has provided a reasonable explanation for why the STRs were silent, and the VA medical opinion does not provide any rationale to refute this. Indeed, the VA examiner specifically noted that the Veteran gave a credible account of the development of depression during service. If the Veteran lacked credibility that would be one thing, but nothing in the VA medical opinion suggests this, in fact, the very opposite.

Turning to the private medical opinion, the Board grants great probative weight based on the examiner's expertise, thorough review of the entire file, examination of the Veteran, and thorough rationale. The Veteran's credible lay statements describe a condition that has lasted continuously since service. Examiner J.B. opined that it was at least as likely as not that the diagnosed unspecified depressive disorder began in military service and has continued since then.

Here, the private medical opinion and the Veteran's competent and credible statements provide a nexus linking his current unspecified depressive disorder to his in-service symptoms of depression. Thus, these statements are entitled to great probative weight.

Based on the above, the Board finds the evidence persuasively favors that the Veteran's current unspecified depressive disorder is related to service. Entitlement to service connection for unspecified depressive disorder is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

JOHN Z. JONES

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Schneider, Joan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.