Citation Nr: A25032902
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-423854
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

1. An earlier effective date prior to May 20, 2023 for the award of an increased 50 percent disability rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied. 

2. Entitlement to a disability rating for PTSD in excess of 50 percent is denied.

3. Entitlement to a total disability rating for compensation based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

1. VA received an intent to file a claim for compensation from the Veteran on September 5, 2022. Prior to VA's receipt of his May 20, 2023 Supplemental Claim for an increased rating for PTSD, VA received a September 26, 2022, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim for separate claims, unrelated to the present matter.

2. It is not factually ascertainable that the Veteran's PTSD met the criteria for a higher rating within one year prior to VA's receipt of his May 20, 2023, VA 21-526EZ.

3. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD has not been manifested by occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

4. The Veteran is not precluded from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation due to service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date earlier than May 20, 2023, for the award of a 50 percent disability rating for PTSD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

2. The criteria for an increased disability rating for PTSD in excess of 50 percent have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

3. The criteria for a TDIU rating have not been met for the period on appeal. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served active duty in the Marine Corps from May 2008 to April 2012.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision from the agency of original jurisdiction that continued a 50 percent disability rating for the Veteran's PTSD. The Veteran initially filed a VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application, for an increased rating for the service-connected psychiatric disorder on May 20, 2023. In a September 2023 rating decision, the Veteran's disability rating for the service-connected psychiatric disorder was increased to 50 percent, effective May 20, 2023. The Veteran filed another Supplemental Claim in September 2023, seeking an increased disability rating for the service-connected psychiatric disorder, as well as an earlier effective date for the prior award of a 50 percent disability rating. Thereafter, the current rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024, to which the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, in March 2024, selecting the Direct Review docket.

Under the Direct Review docket of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As an initial matter, the Veteran's particular claims relating to his psychiatric disorder and TDIU involve a level of subjectivity, dependent on an accurate reporting of facts, symptoms, and treatment history. Although the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms, the record demonstrates inconsistencies in the Veteran's reporting of essential facts which damage the Veteran's overall credibility.

Notably, the Veteran's claims are based primarily on the severity of his social and occupational dysfunction as a result of PTSD symptoms. The Veteran has reported to multiple examiners during the period on appeal as to his "declining" social circle, social isolation, interpersonal difficulties, and lack of meaningful relationships. On VA examination in July 2023, the Veteran reported that he was single, lived alone, and was not dating. Based on the Veteran's self-reporting, a disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) completed by a private provider and submitted by the Veteran in late September 2023 indicated the Veteran to have an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. On a subsequent VA examination in December 2023, the Veteran reported that he has no social support, remains single, and lives alone. 

However, less than one month after the Veteran's December 2023 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-686c, Application Request to Add And/Or Remove Dependents, in which the Veteran reported that he was married on September 20, 2023, and that he and his wife live together. The Veteran's relationship, marriage, and cohabitation were not reflected on any of three VA psychiatric examinations or the DBQ submitted by the Veteran, all of which were completed between June 2023 and December 2023. The Veteran provided detailed descriptions as to his lack of social support, single relationship status, solo living, and romantic difficulties, without mentioning that he had a girlfriend, fiancée, or wife. The DBQ submitted by the Veteran, which indicated the Veteran to have an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships was completed less than one week after the Veteran's wedding date in September 2023, and made no mention of the Veteran's recent marriage. The Veteran continued to report that he was single on examination three months after his wedding in December 2023.  

Such findings not only suggest that the Veteran has not been open and honest about his condition and overall functioning, but show clear misrepresentations in the Veteran's reporting of key facts, such as stating that he was single and living alone three months after his wedding, when the Veteran subsequently confirmed his ongoing marriage and cohabitation on his VA Form 21-686c while seeking to enhance his VA benefits. Inadvertent or otherwise, the Board finds the inconsistencies described above undermine the Veteran's overall credibility and reduce the probative value of the Veteran's lay statements, as well as medical assessments that are dependent on the Veteran's self-reporting.

Earlier Effective Dates

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance, shall be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. The effective date of an award of service connection shall be the day following the date of discharge or release if application is received within one year from such date of discharge or release. Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

To preserve an effective date, an intent to file a claim may be submitted to VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b). Upon receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will furnish the claimant with the appropriate application form prescribed by the Secretary. If VA receives a complete application form prescribed by the Secretary, appropriate to the benefit sought within one-year of receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received. In the event multiple complete claims for a benefit are filed within 1 year of an intent to file a claim for that benefit, only the first claim filed will be associated with the intent to file a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(ii).

The regulation 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(1)(ii) provides that if multiple complete forms for benefits (e.g., compensation benefits) are received within one year of an intent to file a claim for those benefits, only the first claim for those general benefits that was filed will be associated with the intent to file a claim for that general type of benefits. This is the exact situation the AOJ faced in September 2023, when it awarded an increased disability rating of 50 percent for PTSD effective May 20, 2023, the date in which the Veteran's Supplemental Claim was received. 

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the award of the increased 50 percent disability rating for PTSD that took effect May 20, 2023. The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an effective date of September 5, 2022, the date that the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0996, Intent to File a Claim.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's VA Form 21-0966 was received by VA on September 5, 2022. On September 26, 2022, VA received the Veteran's Fully Developed Claim form for service connection for a skin condition; headaches; hearing loss; tinnitus; joint pain; bilateral shoulder condition; neck condition; back condition; bilateral knee condition; bilateral foot condition; sleep apnea; and respiratory condition. Notably, the claim did not relate to an increased disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder. The Veteran's increased rating claim for PTSD was initiated through the submission of a Supplemental Claim in May 2023, as discussed above.

The Board finds that an effective date earlier than May 20, 2023, for the award of an increased disability rating for PTSD is not warranted. Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(ii), if VA receives multiple claims within one year of an intent to file a claim, only the first claim filed will be associated with the intent to file a claim. Here, the Veteran filed multiple claims within one year of his September 5, 2022 Intent to File a Claim form, including 12 service-connection claims in late September 2022. Because of the service-connection claims received by VA on September 26, 2022, the effective date of the award of an increased 50 percent disability rating for PTSD cannot be September 5, 2022 on the basis proposed by the Veteran, as the Intent to File was effectively closed out when VA received the Veteran's September 26, 2022 service-connection claims. 

Instead, the effective date of the increased rating is either the date of receipt of claims, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. In this context, the effective date of May 20, 2023 is appropriate and most favorable to the Veteran.

The Board acknowledges that an exception to that rule applies, however, where the evidence demonstrates that a factually ascertainable increase in disability occurred within the one-year period preceding the date of receipt of a claim for increased compensation. If an increase in disability is factually ascertainable within one year prior to the receipt of the claim, the rating will be effective as of the date of increase; however, if the increase occurred more than one year prior to receipt of the claim, the increase will be effective on the date of claim. Further, if the increase occurred after the date of claim, the effective date will be the date of increase. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(2); Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125 (1997); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(1)(2); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).

Thus, the assignment of an effective date for an increased rating turns not only on the date of claim, but also on whether the evidence demonstrates that a factually ascertainable increase in disability occurred within the one-year period preceding the date of receipt of the Veteran's increased rating claim, which was received on May 20, 2023.

The Board has examined the evidence of record to determine if any increase in disability was ascertainable in the year prior to the date of receipt of the claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o); see also Quarles v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 129, 134 (1992).

However, there exists no competent and credible evidence that establishes a factually ascertainable increase in the severity of the Veteran's PTSD in the year prior to May 20, 2023. There are no psychiatric treatment records during that period and the Veteran has generally denied receiving any mental health treatment. The Veteran submitted a private evaluation from a licensed professional counselor, Tanika Black, in September 2022 in which she opined that the Veteran had a psychiatric diagnosis that is related to service. In providing an opinion, she listed symptoms and stated that they were indicative of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. However, this assessment was undated and provided no context as to the onset of any of the Veteran's symptoms or diagnoses. Thus, the private opinion submitted in September 2022 does not provide evidence of a factually ascertainable increase in the severity of the Veteran's condition within a year prior to May 20, 2023. Additionally, Ms. Black provided no rationale or support for her opinion or conclusions, instead listing only symptoms based on the Veteran's lay statements that are not found to be credible. Despite sweeping conclusions as to the level of the Veteran's occupational impairment, Ms. Black made no mention of the Veteran's active employment at the time of evaluation. 

Furthermore, to the extent that Ms. Black offered an expert opinion related to specialized psychological processes, symptoms, or assessments, the private provider's opinion is afforded minimal probative value as it does not meet the criteria provided in VA's Adjudication Procedure Manual (M21-1 IV.i.3.A.1.i.). While the Board is not bound by the Manual, it finds that it is instructive. Pursuant to M21-1 IV.i.3.A.1.i, in order to conduct an examination for mental disorders, the examiner must meet one of the following criteria: a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist; a licensed doctorate-level psychologist; a doctorate-level mental health provider under the close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist; a psychiatry resident under close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist; or a clinical or counseling psychologist completing a one-year internship or residency (for purposes of a doctorate-level degree) under close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist. 

Thus, Ms. Black is not found to be fully qualified to provide an expert psychological evaluation. While she is competent to report observations and medical symptomatology consistent with her training, education, and experience, her assessment reflects only a conclusory opinion based on a list of criterion, without a rationale. This opinion does little more than recite a history relayed by the Veteran. It contains only a list of symptoms provided by the Veteran without discussion of supporting evidence of objective clinical findings. Accordingly, the Board assigns it no probative weight. See LeShore v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 406, 409 (stating that the mere transcription of medical history does not transform the information into competent medical evidence merely because the transcriber happens to be a medical professional). 

Although subsequent records documented after May 20, 2023 show the Veteran to indicate generally worsening of his PTSD over time, they do not establish worsening specifically in the one-year prior to May 20, 2023, and otherwise do not provide factually ascertainable evidence of worsening during the timeframe at issue. The Board has explained above why the Veteran's lay statements regarding his condition/functioning are not credible and, therefore, such retrospective lay statements from the Veteran cannot serve to establish a factually ascertainable worsening of the Veteran's PTSD. 

Given this, the effective date may not be earlier than the date of the Veteran's claim for the benefit on appeal, which is May 20, 2023. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. Accordingly, entitlement to an effective date earlier than May 20, 2023, for the award of a 50 percent disability rating for PTSD is denied.

Increased Rating

VA has adopted a Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Schedule) to evaluate service-connected disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part IV. Disability evaluations assess the ability of the body as a whole, the psyche, or a body system or organ to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, to include employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. The percentage ratings in the Schedule represent the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from service-connected diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The percentage ratings are generally adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the disability. Id. 

In disability rating cases, VA assesses the level of disability and determines whether the level of disability warrants the assignment of different disability ratings at different times over the course of the claim, a practice known as "staged ratings." See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). When all the evidence is assembled, the Board is then responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding an issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

In deciding claims, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss every piece of evidence submitted by the Veteran or on his behalf. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim. See Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

The Veteran's service-connected PTSD has been evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 using the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, which assigns ratings based on particular symptoms and the resulting functional impairments. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.  

Under DC 9411, a 50 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped, speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The symptoms associated with each rating in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list; rather, they serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Thus, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the DC. See id. VA must consider all symptoms of a veteran's disorder that affect his or her occupational and social impairment. See id. at 443. If the evidence demonstrates that a veteran has symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the DC, the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned. Id. In this regard, VA shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and a veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. Although VA considers the level of social impairment, it does not assign an evaluation based solely on social impairment. Id. VA must consider all the Veteran's symptoms and resulting functional impairment as shown by the evidence in assigning the appropriate rating and will not rely solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination. See id.

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's increased rating claim. The reasons follow.

The Veteran underwent a VA psychological examination in June 2023. The Veteran reported feeling uneasy around others, not liking big crowds, and that his social circle had progressively declined. He reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, sleep impairment, flashbacks, hypervigilance, romantic problems, and cognitive deficits. He reported going to the gym regularly and going on walks with his dogs. The Veteran reported that he worked in construction since 2016 as a coordinator, working for four, different companies during that time. He reported calling in sick regularly. Of his three prior construction jobs, he reported quitting two of them, and being fired from one. He reported that his current boss told him that continued absences could impact his job in the future. The examiner noted the Veteran to experience depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran was cooperative, polite, alert, and fully oriented, with appropriate hygiene. He exhibited no psychomotor abnormalities. The Veteran had a linear and goal-directed thought process, intact cognitive function, fair insight and judgement, and no suicidal ideation. The examiner found that the Veteran's condition resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The Veteran underwent another VA psychological examination in July 2023. He reported continued symptomology as discussed above. Although the Veteran would be married in less than two months, he asserted that he was single and not dating. He reported continuing to work in construction. The examiner noted the Veteran experienced chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, and disturbances of motivation or mood. The Veteran was again found to be polite and cooperative, alert, and fully oriented, with intact attention and concentration, logical thought content, no perceptual abnormalities, and some delayed recall. He again denied any suicidal ideation, despite a history of morbid thoughts. The examiner found the Veteran's condition to result in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication. 

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a DBQ completed by private certified physician's assistant Tracy Connor-Riddick. Ms. Connor-Riddick found the Veteran to experience significant social and occupational impairments due to ongoing excessive fatigue due to lack of sleep from his psychiatric disorders, which cause him to call out from work. Her report focused on the Veteran's disrupted sleep patterns and daytime fatigue, but she checked boxes indicating a range of severe symptoms, including difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; and disorientation to time and place. She found the Veteran's condition to result in total social and occupational impairment. 

The Board does not find the September 2023 DBQ to be probative. Ms. Connor-Riddick's assessment indicated the Veteran's condition resulted in total occupational impairment without reconciling that the Veteran was actively employed and had generally maintained stable longterm employment in one field at the time of evaluation. She found the Veteran's condition to result in total social impairment without any mention of the fact that the Veteran was married less than a week prior to the time of evaluation. Thus, it appears that Ms. Connor-Riddick's assessment was based on an inaccurate factual premise. She did not provide an explanation or rationale regarding noted severe symptoms, which are generally not demonstrated elsewhere on multiple VA examinations both before and after the time of the September 2023 assessment, such as an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including personal hygiene; and disorientation to time or place. Contrary to findings on the September 2023 DBQ, the record generally documents the Veteran to be fully alert and oriented with intact cognitive function and adequate grooming and hygiene.   

Additionally, to the extent that the September 2023 private examiner offered an expert opinion related to specialized psychological processes, symptoms, or assessments, the private provider's opinion is afforded minimal probative value as it does not meet the criteria provided in VA's Adjudication Procedure Manual (M21-1 IV.i.3.A.1.i.). As discussed above, pursuant to M21-1 IV.i.3.A.1.i, in order to conduct an examination for mental disorders, the examiner must meet one of the following criteria: a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist; a licensed doctorate-level psychologist; a doctorate-level mental health provider under the close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist; a psychiatry resident under close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist; or a clinical or counseling psychologist completing a one-year internship or residency (for purposes of a doctorate-level degree) under close supervision of a board-certified or board-eligible psychiatrist or licensed doctorate-level psychologist. 

Thus, while Ms. Connor-Reddick is not found to be fully qualified to provide an expert psychological evaluation, she is competent to report observations and medical symptomatology consistent with his/her training, education, and experience. However, as discussed below, the September 2023 private evaluation is shown to be primarily based on the Veteran's lay statements and reflect minimal objective clinical findings.

In contrast to the VA examinations discussed herein, the DBQ also did not contain independent observations or a concurrent mental status examination, with Ms. Connor-Riddick focusing primarily on the Veteran's sleep difficulties/symptoms which she did not observe. Thus, it appears that the private evaluation was based primarily on the Veteran's lay statements, which are not found to be credible. Documented contemporaneous findings on mental status examination during the period at issue reflect the Veteran to be polite, cooperative, and fully alert and oriented, with intact hygiene, and adequate hygiene and grooming, without evidence supporting that the Veteran experiences disorientation to time and place, or neglects personal hygiene, or has trouble understanding complex commands. For the reasons discussed above, the September 2023 private DBQ is afforded minimal probative value and is found less probative than the VA examinations discussed herein. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in December 2023. The Veteran reported that he was currently unemployed, his last employment being terminated because he stopped showing up to work. Despite subsequent evidence of his recent marriage, the Veteran reported being single, living alone, and having no social support. The Veteran denied receiving any mental health treatment. The examiner documented the Veteran experienced depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of mood or motivation, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and suicidal ideation. The Veteran was noted to present as fully oriented with appropriate grooming and hygiene, goal-directed and linear speech, intact thought process, no evidence of psychotic symptoms, and no suicidal ideation. The examiner found the Veteran's condition to result in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

In Bankhead v. Shulkin, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) wrote the Board must consider the effects of each of a veteran's mental symptoms on his or her own social and occupational situation and undertake "a holistic analysis." 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). When evaluating the severity of a psychiatric disorder, a factfinder should focus on a symptom's effects to determine the level of impairment. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 426, 443 (2002). Thus, in taking a holistic approach in assessing the Veteran's condition, focusing on a symptom's effects, an evaluator may reasonably conclude that a veteran experienced a symptom associated with a 70 percent disability rating, but conclude that the Veteran's overall level of social and occupational functioning is more closely reflected by a lower rating. The VA examination reports discussed above are not rendered inadequate or not probative based on its notation of the Veteran experiencing symptoms that may be associated with higher disability rating than assessed by the examiner. 

Otherwise, while the adjudicator makes the determination of what evaluation is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder, the conclusions of the multiple VA examiners between June 2023 and December 2023 that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was summarized best by the criteria described for a 50 percent rating, or lower, is evidence against a finding that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder warrants a 70 percent rating or higher. These examination reports are found to be adequate, as they were completed by qualified medical professionals, who personally examined the Veteran, provided clinical findings necessary to make a rating evaluation, and made conclusions supported by their contemporaneous clinical observations, not fully dependent on the Veteran's lay statements.

The Board acknowledges that the record indicates that the September 2023 DBQ and December 2023 VA examination reflect the Veteran experiences suicidal ideation among his listed symptoms. However, the facts of this case are distinguishable from those described in Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017), in which the Court held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130).

Under the facts of Bankhead, the claimant was noted to have had recurrent suicidal thoughts and behaviors of varying severity, frequency, and duration throughout the relevant appeal period. Here, the Veteran's reports of suicidal ideation do not cause the level of occupational and social impairment contemplated by the 70 percent disability rating. The Board acknowledges that passive suicidal ideation does not preclude a 70 percent disability rating for suicidal ideation. The Board further acknowledges that a report of suicidal ideation does not automatically confer entitlement to a 70 percent disability rating. VA must engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran has experienced a wide range of psychiatric symptoms, to include his reports of suicidal ideation, as detailed throughout this decision. However, the Board would emphasize that it is the Veteran's overall psychiatric profile that is considered, and there are no "tripwire" symptoms that would trigger a higher rating per se. Rather, the Board determines that the Veteran's symptoms, in their totality, represent an array of symptoms and impact on the Veteran, especially in the light of the Veteran's demonstrated cognitive, social, and occupational functioning. 

Despite two instances of suicidal ideation being listed amongst the Veteran's symptoms, the Veteran has predominantly denied suicidal ideation on examinations during the period on appeal. Even when documented as a symptom, the Veteran actively denied suicidal ideation and previously denied any such symptoms or that he would engage in suicidal behavior. Thus, the documented symptoms of suicidal ideation were based solely on the Veteran's self-reporting without any contemporaneous or supporting evidence, and the Veteran's lay statements have been found to be not credible. 

Despite the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms, he has not been found to be at an elevated risk for suicidal behavior and self-harm. The Veteran has maintained independence in his activities of daily living without mental health treatment. He has maintained intact cognitive functioning and exhibits cooperative behavior and the ability to communicate effectively. Despite the Veteran's brief period of unemployment at the end of the relevant period, the Veteran has predominantly maintained full-time employment as a construction supervisor since 2016, a highly skilled job that requires significant management/socialization with others. Such findings are documented in order to provide a holistic analysis of the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and their impact on the Veteran's social and occupational functioning. Id. The Board finds that suicidal ideation has not been shown to contribute to significant functional deficits or occupational impairment and does not support an increased rating of 70 percent or higher. The Veteran's overall disability picture, including full consideration of the Veteran's reported suicidal ideation, does not rise to the level of deficiencies in most areas during the appeal period. Here, the Board has fully considered the Veteran's symptoms of suicidal ideation in providing a holistic analysis of the Veteran's psychiatric condition, and has not required more than passive thoughts to establish the presence of suicidal ideation. 

The level of severity of the Veteran's primary symptoms during the period on appeal are contemplated by the current 50 percent rating or the criteria for a lower rating, including symptoms, such as depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, panic attacks more than once a week; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

The credible evidence of record is largely absent of the criteria listed in association with a 70 percent disability rating, including obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; or the level of severity those types of symptoms contemplate. In other words, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's symptoms rise to the level of deficiencies in most areas. Rather, the Veteran was generally described as alert, oriented, and cooperative with linear thought process, intact cognitive function, goal-directed speech, fair insight and judgement, and no perceptual abnormalities. The Veteran has required no mental health treatment. Despite the Veteran's reported symptomology and work absences that the Veteran has attributed to his psychiatric disorder, he has predominantly maintained skilled employment in one field with four different employers over the course of many years. Brief lapses in employment do not support that the Veteran is not capable of continued gainful employment.  Despite limited social interaction, the Veteran exhibits appropriate behavior with good hygiene, and independence in activities. Despite reporting that he was single, the Veteran was married during the period on appeal, which refutes an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Based on the Veteran's functioning as reflected by the totality of the evidence during the relevant period, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of a 70 percent rating or higher for the service-connected PTSD. As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application, and the Veteran's claim for a rating higher than 50 percent for PTSD is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

TDIU

The Veteran's TDIU claim has been raised by the record in relation to his increased rating claim, pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Total disability will be considered to exist where there is present an impairment of mind and body that is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.340. Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation because of service-connected disabilities, provided that the Veteran meets the schedular requirements. Specifically, if there is only one such disability, the disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more; if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability that is ratable at 40 percent or more and enough additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

During the relevant period prior to the issuance of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was service connected for tension headaches with a 50 percent disability rating from September 5, 2022; PTSD with a 50 percent disability rating from May 20, 2023; bilateral pes planus with a 30 percent disability rating from September 5, 2022; left shoulder strain with rotator cuff tear with a 20 percent disability rating from September 5, 2022; tinnitus with a 10 percent disability rating from September 5, 2022; left ear hearing loss with a noncompensable disability rating from September 5, 2022; and eczema with a noncompensable disability rating from September 5, 2022. 

Based upon the above, the Veteran's combined disability rating during the relevant appeal period was 90 percent from May 20, 2023. As such, the Veteran has met the schedular criteria for a TDIU rating for the period on appeal.

"Substantially gainful employment" is that employment "which is ordinarily followed by the nondisabled to earn their livelihood with earnings common to the particular occupation in the community where the veteran resides." Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356, 358 (1991). "Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment." 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. The Court has defined employment in a protected environment," which is a type of marginal employment, as "employment in a lower-income position that, due to the [V]eteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." Labruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111 (2024).

In determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the Court in Ray v. Wilkie directed the Board to consider the following factors: (1) the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; (2) whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and (3) whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue. 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). In determining whether unemployability exists, consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his or her age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

The responsibility for making the ultimate TDIU determination is placed on the adjudicator and not a medical examiner. See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013). A medical examiner's role is limited to describing the effects of disability upon the person's ordinary activity. See Floore v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 376, 381 (2013). The Veteran is competent to testify as to facts he personally observed or described; this includes recalling what he personally felt, saw, smelled, heard, or tasted. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).

The above discussion relating to the Veteran's increased rating claim is incorporated herein, to the extent relevant. The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment. The reasons follow.

The Veteran has reported that he attends acupuncture and massage appointments, but the record does not otherwise show the Veteran received recurrent and/or ongoing treatment from a medical provider for any of the service-connected disabilities during the period on appeal.

The Veteran has reported that he experiences headaches approximately three to four times per week, which can last all day. On a June 2023 VA headache examination, it was noted that the Veteran experiences prostrating headache attacks greater than once per month. The Veteran reported that he has to call out of work three to four times per month due to his headaches. However, the above limitations are based exclusively on the Veteran's lay reports, which are not found to be credible as discussed above. There are no treatment records during the relevant period for headaches, and the Veteran has reported that he manages his condition conservatively, taking ibuprofen as needed. On examination for separate disabilities, the Veteran has attributed his calling off work regularly due entirely to separate conditions, without mention of his headache disability. Despite reporting chronic headaches since service separation, the Veteran has predominantly maintained full-time employment as a manager in construction for nearly a decade. The record does not support that the Veteran received special accommodations for headaches, that they prevented him from fulfilling his job duties, or that periods of unemployment were attributable to headaches. Thus, the probative evidence of record does not support that the Veteran's headaches preclude the Veteran from substantially gainful employment.

The Veteran underwent a VA shoulder examination in December 2022. The examiner reported functional impairment relating to the Veteran raising his arms above his shoulders and head, lifting, carrying, opening jars, grabbing, grasping, reaching, driving, and reaching overhead, above the shoulders and horizontally to retrieve items, typing, lifting moderately heavy objects, reduced ability to perform normal working movements of the shoulder with excursion, strength, speed, coordination and/or endurance, and overall reduction in shoulder movement and reduced normal excursion of movements. The Veteran also underwent a VA foot examination in December 2022. The examiner documented functional limitations as they relate to walking and standing for prolonged periods, bending, lifting, carrying, rising from a seated position, kneeling, stooping, and climbing up and down stairs.

Despite the Veteran reporting pain and limitations while performing the wide array of functions described above, this is distinguished from an inability to perform such activities. The Veteran reported his ongoing employment at the time of the December 2022 VA examinations. Furthermore, the limitations documented in the Veteran's December 2022 VA examination reports were based on the Veteran's self-reporting, with the examiners documenting that the Veteran was not receiving prescribed medical treatment for his conditions. Notably, the record reflects the Veteran's ongoing ability to drive, use a keyboard, and maintain independence in his activities of daily living. The Veteran reported during the period at issue that he regularly goes to the gym to work out and goes on walks in the park with his dogs. The Veteran has a long history of work as a construction manager, and the record does not support that work cessations have been attributable to his musculoskeletal disabilities. The record does not support that the Veteran's service-connected shoulder and foot disabilities preclude him from performing substantially gainful employment.

As to the Veteran's eczema, within the October 2022 VA skin examination report, the examiner documented that the Veteran's skin disability had no functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

The Veteran underwent a VA audiological examination in January 2023 for assessment of his left ear hearing loss and tinnitus. The Veteran reported that hearing loss disrupts his current occupation and standard of living and that chronic ringing in his ears is bothersome. Despite this, the record repeatedly reflects the Veteran's ability to communicate appropriately and effectively. Examinations findings further reflect the Veteran to be fully alert and oriented with intact cognitive functioning. The evidence does not support that audiological conditions have precluded the Veteran from performing his job duties or cause any significant functional impact on occupational functioning.

Regarding the Veteran's education, training skills and work history, the Veteran is shown to have an associate degree in law enforcement, as well as having completed multiple separate training/certificate programs in construction management and residential electrical wiring. The Veteran completed water support technical school while in the military. The Veteran has an extensive work history as a construction manager, with additional past work experience as a bartender, security guard, and construction worker. The Veteran has reported that he has excellent written and verbal communication skills. He has maintained employment involving managerial duties for large portions of relevant period, with the totality of the evidence demonstrating the Veteran's capacity for learning, training, and adaptability that would facilitate the Veteran's return to substantially gainful employment.

As to the Veteran's physical ability to perform substantially gainful employment, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's experiences pain and restricted mobility from his physical disabilities. However, despite some brief work cessations, the Veteran has consistently demonstrated the ability to perform the physical requirements of his employment in construction management. His demonstrated activity levels, which include regularly going to the gym and going on walks with his dogs in the park, do not demonstrate the level of physical impairment that would preclude the Veteran from substantially gainful employment. 

While the Veteran may have occasionally missed work due to headache symptoms, sick and personal leave is provided for such reasons, and the record does not support a finding of prostrating attacks occurring with such frequency so as to preclude the Veteran from securing and following substantially gainful employment. The Veteran reported a long history of headaches that did not preclude his employment prior to his most recent work cessation, and he has required only conservative treatment, with records reflecting intact neurological and cognitive functioning on examination. Accordingly, the totality of the evidence shows that the Veteran is capable of performing work at least at the sedentary exertional level. 

The Department of Labor's Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) defines sedentary work as exerting up to 10 pounds of force occasionally (i.e. up to one third of the time), and/or a negligible amount of force frequently (i.e. from 1/3 to 2/3 of the time) to lift, carry, push, pull, or otherwise move objects, including the human body. According to DOT's definition, sedentary work involves sitting most of the time, but may involve walking or standing for brief periods of time. Jobs are sedentary if walking and standing are required only occasionally and all other sedentary criteria are met. The Board finds no prejudice to the Veteran in considering this definition for purposes of deciding the Veteran's claim. The longitudinal record indicates that the Veteran is capable of sedentary work, based on his demonstrated physical abilities during the period on appeal, discussed above. Accordingly, the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran is physically capable of performing substantially gainful employment.

As to the Veteran's mental ability to perform substantially gainful employment, the Veteran has reported a range of psychiatric symptoms resulting from PTSD, including depression, anxiety, sleep difficulties, paranoia, social isolation, hypervigilance, and interpersonal difficulties. However, the Veteran's symptoms were not shown to result in significant functional impairments that would have precluded him from substantially gainful employment. The Veteran has predominantly been employed in a skilled managerial occupation for nearly a decade. Thus, he has demonstrated the ability to interact appropriately and effectively with others, which is confirmed by his VA psychological examination findings. Although the Veteran's lay statements regarding the severity of his social and occupational impairment are not fully credible, recurrent observations from examiners have shown the Veteran to be alert, oriented, and cooperative with linear thought process, intact cognitive function, fair insight and judgement, and no perceptual abnormalities. These relatively normal findings have been documented despite the Veteran receiving no mental health treatment. At a minimum, the record reflects that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder can be reasonably accommodated by restricting him from work that involves supervisory or managerial duties. Such limitations would reduce stress and responsibilities that may exacerbate the Veteran's psychiatric condition.

Based on the above assessment of the Veteran's physical and mental abilities with consideration of his education, training, skills, and work history, the Board finds that the Veteran is capable of work that would result in income at the level of substantially gainful employment, to include a wide range of administrative occupations. The evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would preclude him from jobs such as data entry. With data entry, the Veteran is primarily responsible for entering data into a system. These jobs can usually be done without significant training or experience, requiring very little exertional effort. Based on the Veteran's education and work history, the evidence supports that he has the skills needed for such a position. Additionally, the Veteran could perform jobs such as a telemarketer, where the employee makes calls and reads a script, which does not require extensive training or experience, and would require minimal exertional activity. Similarly, a customer service agent interacts with customers to handle complaints, process orders, and answer questions. The above occupations can be performed with limited physical activity, without requiring managerial or supervisory duties. 

The Veteran could also be a parking lot or toll booth attendant, which jobs would entail activities such as collecting payment, and providing customers with instructions for parking and locating vehicles, which would be sedentary in nature and not involve managerial duties. These examples are not exhaustive but are merely illustrative of potential occupations that the Veteran could perform. This is evidence against a finding that the Veteran is precluded from all forms of substantially gainful employment due to the service-connected disabilities.

For all the reasons described above, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran is precluded from all forms of substantially gainful employment due to service-connected disabilities and is not entitled to a TDIU rating. The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, it is not applicable where, as here, there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Accordingly, entitlement to a TDIU rating is denied.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wonderling, Gabriel N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.