Citation Nr: A25032714
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231202-396762
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 60 percent for bulimia is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for a Caesarean section scar is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for pelvic floor dysfunction is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for genitourinary residuals of pelvic floor dysfunction is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's bulimia did not manifest with self-induced weight loss to less than 80 percent of expected minimum weight, with incapacitating episodes of at least six weeks total duration per year, and requiring hospitalization more than twice a year for parenteral nutrition or tube feeding.

2. The Veteran's Caesarean section scar did not measure 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or more, in total.

3. The Veteran's pelvic floor dysfunction did not manifest with complete or incomplete prolapse of the pelvic organ due to injury, disease, or surgical complications of pregnancy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 60 percent for bulimia are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9521.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for Caesarean section scar are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7802.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for pelvic floor dysfunction are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.116, DC 7614.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran honorably served in the United States Army from June 2017 to September 2021. See DD Form 214. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an April 2023 and September 2023 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), in pertinent part granting service connection for pelvic floor dysfunction rated noncompensable, continuing the noncompensable rating for Caesarean section scar, and the 60 percent rating for bulimia, respectively. In December 2023, the Veteran appealed the noncompensable ratings for the pelvic floor dysfunction and Caesarean section scar, and the 60 percent rating for bulimia, selecting the direct review docket. See December 2023 VA Form 10182. 

APPLICABLE EVIDENTIARY WINDOW

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. The appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. See Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023). 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R, Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted considering the entire recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the viewpoint of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 60 percent for bulimia is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for her bulimia. Her disability is currently rated as 60 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9521 for bulimia nervosa. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9521.

Bulimia nervosa is rated based on the Rating Formula for Eating Disorders. Id. Under this formula, a noncompensable rating applies to binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting or other measures to prevent weight gain, or resistance to weight gain even when below expected minimum weight, with diagnosis of an eating disorder but without incapacitating episodes. A 10 percent rating applies to binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting or other measures to prevent weight gain, or resistance to weight gain even when below expected minimum weight, with diagnosis of an eating disorder and incapacitating episodes of up to two weeks total duration per year. A 30 percent rating applies to self-induced weight loss to less than 85 percent of expected minimum weight with incapacitating episodes of more than two but less than six weeks total duration per year. A 60 percent rating applies to self-induced weight loss to less than 85 percent of expected minimum weight with incapacitating episodes of six or more weeks total duration per year. A 100 percent rating applies to self-induced weight loss to less than 80 percent of expected minimum weight, with incapacitating episodes of at least six weeks total duration per year, and requiring hospitalization more than twice a year for parenteral nutrition or tube feeding. Note (1) defines an "incapacitating episode" as a period during which bed rest and treatment by a physician are required. Id.

In August 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for her increased rating claim. See August 2023 VA Examination Report. At that time, the Veteran reported that she skips/avoids meals at times, she will eat and then later purge in various ways to maintain weight, and that she continues to have difficulty with her self-esteem/concept, feeling she needs to lose weight. Id. The VA examiner indicated in the report that the Veteran meets the criteria for a 60 percent rating, based on binge-eating followed by measures to prevent weight gain, to include self-induced vomit, and incapacitating episodes of six or more weeks total duration per year. Id. However, there is no evidence in the record that the Veteran required hospitalization more than twice a year for parenteral nutrition or tube feeding. Id. 

In light of the above, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's bulimia does not meet the criteria for a total disability rating based on the rating formula for eating disorders. 

As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt is not for application in this case, and entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 60 percent for bulimia must be denied. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for Caesarean section scar is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for her Caesarean section scar, which is currently rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7802. 

Under DC 7802, which contemplates burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are associated with underlying soft tissue damage, a maximum 10 percent rating is assigned for scars measuring 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or more, each or in total. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802.

In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

In January 2023, the Veteran received a VA examination for his increased rating claim. The VA examiner noted that the Caesarean section scar measures 15 x0.1cm, for a total area of 1.5 square cm. See January 2023 VA Examination Report. The VA examiner indicated that the scar is not painful or unstable, or with frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. Id. 

Here, the Board finds that based on the January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran's Caesarean section scar does not meet the criteria for a compensable rating under DC 7802 based on the size of the scar, which does not measure 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or more, in total. In light of the above, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's Caesarean section scar meets the criteria for a compensable rating. 

The Board has also considered other Diagnostic Codes to determine whether a higher rating is warranted. However, the scars in question are not of the head, face, or neck such to warrant a higher rating under DC 7800, and they do not affect an area associated with underlying soft tissue damage such to warrant a higher rating under DC 7801. Finally, the scars are not painful or unstable such to warrant a rating under DC 7804. 

As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt is not for application in this case, and entitlement to a compensable rating for Caesarean section scar must be denied. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for pelvic floor dysfunction is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for her pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD). 

The AOJ rated her disability by analogy under DC 7699-7614 because pelvic floor dysfunction is not listed in the schedule of rating under any Diagnostic Code (DC).

Hyphenated DCs are used when rating residuals and the use of an additional DC is needed to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. Moreover, a diagnostic code ending in "99" signals that the disability is rated by analogy, under a closely related disease or injury in which not only the functions affected, but also the anatomical localization and symptomatology are closely analogous. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.20.

In this case, the hyphenated diagnostic code indicates that the Veteran's pelvic floor dysfunction is rated analogous to a disease, injury, or adhesion of Fallopian tube under DC 7614.

When rating by analogy, VA must adhere to the requirements of that regulation. See Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2023). Accordingly, the Board must address whether a listed disease or injury is 'closely related' to the veteran's ailment by considering three factors when determining which diagnostic code is most "closely analogous" to a given unlisted disability: "(1) whether the 'functions affected' by ailments are analogous; (2) whether the 'anatomical localization' of the ailments is analogous; and (3) whether the 'symptomatology' of the ailments is analogous." Id. at 1379, quoting Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 350 (1992). 

Here, the January 2023 VA examiner defined the pelvic floor dysfunction as a disease occurring "when the muscles or connective tissues of the pelvic area weaken or are injured," and that it mostly occurs after multiple pregnancies. See January 2023 VA Examination Report. 

Therefore, the Board finds that the functions affected by, and symptomatology of the PFD are not analogous to those caused by the diseases, injury, or adhesion of the Fallopian tube. Specifically, although they are diseases of organs localized in the pelvic area, the pelvic floor and the Fallopian tubes serve different functions and cause ailments with different symptomatology. Therefore, the Board finds that the Lendenmann test is not met with respect to DC 7614. Webb, 71 F.4th 1377, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

Here, instead, the Board finds that the PFD is most analogous to the pelvic organ prolapse due to injury, disease, or surgical complications of pregnancy, rated under DC 7621. First, the Board finds that the anatomical localization and functions affected by PFD are most analogous to those caused by pelvic organ prolapse due to injury, disease, or surgical complications of pregnancy. Moreover, the functions affected by the pelvic floor dysfunction are analogous to those affected by the pelvic organ prolapse. As a matter of fact, the Note to the DC 7621 describes the pelvic organ prolapse as occurring when a pelvic organ such as bladder, urethra, uterus, vagina, small bowel, or rectum, drops from its normal place in the abdomen, and it also contemplates genitourinary, digestive, and skin symptoms related to the pelvic organ prolapse. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.116. Similarly, pelvic floor dysfunction mostly occurs after pregnancies, when the muscles or connective tissues of the pelvic area weaken or are injured, and it can lead to genitourinary symptoms. 

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that PFD is most closely analogous to pelvic organ prolapse under DC 7621. See Webb, 71 F.4th at 1379.

With respect to the issue of a compensable evaluation, DC 7621 assigns a maximum compensable rating of 10 percent for complete or incomplete pelvic organ prolapse due to injury, disease, or surgical complications of pregnancy. 

Here, in January 2023, the Veteran was afforded a Gynecological Conditions VA examination, at which time she reported that since having her Caesarean section, she started to experience loss of urine, and she was diagnosed with weakened pelvic floor and prescribed physical therapy. See January 2023 VA Examination Report. Her symptoms persisted since her Caesarean section, but she denied receiving any treatment currently. Id. The VA examiner confirmed a diagnosis of pelvic floor dysfunction, but the examiner did not find any other gynecological disability, and excluded a diagnosis of pelvic organ prolapse. Id. Finally, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's disability does not impact her ability to work. Id. 

In every instance where the schedule does not provide zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met. 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

In this case, the PFD is being rated under the analogous DC 7621 for complete or incomplete pelvic organ prolapse. However, the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of pelvic organ prolapse, therefore a compensable rating under DC 7621 cannot be assigned. 

Moreover, DC 7621, directs adjudicators to separately evaluate any genitourinary, digestive, or skin symptoms under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) and combine all evaluations. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.116 DC 7621, Note. Therefore, the Board has separately decided the issue of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for genitourinary residuals of PFD as reported by the Veteran. 

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for a compensable rating for pelvic floor dysfunction under DC 7699-7621. 

The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that an initial compensable rating for pelvic floor dysfunction is not warranted. Because the evidence is against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application in this case. See Lynch, at 781-82. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for genitourinary residuals of pelvic floor dysfunction.

As discussed above, the Board found that the Veteran's pelvic floor dysfunction is most analogous to pelvic organ prolapse under DC 7621, which directs the adjudicators to separately evaluate any genitourinary, digestive, or skin symptoms under the appropriate diagnostic code(s). See 38 C.F.R. § 4.116 DC 7621, Note.

In this case, during the January 2023 Gynecological Conditions VA examination, the Veteran reported that since having her Caesarean section, she started to experience some loss of urine, and she was subsequently diagnosed with weakened pelvic floor and prescribed physical therapy. See January 2023 VA Examination Report. 

Here, the Board finds that the January 2023 VA examination does not sufficiently describe the severity and frequency of the Veteran's loss of urine to rate this residual, as she was not provided a Genitourinary VA examination. Therefore, the Board concludes that it was a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error to deny a compensable rating for the residuals of pelvic floor dysfunction without affording the Veteran with a genitourinary conditions VA examination to rate her residuals. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.802. The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file. 

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a genitourinary VA examination with an appropriate examiner to rate her urinary loss as residual of her service-connected pelvic floor dysfunction. 

 

 

J. B. FREEMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fiorito, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.