Citation Nr: A25032346
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 201222-139291
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 100 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with depression, including bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for migraine headaches is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for myofascial neck pain is denied. 

Effective September 7, 2018, entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) for residuals of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) is granted.

Prior to September 7, 2018, entitlement to SMC for residuals of TBI under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum rating assignable for PTSD with depression, including bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence, for the entire period on appeal.

2. The Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for migraine headaches for the entire period on appeal, and referral for extraschedular consideration is not warranted.

3. The Veteran's neck disability manifests in forward flexion greater than 30 degrees and a combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees.  There is no evidence of muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal, kyphosis.

4. From September 7, 2018, forward, the Veteran is not eligible for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(2); is in need of regular aid and attendance for his 100-percent rated residuals of a TBI; and without such aid and attendance, would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care.

5. Prior to September 7, 2018, the Veteran did not have 100-percent rated TBI residuals.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. As the Veteran had a 100 percent schedular rating for PTSD for the entire appeal period, there is no legal basis for a higher schedular rating.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.125, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411; Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

2. The criteria for a rating higher than 50 percent for migraine headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for myofascial neck pain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5017; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, Diagnostic Code 5237.

4. From September 7, 2018, the criteria for entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(t); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(j), 3.352.

5. Prior to September 7, 2018, the criteria for entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(t); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(j), 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1987 to April 1991.  He was awarded a Combat Action Ribbon, Southwest Asia Service Medal, and Kuwait Liberation Medal, among others.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2020 rating decision of an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on May 16, 2024, and a hearing transcript is included with the record.  The Board acknowledges that the undersigned did not preside over the Board hearing; however, under the modernized review system, the Veterans Law Judge who conducts a Board hearing is not required to decide the appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 7107(c); Frantzis v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 354 (2022). 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2020 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Procedural History - SMC at the (t) rate.

The Board must first address the unique procedural history of this case with respect to SMC at the (t) rate.  That issue was originally processed through the "legacy" (pre-Appeals Modernization Act) system.  The legacy appeal arose from a rating decision dated November 2014.  The November 2014 rating decision denied entitlement to SMC.  Subsequent rating decisions granted the Veteran SMC, but at a lower rate than at the level provided by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t), which the Veteran has continued to seek through the appeals process.  See generally, December 2014 Notice of Disagreement; Rating Decisions dated July 2015 and August 2015.

In August 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (the Appeals Modernization Act or AMA), Pub. Law 115-55, which created a new claims and appeals process for pursuing VA benefits.  The AOJ invited the Veteran to opt into the Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP), a temporary program that allowed early participation in the new appeals process before the AMA became effective in February 2019.  In April 2018, the Veteran elected to participate in RAMP.  In doing so, he acknowledged that he was withdrawing all eligible, pending compensation appeals in their entirety and any associated hearing requests, and that eligible appeals would be processed under the AMA system.  He selected the "Supplemental Claim" lane, which entitled the Veteran to a new rating decision by the AOJ.  In August 2018, the AOJ notified the Veteran of its receipt of his RAMP opt-in election and transfer of his pending appeals relating to TBI residuals, left scalp scars, migraine headaches, and SMC from the legacy appeals system to the RAMP.  In September 2018, the AOJ issued the RAMP decision, notified the Veteran, and explained his rights to seek further appellate review under RAMP.  In January 2019, the Veteran timely appealed the September 2018 RAMP rating decision to the Board and requested the "Direct Review" docket, indicating that he did not want a Board hearing and would not submit any additional evidence in support of the appeal.  In an April 2019 notice, the Board acknowledged the Veteran's appeal request and informed him that the appeal had been placed on the Direct Review docket.  

In January 2020, the Board issued a decision denying the Veteran's SMC claim at the level provided by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t).  Within one year of that decision, in June 2020, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim requesting SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) and presented new and relevant evidence.  The AOJ issued a rating decision in November 2020 again denying the higher level SMC and the Veteran appealed this issue to the Board.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the claim has been continuously prosecuted since the Veteran's claim was initially denied by the November 2014 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(3).

In denying the claims for increased ratings for PTSD and migraine headaches, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's attorney's argument that the symptoms of these disabilities should be evaluated under Diagnostic Code 8045 to allow for a 100 percent rating under Code 8045 to permit SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t).  However, the issue of entitlement to a higher rating for TBI under Diagnostic Code 8045 is not an issue in this appeal stream.  Moreover, the Veteran has been evaluated at 100-percent for the combined TBI residuals since September 7, 2018, as will be explained in the decision herein.  

Concerning the Veteran's recent arguments submitted in March 2025, they are not pertinent to the matters adjudicated herein.  To the extent that the Veteran argues that SMC at the (t) rate should be assigned an effective date earlier than the one assigned herein, the Board has explained that prior to September 7, 2018, he was not entitled to SMC at the (t) rate because he did not have 100-percent rated TBI residuals.  As explained in the decision below, the Board may not reevaluate the disability ratings assigned for the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prior to September 7, 2018.  The Veteran is advised to submit the applicable claim concerning any allegations of clear and unmistakable error in a prior rating decision or a claim for service connection.   

Increased Rating - PTSD with depression, including bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence.

This appeal arises from the Veteran's disagreement with the November 2020 rating decision that continued the Veteran's 100 percent rating for PTSD.  However, the Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum schedular rating of 100 percent for PTSD under Diagnostic Code 9411 during the entire appeal period and, therefore, a higher rating is not warranted as a matter of law.

Accordingly, the claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 100 percent for PTSD is denied as matter of law.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

Increased Rating - Migraine headaches.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for his migraine headaches, currently rated at 50 percent under Diagnostic Code 8100.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The maximum schedular rating of 50 percent is assigned for very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  The rating criteria for DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that the claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 254, 252 (2018).  In evaluating headaches under Diagnostic Code 8100, consideration may not be given to the ameliorative effects of medication.  Jones v. Shinseki, 30 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  The provisions of Diagnostic Code 8100 contemplate all symptoms experienced due to headaches.  Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67 (2020).  

Since October 20, 2015, the Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for migraine headaches under Code 8100 and a higher rating is not possible under this diagnostic code.  The Board has considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating but has found none.  As the maximum schedular rating for migraine headaches under Diagnostic Code 8100 has already been assigned, a higher schedular rating is not available.  

Nonetheless, in exceptional cases an extraschedular rating may be provided.  38 C.F.R. § 3.321.  The Court has set out a three-part test, based on the language of 38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1), for determining whether a veteran is entitled to an extraschedular rating: (1) the established schedular criteria must be inadequate to describe the severity and symptoms of the claimant's disability; (2) the case must present other indicia of an exceptional or unusual disability picture, such as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization; and (3) the award of an extra-schedular disability rating must be in the interest of justice.  Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008), aff'd, Thun v. Shinseki, 572 F.3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

The Board may not assign an extraschedular rating in the first instance but must specifically adjudicate whether to refer a case for extraschedular evaluation when the issue either is raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record.  Barringer v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 242 (2008); see also Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484 (2016) (the Board is not obligated to analyze whether extraschedular referral is warranted in all cases, but only if the issue is argued or raised by the record).  

In this case, the Veteran's migraine headaches are assigned the highest-available rating.  Since this rating contemplates all manifestations, referral for an extraschedular rating is not warranted.  See Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67 (2020).  

The evidence persuasively weighs against the claim and the claim for a rating in excess of 50 percent for migraine headaches is denied.

Increased Rating - Myofascial neck pain.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities, which are based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  The Board will also consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is generally to be avoided.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  The critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the disabilities is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other disability.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

When determining the severity of musculoskeletal disabilities, which are at least partly-rated on the basis of range of motion, VA must also consider the extent the Veteran may have additional functional impairment above and beyond the limitation of motion objectively demonstrated due to the extent of pain/painful motion, limited or excess movement, weakness, incoordination, and premature/excess fatigability, etc., particularly during times when symptoms "flare up," such as during prolonged use, and assuming these factors are not already contemplated in the governing rating criteria.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995), see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59.

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5237 for his service-connected neck disability for the entire period on appeal.

The rating criteria for musculoskeletal disorders were revised on February 7, 2021. However, the general rating criteria for diseases and injuries of the spine and the formula for rating intervertebral disc syndrome based on incapacitating episodes remain unchanged under the new rating criteria.

Pursuant to the general rating criteria for diseases and injuries of the spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal, kyphosis.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical 15 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  A higher rating of 40 percent is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  The highest evaluation of 100 percent is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

In order to be entitled to a higher 20 percent rating, the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine disability must be manifested by forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

In this case, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted for myofascial neck pain.  VA treatment records show complaints of pain.  The November 2020 VA examination report reflects forward flexion of his cervical spine to 45 degrees.  Since the Veteran had forward flexion greater than 30 degrees, a 20 percent rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 5237 based on limitation of forward flexion.  In addition, the VA examination report shows a combined range of motion of the Veteran's cervical spine above 170 degrees.  Thus, a higher 20 percent rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 5237.

The Board acknowledges the May 2020 Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), completed by Dr. C.B., and received by VA in June 2020.  Though the DBQ includes range of motion findings, the provider did not indicate whether the Veteran was examined in person or whether there is an accurate measurement.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.46.  The Board finds that this examination report is of little probative value and will not be used to evaluate the Veteran's disability.  The Board assigns greater probative weight to the November 2020 VA examination report.  

As to any additional functional impairment, to include during flare-ups and periods of repeated use, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran exhibited pain on range-of-motion testing.  In addition, during the November 2020 VA examination report, the Veteran stated that he had flare-ups and functional impairment or loss that were alleviated by motrin and repositioning his neck.  However, neither the lay nor medical evidence reflects the functional equivalent of impairment required for a rating in excess of 10 percent.  The Board affords great probative weight to the objective findings during the November 2020 VA examination report.  The examiner opined that even during periods of flare-ups and periods of repeated use, forward flexion would be limited to 40 degrees and the combined range of motion would be greater than 170 degrees.  The examiner also found that the Veteran did not have localized tenderness, abnormal spinal contour, guarding, or muscle spasm.  The Veteran is competent to report symptoms and functional impairments that he observes.  However, the Veteran has not provided any evidence in support of the specific rating criteria required for a higher, 20 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5237.  In addition, the Board affords greater probative value to the objective findings made by the VA examiner who has the medical training or credentials to make such determinations.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Consequently, the Board affords the most probative weight to the objective findings contained in the November 2020 VA examination.

In making the above findings, the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran has used medication, including motrin, to treat his neck pain.  The Court has held that in assigning a disability rating, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  More recently, the Court stated that the "the Board [is] obligated to discount the beneficial effects of the medication taken for each disability and evaluate the baseline severity of those disabilities" and held that "Jones applies in the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant [diagnostic code] does not reference medication as a factor in evaluation." Ingram v. Shinseki, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *15-19 (March 12, 2025).

The Board notes, however, that neither Jones nor Ingram address how the Board is to discount the beneficial effects of medication, particularly when used as treatment for musculoskeletal symptoms and where examiners cannot reasonably assess range of motion both with and without use of medication.  Remanding this appeal to order an addendum medical opinion based on Jones and Ingram, and in the lens of the rating criteria under § 4.71a, would almost certainly require an examiner to engage in medical speculation and would result in a medical opinion that lacks the degree of certainty to ascertain, even under the benefit-of-the-doubt standard, the impact of the ameliorative effects of medication on the severity of a veteran's musculoskeletal disability in terms of range of motion. See, e.g., Hood v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 295, 298-99 (2005) (medical opinions that are speculative have "little probative value"). Significantly, one of the judges in McCarroll, joined by another judge in concurrence, expressed the same concern as to the implications of the holding in Jones:

The requirement that the Secretary "may not consider the relief afforded by [a veteran's] medication when" applying the rating schedule, as Jones demands...invites medical speculation in trying to guess what a veteran's symptoms might be without the medication, or medical malpractice in the cessation of medication so that the veteran's symptoms without medication might be recorded. The former invites non-helpful guesswork by medical practitioners,...and the latter raises, at a minimum, serious ethical concerns that no court should encourage. That Jones essentially requires the Board to consider whether a medical examination is required to determine how serious a veteran's symptoms would have been in an alternate reality in which he or she was not taking his or her required medication should alone demonstrate the fallacy of the Jones holding.  McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 278 (2016) (internal citations omitted). 

Because it is highly unlikely that remand to obtain a medical opinion as to the ameliorative effects of medication on the severity of the Veteran's neck condition would result in a probative, non-speculative opinion as to such, the Board does not wish to further delay adjudication of the Veteran's appeal to engage in likely unfruitful further development pursuant to Jones and Ingram. Moreover, the Board certainly cannot - and will not - order the Veteran to stop taking medication to undergo an examination that would reflect the severity of his neck condition without the use of pain medication. This would not only be cruel and potentially damaging to the Veteran, but the undersigned finds it would be legally unethical to ask such.

Finally, the Board notes that VA compensation does not contemplate hypothetical symptoms or impairment. Instead, the purpose of VA benefits is to compensate for decreased earning capacity - to compensate for actual symptoms or impairment that an individual experiences in the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. The Veteran's manifestations of pain have been considered in rating his neck disability, but it remains the Board's obligation to rate the condition based on the application of the rating criteria found in the diagnostic codes to the objective medical evidence. 

For the reasons and bases stated above, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's neck disability.  The claim is denied.   

Entitlement to SMC at the 1114(t) rate.

SMC is available when a veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities cause "additional hardships above and beyond those contemplated by VA's schedule for rating disabilities."  Breniser v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 64, 68 (2011); see 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k)-(s).  When more than one SMC rate is applicable, rates are calculated using the combined ratings table.  The rate of SMC "varies according to the nature of the veteran's service-connected disabilities."  Moreira v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 522, 524 (1992).  

Basic levels of SMC are listed in section 1114(k), providing for compensation where a veteran, as a result of service-connected disability, has also suffered one of the listed forms of anatomical loss.  A veteran who meets the requirements set out in section 1114(k) can potentially receive additional benefits through the SMC structure Congress has created.  Namely, higher levels of SMC may be awarded if, in addition to one or more of the disabilities specified in subsection (k), the veteran also meets the requirements for any of the rates specified in subsections (l) through (o).  38 U.S.C. § 1114.  And, in cases where a veteran is entitled to an SMC rate between (l) and (n) and also has additional service-connected disabilities not captured by any SMC rate, the SMC rate can be increased by either a half or a full step, but not more than the maximum SMC rate set out in subsection (o).  38 U.S.C. § 1114(p).  There are seven levels of SMC rates between (l) and (o): (l), (l 1/2), (m), (m 1/2), (n), (n 1/2), and (o).

The SMC provided by 38 U.S.C. 1114(l) is payable for anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, one hand and one foot, blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less or being permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance.  The Veteran is in receipt of SMC at the (l) rate on account of being so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance from October 17, 2014.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

SMC at the (m), (n), and (o) rates are based on a combination of disabilities related to anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands/arms (at levels), both legs (at levels), one arm and one leg (at levels), blindness (at levels, including anatomical loss of eyes), combinations of visual impairment and hearing impairment (at specific severities).  38 U.S.C. § 1114 (m), (n), (o); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (c), (d), (e).

Paralysis of both lower extremities together with the loss of anal and bladder sphincter control will entitle a veteran to the (o) rate of SMC, through the combination of loss of use of both legs and helplessness.  The requirement of loss of anal and bladder sphincter control is met even though incontinence has been overcome under a strict regimen of rehabilitation of bowel and bladder training and other auxiliary measures.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(e)(2).

Determinations for entitlement to the (o) rate of SMC must be based upon separate and distinct disabilities.  That requires, for example, that where a veteran who had suffered the loss or loss of use of two extremities is being considered for the maximum rate on account of helplessness requiring regular aid and attendance, the latter must be based on need resulting from pathology other than that of the extremities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(e).

Additionally, 38 U.S.C. § 1114(p) provides for "intermediate" SMC rates between the different subsections based on anatomical loss or loss of use of the extremities or blindness in connection with deafness and/or loss or loss of use of a hand or foot.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(p); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (f).

In addition to the statutory rates payable under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l) through (n) and the intermediate or next-higher rate provisions set forth under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(p), additional single permanent disability or combinations of permanent disabilities independently ratable at 50 percent or more will afford entitlement to the next-higher intermediate rate, or if already entitled to the next-higher intermediate rate, then to the next-higher statutory rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, but not above the (o) rate.  The disability or disabilities independently ratable at 50 percent or more must be separate and distinct and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems from the conditions establishing entitlement under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) through (n) or the intermediate rate provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(p).  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(f)(3).

Also, additional single permanent disability or combinations of permanent disabilities independently ratable at 100 percent apart from any consideration of individual unemployability will afford entitlement to the next-higher intermediate rate, or if already entitled to the next-higher intermediate rate, then to the next-higher statutory rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, but not above the (o) rate.  The disability or disabilities independently ratable at 100 percent or more must be separate and distinct and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems from the conditions establishing entitlement under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) through (n) or the intermediate rate provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(p).  38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (f)(4).

A veteran receiving SMC at the (o) rate, at the maximum rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (p), or at the intermediate rate between (n) and (o) plus SMC at the (k) rate, and who is in need of regular aid and attendance meets the requirements for entitlement to SMC at the (r-1) rate.  SMC at the (r-2) rate requires a higher level of care.  38 U.S.C. § 1114 (r)(1) ("r-1" rate), (r)(2) ("r-2" rate).  SMC at the (r-2) rate requires a showing that the Veteran required daily personal health care services by a medical professional, or under the supervision of such, without which institutional care would be required.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(h)(2).

Turning the facts of this case, as to SMC under 38 U.S.C. 1114(p), the Veteran received a rate at p-1 pursuant to 38 C.F.R. 3.350(f)(3) effective October 17, 2014.  In that subsection, in addition to the statutory rates payable under 38 U.S.C. 1114(l) through (n) and the intermediate or next higher rate provisions outlined above, additional single permanent disability or combinations of permanent disabilities independently ratable at 50 percent or more will afford entitlement to the next higher intermediate rate or if already entitled to an intermediate rate to the next higher statutory rate under 38 U.S.C. 1114, but not above the (o) rate.  In the application of this subparagraph the disability or disabilities independently ratable at 50 percent or more must be separate and distinct and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems from the conditions establishing entitlement under 38 U.S.C. 1114(l) through (n) or the intermediate rate provisions outlined above.  The AOJ noted that the Veteran was to be paid at the rate intermediate between (l) and subsection (m) on account of additional disabilities, independently ratable at 50 percent or more from October 17, 2014.

As to SMC at the rate of p-2, the Veteran had been authorized for that rate under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(f)(4) from September 7, 2018.  The AOJ noted that the Veteran was paid at a rate equal to subsection (m) on account of entitlement to the rate equal to subsection (m) with additional disability, Meniere's disease, ratable at 100 percent from September 7, 2018.  

SMC provided by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) is payable to a veteran who, as the result of service-connected disability, is in need of regular aid and attendance for the residuals of TBI, is not eligible for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(2), and in the absence of such regular aid and attendance would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care.  Determination of this need is subject to the criteria of 38 C.F.R. § 3.352.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(j).

38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) provides for basic criteria for regular aid and attendance and being permanently bedridden.  The following will be accorded consideration in determining the need for regular aid and attendance: inability of claimant to dress or undress himself (herself), or to keep himself (herself) ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); inability of claimant to feed himself (herself) through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment.  "Bedridden" will be a proper basis for the determination.  For the purpose of this paragraph "bedridden" will be that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the claimant remain in bed.  The fact that claimant has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice.  It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in this paragraph be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need.  A determination that the veteran is so helpless, as to be in need of regular aid and attendance will not be based solely upon an opinion that the claimant's condition is such as would require him or her to be in bed.  They must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others.

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(b)(2) provide that a veteran is entitled to the higher level aid and attendance allowance authorized by § 3.350(j) in lieu of the regular aid and attendance allowance when all of the following conditions are met: (i) As a result of service-connected residuals of traumatic brain injury, the veteran meets the requirements for entitlement to the regular aid and attendance allowance in paragraph (a) of this section; (ii) As a result of service-connected residuals of traumatic brain injury, the veteran needs a 'higher level of care' (as defined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section) than is required to establish entitlement to the regular aid and attendance allowance, and in the absence of the provision of such higher level of care the veteran would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care.

The need for a higher level of care means that the veteran requires personal health-care services provided on a daily basis in their home by a person who is licensed to provide such services or who provides such services under the regular supervision of a licensed health-care professional.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(b)(3).  Personal health-care services include (but are not limited to) such services as physical therapy, administration of injections, placement of in dwelling catheters, and the changing of sterile dressings, or like functions, which require professional health-care training or the regular supervision of a trained health-care professional to perform.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(b)(3)-(4).

The regulations also provide that the term "under the regular supervision of a licensed health-care professional" means that an unlicensed person performing personal health-care services is following a regimen of personal health-care services prescribed by a health-care professional, and that the health-care professional consults with the unlicensed person providing the health-care services at least once each month to monitor the prescribed regimen.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(b)(4).  The consultation need not be in person; a telephone call will suffice.  Id.  A person performing personal health-care services who is a relative or other member of the veteran's household is not exempted from the requirement that he or she be a licensed health-care professional or be providing such care under the regular supervision of a licensed health-care professional.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(b)(5).

In a recent decision, the United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) held that the implementing regulation for this statute, 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(b)(2)(ii) was invalid as it is beyond the requirements of the statute.  See Laska v. McDonough, No. 22-1018 (U.S. Vet. App. Aug. 15, 2023) (holding that VA exceeded its authority by requiring a higher level of care than Congress intended).  Thus, the Board will not consider its provisions and will consider eligibility under the language of the statute only.  Id.

The Veteran contends that he should receive SMC at the rate provided by 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) for his TBI residuals.  

First, the evidence does not demonstrate nor does the Veteran contend that he meets the requirements to receive compensation as listed under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(r)(2) (SMC(r)(2)).  The Veteran is not in receipt of SMC at the (o) rate, the maximum rate under (p) or an intermediate rate between the (n) and (o) rates plus a (k) rate.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(r); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(h).  Accordingly, he is not eligible for SMC at the (r)(2) rate.  

Next, the Board finds that the Veteran has been 100-percent rated for TBI residuals with Meniere's disease since September 7, 2018, when the Veteran was awarded service connection for Meniere's disease and assigned a 100 percent disability rating.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 4.25(b).  In this respect, an October 2018 VA clinician found that TBI injuries have been associated with Meniere's disease, noting that cases of Meniere's disease are attributed to hydrodynamic changes caused by scarring from bleeding into the inner ear.  The clinician also noted cases reported of Meniere's disease after temporal bone fracture, and even acceleration-deceleration injuries.  A July 2020 VA clinician also found that the Veteran has a TBI and identified the residual as Meniere's disease.  See July 2020 VA examination for TBI, pg. 2.  

The next question for the Board is whether the Veteran requires aid and attendance as a result of his 100-percent rated TBI residuals and, whether, in the absence of such regular aid and attendance, he would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t).  

Turning to the evidence of record, VA medical treatment records show that the Veteran has reported TBI residuals of memory loss, cognitive impairment, loss of balance, and dizziness.  

An October 2018 VA examination report for ear conditions shows that the Veteran reported increased hearing loss, increased headaches, and occasional migraines.  He stated that he could not work, and he did not drive.  He had bad balance and stumbled especially in the mornings.  The examiner found that the Veteran had hearing impairment with vertigo and cerebellar gait; tinnitus; vertigo; and nausea.  The examiner found that the Veteran had difficulty with balance due to daily episodes of vertigo, difficulty with focus, concentration and task completion.  He was unable to work or drive at this time.  

A September 2020 VA medical treatment record shows that the Veteran moved to Missouri to live with his sister in November 2018.  After moving to Missouri, he found it increasingly difficult to attend his medical appointments and manage his medications.  He moved into the VA medical foster home on March 1, 2019, to improve his physical and mental health.  A January 2020 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran planned to hire an in-home caregiver.  

A May 2020 letter from a social worker, R.B., at the VA medical foster home, noted that the Veteran had been a resident since March 1, 2019.  R.B. stated that the Veteran had been experiencing increasing depression, anxiety, and an inability to care for himself prior to moving into the home.  R.B. stated that the Veteran was living with his sister, but he was not attending his medical appointments, not taking medications as prescribed, and had exacerbated symptoms of PTSD and TBI.  Since being placed in the foster home, his depression and anxiety decreased.  He also had a full-time caregiver and now took his medication as prescribed, attended his appointments, and had a caregiver to provide stability, advocacy, and continuity of care for the Veteran.  R.B. opined that the Veteran required aid and attendance of another person due to his service-connected conditions of Meniere's disease, lumbosacral or cervical strain, headaches, scars, chronic fatigue syndrome, superficial scars, PTSD, and TBI. 

A May 2020 examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, was completed by Dr. C.B., a private physician.  Dr. C.B. found that the Veteran was not able to prepare meals, needed assistance with bathing and tending to other hygiene needs, required nursing home care, required medication management, and needed oversight regarding his finances.  Dr. C.B. explained that the Veteran suffered from severe loss of balance due to his vertigo, needed reminders for proper hygiene care, was unsteady and unstable when standing and walking, and could only leave the foster home when accompanied by a provider.  

A June 2020 medical note, authored by Dr. P.B., found that the Veteran was in need of VA medical foster care as a result of his vertigo-a residual of his TBI.  During the tele-health examination, the Veteran reported short-term memory issues with associated vertigo, nausea, headaches, and blurry vision.  He described vertigo as a feeling of lightheadedness and spinning.  He also complained of balance problems as well as numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.  He did not sleep well at night due to nightmares.  Dr. P.B. determined that the Veteran had memory issues and associated symptoms of vertigo, nausea, headaches, blurry vision, and headaches from his TBI.    

In a June 2020 statement, the Veteran explained that he began having headaches immediately after discharge from military service.  He stated that he had constant pressure in his head and dealt with chronic fatigue.  He also noted that he had constant tinnitus.  He noted that, in March 2019, his social worker recommended that he enter a foster home because of his severe short term memory loss, PTSD, Meniere's disease, neck pain, migraine headaches, chronic fatigue, depression, bipolar disorder, and chronic sleep problems.  The Veteran stated that he was depressed and not happy anymore.  He had not worked since 2008 due to his TBI symptoms.  He noted that his short-term memory loss was very bad and that his foster care home provider had to remind him when rent was due and drive him to the bank to pay.  He also stated that he worried about taking showers and falling so he had to ask his foster care home provider to monitor him.  The Veteran also asked his provider to manage his medication and that he was disoriented during the day.  He also reported that he could not prepare his own meals that need use of the stove or oven as a result of his bad balance.  

In a June 2020 opinion, Dr. C.B. opined that the Veteran should be granted SMC at the (t) rate.  He opined that the Veteran's TBI symptoms required the regular aid and attendance of another person.  Dr. C.B. explained that the December 2018 rating decision granted service connection for Meniere's disease related to the service-connected TBI.  Dr. C.B. noted that the symptoms included hearing loss, tinnitus, vertigo, and/or a cerebellar gait.  In this case, he opined that the incapacitating episodic episodes were occurring more than weekly and sufficiently severe to warrant the total evaluation.  Dr. C.B. again found that the Veteran required aid and attendance of another person due to residuals of TBI manifesting "in a cluster of symptoms synonymous with Meniere's disease."  See pg. 5.  

A November 2020 examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, completed by B.F., found that the Veteran was unable to prepare his own meals; needed assistance in bathing and tending to other hygiene needs; and reported that he could not drive due to his dizziness.  

In an August 2024 statement, J.H. explained that she had been the Veteran's caregiver for the past two years.  She reported that she assisted him with his daily care.  She managed the Veteran's medical appointments including reminding him of appointments and accompanying him to appointments and monitored his medications.  She observed that he had daily confusion accompanied by an inability to focus or concentrate.  He was unable to read a book or lengthy article due to lack of focus.  He was unable to accomplish more than one or two tasks a day due to his lack of focus.  The Veteran was given instructions and directions regarding bathing, laundry, and household cleanliness.  She reported that the Veteran had severe short-term memory loss and noted that she had to prepare the Veteran's meals.  He had severe balance issues and she observed him losing his balance.  She noted that he had fallen several times.  J.H. felt that the Veteran could not live independently, and she had assisted him in securing homes in residential houses where he was sheltered and could have some meals provided.  She and other church members supplemented his meals and monitored nutrition.

Given the above, the Board finds that the evidence, is at least in relative balance as to whether the 100-percent rated residuals of TBI, specifically his dizziness and loss of balance, memory loss, and headaches, result in periods of both physical and mental incapacity that requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect him from hazards incident to his daily environment.  Therefore, he meets the requirement for regular aid and attendance due to his TBI residuals.

Moreover, the Board finds that the evidence demonstrates in the absence of regular aid and attendance, the Veteran would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(t).  Because the Veteran is unable to perform essential activities of daily living, such as preparing meals, following a medication regimen, and being able to perform basic hygiene without being monitored or instructed by another person, he would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care in the absence of regular aid and attendance.  This is further evidenced by his stay at the VA medical foster home from March 1, 2019, and the August 2024 lay statement from his current caregiver.  

Considering all this evidence, the Board finds that the evidence is in relative balance as to whether the Veteran is in regular need of regular aid and attendance for the 100-percent rated residuals of TBI, and in the absence of such regular aid and attendance would require hospitalization, nursing home care, or other residential institutional care.  Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that the criteria for SMC is warranted at the rate established under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) effective September 7, 2018, when he was awarded service connection and a 100 percent rating for Meniere's disease.

In awarding this benefit, the Board notes that the Veteran lived at a VA foster medical home beginning in March 2019.  The award of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) may be subject to the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.351, 3.552.  The provisions of § 3.352(b)(2) state that the aid and attendance rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) shall be discontinued when a veteran is hospitalized at VA expense.  See 38 C.F.R. 3.351(2) (defining hospitalization as institutional, domiciliary, or nursing home care in a Department of Veterans Affairs institution or domiciliary or at Department of Veterans Affairs expense).

SMC at the (t) rate prior to September 7, 2018.

Prior to September 7, 2018, the Veteran was in receipt of SMC at the (l) rate for his need for aid and attendance for his PTSD, TBI, and scars effective October 17, 2014.  However, prior to September 7, 2018, he did not have 100-percent rated TBI residuals to warrant SMC at the (t) rate.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.352.  

In the September 2018 RAMP decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had TBI residuals consisting of TBI rated at 40 percent; migraine headaches rated at 50 percent; tinnitus rated at 10 percent; scars rated at 30 and 20 percent; and neck pain rated at 10 percent, combining to 90 percent.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  The Veteran also had service-connected non-TBI-related disabilities including PTSD rated at 100 percent and chronic fatigue syndrome rated at 10 percent.   

First, the Board recognizes the Veteran's argument that his service-connected chronic fatigue syndrome should be considered a residual of TBI.  However, service connection for CFS was not granted as a TBI residual.  See May 1996 rating decision.  Moreover, even if the Board considered the CFS as a TBI residual, it would still not combine to 100 percent.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  

As to PTSD, that increased rating issue was initiated by a June 2020 supplemental claim received more than one year after any final rating decision and the Board cannot reach the review period prior to September 7, 2018, to evaluate the symptoms attributable to PTSD as opposed to TBI under Code 8045.  Further, the crux of the Veteran's argument is that his TBI should be rated as 100 percent under Diagnostic Code 8045, not that his service-connected PTSD is a TBI-residual.  See May 2024 hearing transcript; August 2024 argument; March 2025 argument.  The record reflects that the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD in a March 2006 rating decision due to his stressor of combat, and not as a residual of an injury to the brain.    

Though the Board recognizes and acknowledges the TBI symptoms experienced by the Veteran prior to September 7, 2018, the Veteran withdrew his increased rating claims for TBI, headaches, and scars, in October 2019.  See also January 2020 Board decision.  The SMC at the (t) rate is the sole issue that reaches back to the time period prior to September 7, 2018.  The Board cannot now relitigate the increased rating claim for TBI to adjust the ratings during the time period prior to September 7, 2018, to allow for an award of SMC at the (t) rate.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.1100, 20.1103.

Accordingly, prior to September 7, 2018, the criteria for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) are not met.  The evidence weighs persuasively against the claim, and it is denied.  

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Seay, Jessica M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.