Citation Nr: A25032810
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-427895
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

An initial rating higher than 20 percent for a left shoulder strain is denied.

An initial rating higher than 10 percent for a lumbosacral strain (low back disability) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve associated with a lumbosacral strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve associated with a lumbosacral strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has not been diagnosed with sleep apnea.

2. The Veteran's left shoulder strain has not been manifested by range of motion of the arm limited to least midway between the side and shoulder level or less.

3. The Veteran's low back disability has not been manifested by range of forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 60 degrees or less; or by a combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 120 degrees or less; or by muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis; or by ankylosis; he has not had intervertebral disc syndrome of the thoracolumbar spine. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 20 percent for a left shoulder strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.321, 4.3, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5201.

3. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 10 percent for a low back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.321, 4.3, 4.71a, DC 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 2011 to March 2013.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2023 and February 2024 decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In March 2024 the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) with respect to these decisions and elected the Direct Review option.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 7105, 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.203.  

Under the Direct Review option, the Board's decision will be based on the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on the issue or issues on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.301, 20.801(a).  Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision with respect to the evaluations of the Veteran's left shoulder strain and low back disability, and the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision with respect to the claim for service connection for sleep apnea.  See id.  If evidence was submitted by the Veteran or otherwise added to the claims file since the AOJ decisions on appeal, the Board has not considered it at this time.  See id.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that the Board could not in consider in this decision, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Because the Board is remanding the issues of entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right and left lower extremities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those issues on remand.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection generally will be awarded when a veteran has a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a link ("nexus") between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009). 

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance-which includes but is not limited to equipoise-the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. 

For the following reasons, the Board finds that service connection for sleep apnea is not established.

To satisfy the criteria for service connection, there must be evidence of a current disability.  Here, the record does not show diagnoses of sleep apnea or a similar condition.  In December 2023, a VA examiner reviewed the claims file and found that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with sleep apnea. 

The objective medical evidence outweighs the Veteran's unsupported lay belief that he has sleep apnea.  See King v. Shinseki, 700 F.3d 1339, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (holding that to find a medical opinion more probative than a lay opinion on a medical issue did not amount to improperly discounting the lay evidence).

The evidence does not show a distinct sleep disability within the scope of the claim for sleep apnea.  The Veteran's symptom of sleep impairment is compensated by the 70 percent rating assigned his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), since a 30 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of PTSD that include chronic sleep impairment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.  

In the absence of a current disability, the criteria for service connection for sleep apnea are not satisfied.  See Holton, 557 F.3d at 1366.

As the persuasive evidence is against the claim, the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

Increased Ratings

VA has adopted a Schedule for Rating Disabilities to evaluate service-connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.321; see generally, 38 C.F.R. Part IV.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  The percentage ratings in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities represent, as far as practicably can be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from service-connected disabilities in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Diagnostic codes in the rating schedule identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.  If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  Id.  All reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

Because the level of disability may have varied over the course of the claim, the rating may be "staged" higher or lower for segments of time during the period under review in accordance with such variations.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance-which includes but is not limited to equipoise-the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

Entitlement to a higher initial rating for a left shoulder strain.

For the following reasons, the Board finds that the criteria for an initial rating higher than 20 percent for the Veteran's left shoulder disability have not been met.

A. Rating Criteria

The Veteran's left shoulder disability is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5201, which pertains to limitation of motion of the arm.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  

The Board notes that revisions to the rating schedule applicable to the musculoskeletal system went into effect on February 7, 2021.  See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Musculoskeletal System and Muscle Injuries, 85 Fed. Reg. 76453 (Nov. 30, 2020).  The Board may consider these changes without remand to the agency of original jurisdiction for consideration in the first instance.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.904(d)(2).  The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise; thus, the changes to the rating schedule that went into effect on February 7, 2021 do not apply prior to that date.  See VAOPGCPREC 7-2003 (Nov. 19, 2003); Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003); 85 Fed. Reg. 76453.  These changes will be discussed further below.

Under the version of DC 5201 in effect prior to February 7, 2021, a 20 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion of the arm at shoulder level for the major (dominant) and minor (non-dominant) extremity; a 30 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion to midway between the side and shoulder level for the major extremity, and a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity; a maximum 40 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion to 25 degrees from the side for the major extremity, and a maximum 30 percent for the minor extremity.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

VA regulation defines normal range of shoulder motion as forward elevation (flexion) from 0 to 180 degrees; abduction from 0 to 180 degrees; internal rotation from 0 to 90 degrees; and external rotation from 0 to 90 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I.  

Plate I clearly shows that limitation of flexion or abduction to shoulder level means limitation to 90 degrees.  Therefore, limitation of motion to midway between the side and shoulder level means limitation to 45 degrees, which is the midway point between 0 and 90 degrees.  As shown below, the recently amended version of DC 5201 specifies these degrees with regard to the above limitations. 

Limitation of motion under the prior version of DC 5201 may be compensated based on limitation of abduction or limitation of flexion-the two planes of movement involving lifting the arm from the side-whichever would afford the higher rating.  Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d, 1355, 1358-59 (2013) (citing Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 314-16 (2003)).  However, separate ratings for both limitation of abduction and flexion are not available under this diagnostic code.  Id. (holding that "the plain language of [DC] 5201... allows only a single rating for 'limitation of motion of' an arm").

The current version of DC 5201 is substantively identical to the prior version, but clarifies that the limitation of motion may be in flexion and/or abduction, and specifies the degrees at which range of motion of the arm is considered limited to shoulder level or midway between side and shoulder level.  

Under current DC 5201, a 20 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion of the arm at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees) for the major (dominant) and minor (non-dominant) extremity; a 30 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion to midway between the side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees) for the major extremity, and a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity; a maximum 40 percent rating is assigned for limitation of motion of the arm in flexion and/or abduction to 25 degrees from the side for the major extremity, and a maximum 30 percent for the minor extremity.  85 Fed. Reg. at 76462.

In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system based on range of motion, the Board must consider whether a higher rating may be assigned for functional loss of the affected joint, including with repeated use over time or during flare-ups of symptoms.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995).  In this regard, VA must consider factors such as weakness and pain affecting the normal working movements of the body in terms of excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40; Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 43 (2011).  With respect to the joints, VA must consider whether there is less movement or more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, as well as swelling, deformity, or atrophy of disuse.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45. 

B. Factual Background

The December 2018 VA examination states that the Veteran reported having left shoulder pain for many years.  He did not report flare-ups or functional loss.  On examination, range-of-motion (ROM) testing showed flexion of the left arm from 0 to 170 degrees, abduction from 0 to 170 degrees, external rotation from 0 to 90 degrees, and internal rotation from 0 to 90 degrees.  He exhibited pain with abduction, but the examiner found it did not cause functional loss.  There was no additional loss of range of motion with repetitive testing.  The examiner found that pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination would not significantly limit functional ability of the Veteran's left arm with repeated use over a period of time.  Muscle strength testing showed 5/5 strength of the left shoulder.  There was no muscle atrophy.  A rotator cuff condition was not suspected.  There was no instability, dislocation, or labral pathology suspected.  A condition of the clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint or sternoclavicular joint was not suspected.  There was no loss of head (flail shoulder), nonunion (false flail shoulder), or fibrous union of the humerus.  There was no malunion of the humerus with moderate or marked deformity.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to the Veteran's left shoulder disability.  Diagnostic imaging did not show degenerative or traumatic arthritis.  The examiner found that the Veteran's left shoulder should disability did not have an impact on his ability to perform any type of occupational task. 

The VA treatment records show that in February 2019 the Veteran reported left shoulder pain that he characterized as a 7 out of 10 in severity and described as a burning sensation.  He was not taking any medications.  He requested an x-ray study.  An x-ray performed that day was found to be unremarkable. 

In September 2019 the Veteran complained of left shoulder pain that radiated to his left forearm at times. 

In a January 2020 statement (VA Form 21-4138), the Veteran wrote that ever since service he has experienced daily shoulder pain that sometimes gets so bad he can barely move his arm.  He stated that his left shoulder condition limited the movement of his arm, which made it harder to carry out his work as a contractor.  

A February 2020 VA treatment record shows that he reported that his work involved flipping houses.  He enjoyed the work, but the physical nature of remodeling houses aggravated pain in his back and knee.  

An April 2020 VA treatment record states that he reported working in construction and that he hurt his back often. 

The Veteran has submitted the report of a June 2020 shoulder examination performed by a private doctor.  VA's Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) for shoulder and arm conditions was used as the template for the examination report.  The examiner diagnosed a shoulder strain, with a date of diagnosis of 2018, acromioclavicular (AC) joint osteoarthritis, with a date of diagnosis of February 5, 2013, and shoulder separation, with a date of diagnosis of June 2013.  The Veteran reported that during service, in 2013, he was seen and treated for a separated shoulder, AC osteoarthritis, and impingement syndrome.  He stated that since that time he had progressively worsening symptoms with decreasing range of motion of the left shoulder.  He stated that on a "good" day he can hardly lift his left arm past his shoulder, and that during a flare-up "it's like [his] left shoulder is frozen."  In that regard, during flare-ups it was difficult to lift his left arm away from his body.  His shoulder was really stiff, and it was difficult to do things like put on a shirt or comb his hair because he could not lift his left arm.  

On ROM testing, flexion of the Veteran's left arm was to 170 degrees, abduction to 170 degrees, external rotation to 90 degrees, and internal rotation to 90 degrees.  There was no additional loss of ROM after repetitive testing.  The examiner estimated that during a flare-up or with repeated use over a period of time, flexion of the left shoulder would be to 90 degrees, adduction to 25 degrees, external rotation to 15 degrees, and external rotation to 15 degrees.  In that regard, the examiner stated that during a flare-up the Veteran experiences loss of range of motion of the left shoulder due to pain and muscle spasming.  The examiner added that the Veteran is unable to abduct his left shoulder greater than 25 degrees during a flare-up.  

Muscle strength testing showed 5/5 strength of the left shoulder in forward flexion and abduction.  A rotator cuff condition was not suspected.  There was no instability, dislocation, or labral pathology suspected.  There was no history of mechanical symptoms.  There was no history of recurrent dislocation.  A condition of the clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint or sternoclavicular joint was not suspected.  The Veteran did not have an AC joint condition or any other impairment of the clavicle or scapula.  There was no loss of head (flail shoulder), nonunion (false flail shoulder), or fibrous union of the humerus.  There was no malunion of the humerus with moderate or marked deformity.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to the Veteran's left shoulder disability.  

The examiner stated that imaging of the left shoulder had been performed and showed degenerative or traumatic arthritis.  The examiner cited a January 2013 x-ray study that showed calcifications at the inferior aspect of the AC joint with mild hypertrophy of the distal clavicle with could be secondary to a prior AC joint injury/distal clavicle injury.  

Regarding the functional impact of the Veteran's left shoulder disability, the examiner stated that the Veteran experiences significant limitations in his range of motion and functional ability of the shoulder, particularly during a flare-up, which limited weightbearing and non-weightbearing activities, making manual labor and even activities of daily living difficult due to pain and muscle spasming. 

VA treatment records dated through 2023 do not show subsequent complaints of left shoulder symptoms or treatment for the Veteran's left shoulder.  There are no non-VA medical records pertaining to his left shoulder dated during the period under review. 

C. Analysis

The Veteran's left arm is his major extremity, according to the December 2018 VA examination report.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.69.  Thus, the ratings assigned for limitation of motion of the major upper extremity apply.  

The persuasive evidence shows that the Veteran's left shoulder disability has not been manifested by limitation of motion to midway between the side and shoulder level or less.  Both the December 2018 VA examination and June 2020 private examination show flexion and abduction of the left arm well in excess of limitation midway between side and shoulder level, which is 45 degrees, including after repetitive testing.  

The Board has considered whether there is additional functional loss of the left shoulder under the Deluca criteria, including during flare-ups and with repeated use of the shoulder over a period of time.  The Veteran did not report flare-ups at the December 2018 examination, and the examiner found that there would be no additional functional loss of the shoulder with repeated use over time.  

The June 2020 private examiner estimated that during flare-ups, the Veteran's abduction of the left shoulder would be limited to 25 degrees.  As the examiner measured 170 degrees of range of abduction at the examination, including after repetitive testing, this means that there would be a loss of 145 degrees of range of motion during flare-ups, according to the examiner's estimate. 

The Board finds that the June 2020 private examiner's estimates of additional range of motion loss during flare-ups are not probative.  The only explanation provided was the Veteran's self-report.  The examiner did not account for the fact that the February 2019 x-ray study was found to be unremarkable, and that there is no other objective evidence of pathology of the left shoulder during the period under review.  The diagnoses of AC joint osteoarthritis and shoulder separation provided by the examiner are based on findings from 2013, many years prior to the date of this claim.  The record does not show findings of arthritis or any condition apart from a left shoulder strain based on current examination findings.  Indeed, notwithstanding the diagnosis of AC joint osteoarthritis based on a January 2013 x-ray, which is dated many years prior to the date of this claim, the examiner stated in the same report that the Veteran did not have a condition of the AC joint.  Moreover, the examiner did not provide any other findings of abnormalities based on actual examination of the Veteran's shoulder.  ROM testing showed nearly normal range of motion of the shoulder, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I, and no weakness or other abnormalities were found on examination.  

 

Accordingly, because the estimates of additional loss of ROM during flare-ups provided by the June 2020 examiner are extreme (a loss of 145 degrees of range of abduction), appear to be based solely on the Veteran's unsubstantiated self-report, and are not accompanied by an explanation correlating them with the range-of-motion findings on the day of the examination or accounting for the otherwise normal findings during the period under review, including the February 2019 x-ray study, the Board finds they are unreliable and hence not probative.  To the extent the examiner based those estimates on the 2013 diagnoses, the examiner did not address the fact that the February 2019 x-ray study was found to be unremarkable, and that the findings from 2013 are not otherwise show to reflect the nature or severity of the Veteran's left shoulder disability during the period under review, which begins a number of years after those findings.

Moreover, the June 2020 examination does not specify the frequency and duration of the Veteran's reported flare-ups.  Flare-ups in themselves do not automatically warrant assignment of a higher rating.  For example, flare-ups occurring once or twice per year and last one or two days at a time would not warrant a higher rating, even if range of motion of the shoulder satisfied the criteria for a higher rating during those periods, since they would not occur frequently enough or last long enough to cause additional functional impairment of earning capacity.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10; see also Voerth v. West, 13 Vet. App. 117, 122-23 (1999) (observing that "temporal considerations are important," and that occasional short-lived flare-ups must be distinguished from those cases where a person experiences a worsened condition for weeks or months which impairs earning capacity).

The Board also notes that the VA treatment records and December 2018 VA examination cast significant doubt on the credibility of the Veteran's statements, including his January 2020 written statement (VA Form 21-4138), in terms of the severity of his flare-ups.  The VA treatment records show that he has reported working in construction, which is presumably a physically intensive occupation.  He noted the physical nature of remodeling houses in the February 2020 VA treatment record.  The fact that he was able to work in construction undercuts his reported functional impairment of the left shoulder, which is his dominant arm.  Significantly, the February 2020 VA treatment record shows that he reported that his work remodelling houses aggravated pain in his back and knee, but he did not report that affected his shoulder.  The Board finds it implausible he would not also mention his shoulder given the extensive physical limitations he described at the June 2020 private examination.  Finally, he did not report having flare-ups at the December 2018 examination, which conflicts with his statements at the June 2020 private examination.  The evidence thus undercuts the credibility of the Veteran's regarding the nature and severity of his flare-ups. 

The Board observes that the record does not show a worsening of the Veteran's left shoulder disability since the December 2018 examination was performed.  Indeed, the December 2018 and June 2020 examinations contain the same ROM measurements and same findings that strength was normal, and that there was no instability or other abnormalities.  He has not otherwise reported worsening of his shoulder symptoms since the December 2018 examination.  His January 2020 written statement, for example, does not indicate that there was a worsening, but asserts that he has had flare-ups ever since service (i.e., that it sometimes gets so bad he can barely move his arm).  Thus, the findings in the two examinations can be compared with and weighed against each other, since the level of disability was presumably the same at both examinations. 

For the above reasons, the Board finds that the December 2018 VA examination carries much more probative weight than the June 2020 private examination with regard to whether there has been additional functional loss of the Veteran's shoulder during flare-ups that further impairs earning capacity.  

Thus, as the persuasive evidence shows that the Veteran's range of flexion and abduction of the left arm has well exceeded limitation of motion to midway between the side and shoulder level or less, and that he has not had additional functional loss of the left shoulder beyond that captured in the December 2018 examination-the findings in the June 2020 private examination having been discounted in that regard, as discussed above-due to the Deluca factors set forth in § 4.40 and §4.45 of the regulations, the criteria for an initial rating higher than 20 percent based on limitation of range of motion have not been met.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201.  

The Board finds that the December 2018 examination complies with the requirements of Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 168-70 (2016).  The examiner stated that there was evidence of pain on passive ROM testing, which indicates that passive ROM testing was performed.  The examination does not specify ROM measurements in terms of weightbearing and non-weightbearing.  In Correia, the Court held that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, VA examinations for joint disabilities must include, "whenever possible," range-of-motion testing in active motion, passive motion, in weightbearing and in non-weightbearing, and, if possible, with comparison to the range of motion of the opposite undamaged joint.  28 Vet. App. at 168-70.  

In this case, because the shoulder is not a weightbearing joint, the Board finds that whether the Veteran was standing or sitting-i.e., in weightbearing or non-weightbearing-when the range-of-motion testing was performed is irrelevant.  This is borne out by Plate I in the rating schedule, which in its depiction of measurements of range of motion of the shoulder, does not show if the individual is seated or standing.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I.  That of course is because, as a matter of simple logic, whether a person is standing or seated, that is, in weightbearing or non-weightbearing, would have no effect on pain or range of motion of the shoulder.  By contrast, the depiction of measurements of range of motion of the knee, a weightbearing joint, in Plate I show the person seated.  See id.

In addition, the December 2018 VA examination states that there was no evidence of pain when the joint was used in non-weightbearing.  Thus, there is no indication that specifying shoulder ROM in weightbearing versus non-weightbearing would alter the ROM measurements provided in the examination report. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the examination is adequate under Correia. 

The Board may not deny a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when the ameliorative effects of medication are not contemplated by the rating criteria.  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  The rating criteria applicable to the shoulder do not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication, and thus those effects must be discounted.  See Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, No. 23-1798 (March 12, 2025) (holding that Jones applies to rating musculoskeletal disabilities).

Here, the record does not show that the Veteran's left shoulder symptoms or functioning have been alleviated by medication.  Thus, the December 2018 examination captures the severity of his left shoulder disability without the ameliorating effects of medication, and therefore the Board is not denying a higher rating based on the relief provided by medication.  

The changes to the criteria applicable to the shoulder and arm are essentially clarifying, rather than substantive, changes.  New DC 5201 contains the same rating criteria as the former version, but clarifies that limitation of motion of the arm includes flexion and/or abduction, and that limitation of motion to shoulder level is limitation of flexion and/or abduction to 90 degrees, while limitation midway between side and shoulder level is flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees.  

As the December 2018 VA examination and June 2020 private examination show that the Veteran's left arm range of flexion and abduction substantially exceeds 45 degrees, that change to DC 5201 defining when limitation of motion is considered to be midway between side and shoulder level does not support assignment of a rating higher than 20 percent under new DC 5201.  (Again, the findings in the June 2020 private examination regarding additional loss of ROM during flare-ups are discounted, for the reasons discussed above.)

The Board has considered the applicability of other DC's pertaining to the shoulder and arm.  The evidence, including the December 2018 VA examination and June 2020 private examination, shows that the Veteran's left shoulder disability has not been manifested by any other conditions during the period under review.  Thus, the other DC's pertaining to the shoulder and arm do not apply.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC's 5200-5203. 

Finally, with regard to ankylosis under DC 5200, the Board notes that the criteria for a higher rating based on ankylosis can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare-up.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 11 (2021).  This is because "ankylosis is, in essence, a complete limitation of motion."  Id. at 10.  Thus, an evaluation based on ankylosis may be assigned if there is functional loss that is the equivalent of ankylosis.  Id. at 11.  As discussed above, the Board finds that the Veteran has not had complete limitation of motion of the left arm during flare-ups, and indeed finds that the persuasive evidence weighs against a higher rating based on any additional limitation of motion or functional loss during flare-ups or with repeated use of the shoulder over time.  Therefore, he has not had the functional equivalent of ankylosis.

In sum, the criteria for an initial rating higher than 20 percent for the Veteran's left shoulder disability have not been met.  As the persuasive evidence is against a higher rating, the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

Entitlement to a higher initial rating for a low back disability.

For the following reasons, the Board finds that the criteria for an initial rating higher than 10 percent for the Veteran's low back disability have not been met.

A. Rating Criteria

Preliminarily, the Board notes that revisions to the rating schedule applicable to the musculoskeletal system went into effect on February 7, 2021.  See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Musculoskeletal System and Muscle Injuries, 85 Fed. Reg. 76453 (Nov. 30, 2020).  The Board may consider these changes without remand to the agency of original jurisdiction for consideration in the first instance.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.904(d)(2).  These changes will be discussed further below.  However, the Board here notes that no changes were made to the actual rating criteria applicable to the spine.

The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise; thus, the changes to the rating schedule that went into effect on February 7, 2021 do not apply prior to that date.  See VAOPGCPREC 7-2003 (Nov. 19, 2003); Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003); 85 Fed. Reg. 76453.

The rating schedule provides for the evaluation of all disabilities of the spine under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula) unless the disability is rated under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes (DC 5243).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5243.  The evaluation of IVDS will be discussed below.  

Under the General Rating Formula, evaluations of disabilities of the spine are assigned as follows:

A 10 percent rating is assigned when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, when forward flexion of the cervical spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, when the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, when the combined range of motion of the cervical spine is greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, when there is muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or when there is a vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. 

A 20 percent rating is assigned when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, when forwards flexion of the cervical spine is greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, when the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, when the combined range of motion of the cervical spine is not greater than 170 degrees; or, when there is muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  

A 30 percent rating is assigned when forward flexion of the cervical spine is 15 degrees or less; or, when there is favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 40 percent rating is assigned when there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine; or, when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is limited to 30 degrees or less; or when there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  

A 50 percent rating is assigned when there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  

A 100 percent rating is assigned when there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  

Id.  

The General Rating Formula applies with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease.  Id.

Any associated neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be rated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code.  Id., Note (1). 

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is from 0 to 90 degrees; extension from 0 to 30 degrees; left and right lateral flexion from 0 to 30 degrees; and left and right lateral rotation from 0 to 30 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5243, Note (2), and Plate V.  The normal combined range of motion is 240 degrees.  Id.

Normal forward flexion of the cervical spine is from 0 degrees to 45 degrees; extension from 0 to 45 degrees; left and right lateral flexion from 0 to 45 degrees; and left and right rotation from 0 to 80 degrees.  Id.

Unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5243, Note (5).  

Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.  Id.

The requirement of establishing ankylosis under the General Rating Formula can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare-up.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 11 (2021).  This is because "ankylosis is, in essence, a complete limitation of motion."  Id. at 10.  Thus, an evaluation based on ankylosis may be assigned if there is functional loss that is the equivalent of ankylosis.  Id. at 11.

Disabilities of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments are evaluated separately, except when there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which is rated as a single disability.  Id., Note (6). 

Under DC 5243, IVDS may be evaluated under the General Rating Formula, as set forth above, or the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.  Under the Formula for Rating IVDS, a 10 percent rating is assigned if incapacitating episodes have a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months; a 20 percent evaluation is assigned if incapacitating episodes have a total duration of at least two weeks but less than four weeks; a 40 percent rating is assigned if the total duration is at least four weeks but less than six weeks; and a 60 percent rating is assigned if the total duration is at least six weeks.  Id.

For purposes of evaluations under diagnostic code 5243, an incapacitating episode is defined as a period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that require bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.  Id., Note (1). 

Effective February 7, 2021, the revised schedule provides that the criteria for rating IVDS under DC 5243 apply only when there is disc herniation with compression and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root.  Schedule for Rating Disabilities:  Musculoskeletal System and Muscle Injuries, 85 Fed. Reg. 76462 (Nov. 30, 2020) (codified at 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243).  Diagnostic Code 5242, which pertains to degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease other than IVDS, is to be assigned for all other disc diagnoses.  No changes were made to the criteria for rating IVDS.  A "non-substantive edit[]" was also made to DC 5242 clarifying that it applies to degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease other than IVDS.  Id. at 76459, 76462.  

In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, consideration must be given to functional loss, including due to weakness and pain, affecting the normal working movements of the body in terms of excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40; Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 43 (2011).  With respect to the joints, it must be considered whether there is less movement or more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, as well as swelling, deformity, or atrophy of disuse.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45. 

These considerations thus require a determination of whether a higher rating may be assigned based on functional loss of the affected joint on repeated use as a result of the above factors, including during flare-ups of symptoms, beyond any limitation reflected on one-time measurements of range of motion.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995).

B. Factual Background 

The VA treatment records show that in July 2018, the Veteran reported tossing and turning constantly and waking up every two to three hours due to back pain.  He was scheduled for an x-ray, and an October 2018 record states that the x-ray of his lumbosacral spine was found to be normal.  In September 2018, he reported that medication did not help his back pain.  He reported doing construction work and that it had been difficult for him to make an appointment due to working.

The December 2018 VA examination reflects that the Veteran reported back pain and morning stiffness, which had been going on for a long time.  He did not report flare-ups.  He did not report functional loss or functional impairment of the thoracolumbar spine.  On examination, forward flexion of the Veteran's back was measured to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees.  Pain was exhibited with forward flexion.  There was evidence of pain on passive ROM testing.  There was no evidence of pain when the joint was used in non-weightbearing.  There was no additional loss of ROM on repetitive testing.  The examiner found that repeated use of the back over time would not significantly limit functional ability, including due to factors such as pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination.  There was no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joints or soft tissue of the back.  There was no guarding or muscle spasm of the back.  Muscle strength testing of the hips, knees, and ankles showed normal strength.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflex testing was normal in the bilateral knees and ankles.  A sensory examination of the bilateral lower extremities was normal.  A straight leg raising test was negative.  The Veteran did not have radicular pain or other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.  He did not have ankylosis.  There were no other neurologic abnormalities or findings related to his low back disability.  He did not have IVDS.  The examiner found that the Veteran's back condition did not have an impact on his ability to work.  

The VA treatment records show that in September 2019 the Veteran reported chronic low back pain.  He had seen an acupuncturist, chiropractor, and physical therapist, but for only 1-2 visits each time.  He took Goody's powders twice per day.  He reported that meloxicam and Tylenol and not helped in the past.  He worked in construction.  Later that month he reported that his low back pain radiates to the back of his thighs, and that he sometimes gets back spasms. 

In a January 2020 statement (VA Form 21-4138), he wrote that on and off since his period of active he has experienced periodic exacerbations of back pain that are completely immobilizing.  He stated that during flare-ups it is nearly impossible to bend forward or perform physical activities requiring lifting any weight.  Even getting out of bed was difficult during flare-ups.  He stated that these flare-ups have worsened over time since active service, but he had experienced his current symptoms for the past several years. 

The VA treatment records show that in February 2020, he reported that he works flipping houses.  He enjoyed the work, but the physical nature of remodeling houses aggravated pain in his back and knees.  An April 2020 record notes that he worked in construction and hurt his back often. 

The Veteran has submitted the report of a June 2020 back examination performed by a private doctor.  VA's DBQ for back conditions was used as the template for the examination report.  The examiner diagnosed a lumbosacral sprain/strain and radiculopathy.  The Veteran reported a gradual onset of back pain associated with bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy during active service.  He stated that his symptoms had progressively worsened since that time, and that he now experienced daily back pain with frequent flare-ups aggravated by physical activity.  He endorsed flare-ups, stating that during a flare-up he can hardly get out of bed.  He needed to lie on a flat surface.  He worked in construction, so on a flare-up day he had to "call into work."  He stated that during flare-ups his back became really stiff and it was painful to bend or twist.  He could not bend forward to tie his shoes, and could not sit or stand "for too long."

On examination, the examiner measured forward flexion of the Veteran's back to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, and right lateral flexion, left lateral flexion, right lateral rotation, and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees each.  There was no additional loss of ROM on repetitive testing.  The Veteran reported pain on active and passive ROM testing, and with weightbearing and non-weightbearing activities. The examiner estimated that during a flare-up, forward flexion of the Veteran's back would be further limited to 30 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, and right and left lateral flexion and rotation to 10 degrees each.  In that regard, the examiner stated that the Veteran's ability to stand, sit, and walk was greatly decreased during a flare-up due to pain and muscle spasm.  As a result, he was unable to perform most of his daily activities during such episodes.  He reported significant pain during a flare-up, and limited movement of his lumbar spine.  The examiner added (at the bottom of the report) that virtually all chronic musculoskeletal conditions are subject to acute episodes of flares that can result in increased joint pain and consequent fatigue and reduced range of motion of the affected joints.  The periodic limitations reported by the Veteran were consistent with such flare-ups.  The estimates of ranges of motion during flare-ups reflected the examiner's best estimates of the functional impairment experienced by the Veteran during flare-ups based on the examiner's knowledge of the onset and course of the Veteran's condition and consideration of all evidence pertinent to such a determination, including his medical history and subjective descriptions.  The examiner noted that the entire claims file had been reviewed, including service treatment records, VA treatment records, and prior VA examination reports.  The examiner had considered all information necessary to accurately assess the severity of the Veteran's condition, including his medical history and subjective descriptions. 

Examination findings further showed no localized tenderness or pain of the joints or soft tissue.  The Veteran did not have guarding or muscle spasm of the back.  Spinal contour was normal.  Muscle strength testing of the hips, knees, and ankles showed normal strength.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflex testing was normal in the bilateral knees and ankles.  A sensory examination of the bilateral lower extremities was normal.  A straight leg raising test was negative bilaterally.  The examiner found that the Veteran did not have IVDS.  He did not have ankylosis. 

Regarding the impact of the Veteran's back disability on his ability to work, the examiner reiterated the Veteran's report that during a flare-up his back pain limited his ability to stand or sit for prolonged periods, and that during such exacerbations he experienced significant loss of function and mobility of the lumbar spine due to pain and muscle spasming, making it difficult to bend, twist, crouch, or lift substantial weight.  The examiner further noted the Veteran's report that during a flare-up he is generally unable to get out of bed and will have to call in sick to his job in construction. 

The VA treatment records show that in January 2022 the Veteran reported chronic low back pain and bilateral leg pain with "lightening" running down his legs.  It was worse with lifting/activity.  Over-the-counter medications were not helping.  On examination, he had mild low back pain.  Range of motion and function were normal.  Muscle strength and tone were normal.  

C. Analysis 

The persuasive evidence shows that the Veteran's low back disability has not been manifested by range of forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 60 degrees or less; or by a combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 120 degrees or less; or by muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  Both the December 2018 VA examination and June 2020 private examination show findings of forward flexion of the Veteran's back to 70 degrees, and a combined range of motion of 170 degrees, including on repetitive testing.  The VA treatment records show that his range of motion of the back was found to be normal when examined in January 2022.  The December 2018 and June 2020 examinations also show findings that he has not had muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  Finally, they show that he has not had ankylosis of the spine.  

Accordingly, the criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent under the General Rating Formula have not been met.

The Board has considered whether there has been additional functional loss of the Veteran's back under the Deluca factors, including during flare-ups and with repeated use over a period of time, that would warrant a higher rating.  The Board finds that a higher rating is not warranted when those factors are considered.  In that regard, he did not report flare-ups at the December 2018 examination, and the examiner found that there would be no additional functional loss of the back with repeated use over time.  

The Board has considered that the June 2020 private examiner estimated that during flare-ups, the Veteran's forward flexion of the back would be limited to 30 degrees, and the combined range of motion would be 85 degrees, which represents a 40-degree loss of flexion and a loss of 85 degrees of combined range of motion, or a loss of fifty percent of combined range of motion.  The Board finds that the June 2020 private examiner's estimates of additional range of motion loss during flare-ups are not probative.  The only explanation provided was the Veteran's self-report, a general reference to review of the claims file and medical records therein, and the observation that virtually all chronic musculoskeletal conditions are subject to acute episodes of flares that can result in increased joint pain and consequent fatigue and reduced range of motion of the affected joints.  The examiner did not account for the fact that the September 2018 x-ray study was normal, and that there is no other evidence of objective pathology of the Veteran's back during the period under review, including in the June 2020 examination.  

 

Accordingly, because the estimates of additional loss of ROM during flare-ups provided by the June 2020 examiner are extreme, appear to be based solely on the Veteran's unsubstantiated self-report, and are not accompanied by an explanation correlating them with the range-of-motion findings on the day of the examination or accounting for the otherwise normal findings during the period under review, including the July 2018  x-ray study, the Board finds they are unreliable and hence not probative.  The examiner's estimates essentially represent the examiner's medical opinion.  "A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two."  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301(2008).  Because the examiner's estimates lack a reasoned explanation linking the data to the conclusion reached, and do not account for other evidence in tension with those estimates, as specified above, the Board finds they are not probative.  See id. (holding that the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

In that regard, the June 2020 examiner's general observation that "virtually all chronic musculoskeletal conditions are subject to acute episodes of flares that can result in increased joint pain and consequent fatigue and reduced range of motion of the affected joints" indicates that the examiner was not considering the Veteran's specific medical history and circumstances, despite the examiner's professing to the contrary.  Rather, as stated by the examiner, the estimates of additional loss of ROM were based solely on the Veteran's self-report, with no medical analysis correlating his descriptions of flare-ups with the actual objective medical findings specific to him or his medical history, including the nature of the initial back injury. 

The Board also notes that the VA treatment records and December 2018 VA examination cast significant doubt on the credibility of the Veteran's statements, including the January 2020 written statement (VA Form 21-4138), in terms of the severity of his flare-ups.  They show that he has reported working in construction, which is presumably a physically intensive occupation.  He noted the physical nature of remodeling houses in the February 2020 VA treatment record.  He stated in October 2018 that it was difficult for him to make medical appointments because of his work.  The fact that he was able to work in a physically intensive job undercuts his reported functional impairment of the back.  The Board observes that a physically demanding job may be more difficult for him or aggravate his back symptoms, but that does not speak to the severity of his back condition itself in terms of how it normally manifests under the ordinary conditions of daily life, but to the nature of the work in terms of its impact on his back condition.  

Significantly, the Veteran did not report flare-ups at the December 2018 VA examination, which conflicts with his later statements asserting flare-ups.  As discussed further below, the record does not show a worsening of his symptoms between the December 2018 examination and the June 2020 private examination. 

Finally, and importantly, the June 2020 private examination does not specify the frequency of the Veteran's flare-ups.  It merely notes that he reported "frequent" flare-ups aggravated by physical activity.  The VA treatment records in which he reported and sought treatment for his back symptoms do not mention flare-ups, missed days of work, or the extreme types of symptoms described in the June 2020 examination, such as being hardly able to get out of bed and unable to bend enough to tie his shoes.  The Board finds it implausible that such severe symptoms would not be mentioned in the context of medical treatment for his back, and for that reason, cannot overlook the fact that such symptoms were only reported in the context of supporting this claim for benefits, which further undercuts their reliability.  

At any rate, there is no evidence, including in the January 2020 written statement (VA Form 21-4138) or the June 2020 private examination specifying the frequency of his flare-ups.  VA has no duty to request the private examiner to provide the frequency of the Veteran's flare-ups as that is not information that is objective and not a matter of opinion.  Savage v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 259, 270 (2011).  As can be seen, it would be based solely on his self-report. 

Thus, it may well be that any flare-ups the Veteran has experienced occurred once or twice per year and were of two days' duration.  That frequency and duration is not a basis for assigning a higher rating for his back disability based on ROM during flare-ups.  To the put the matter into perspective, under the Formula for Rating IVDS, a 10 percent rating is assigned for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than two weeks during a 12-month period.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  As an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms requiring bed rest, it is akin to the level of severity of the flare-ups described by the Veteran.  Clearly, bed rest means not using the back at all.  Thus, considered in light of the Formula for Rating IVDS, the frequency and duration of flare-ups is significant, since brief flare-ups happening once or twice a year, for example, and thus having a total duration of less than two weeks in a 12-month period, would not warrant a higher rating even if accompanied by limitation of ROM satisfying the criteria for a higher rating under the General Rating Formula.  The flare-ups must be shown to occur frequently enough or last long enough to cause additional impairment of earning capacity not captured by the current rating assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10; see also Voerth v. West, 13 Vet. App. 117, 122-23 (1999) (observing that "temporal considerations are important," and that occasional short-lived flare-ups must be distinguished from those cases where a person experiences a worsened condition for weeks or months which impairs earning capacity).

The Board also notes that the record does not show a worsening of the Veteran's back disability since the December 2018 examination was performed.  Indeed, the December 2018 and June 2020 examinations contain the same ROM measurements, and he has not reported, and the evidence does not otherwise show, a worsening of his back symptoms since the December 2018 examination.  Thus, the findings in both examinations may be compared with and weighed against each other. 

For the above reasons, the Board finds that the December 2018 VA examination carries much more probative weight than the June 2020 private examination with regard to the Veteran's ranges of motion of the thoracolumbar spine in terms of the Deluca factors.  

Thus, as the persuasive evidence shows that the Veteran's range of forward flexion of the back has exceeded 30 degrees, and his combined range of motion of the back has exceeded 120 degrees, and that he has not had additional functional loss of the back beyond that captured in the December 2018 examination-the findings in the June 2020 private examination having been discounted in that regard, as discussed above-due to the Deluca factors set forth in § 4.40 and §4.45 of the regulations, the criteria for an initial rating higher than 10 percent based on limitation of range of motion have not been met.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201.  

The Board finds that the December 2018 examination complies with the requirements of Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 168-70 (2016).  The examiner stated that there was evidence of pain on passive ROM testing, which indicates that passive ROM testing was performed.  The examiner stated that there was no pain in non-weightbearing, so non-weightbearing measurements would not be worse than those recorded in the examination report.  The Board also notes that Plate V of the rating schedule shows that ROM measurements of the thoracolumbar spine are to be obtained when the person is in a weightbearing position, as shown by the fact that the figure in the diagram is standing.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the examination is adequate under Correia. 

The Board may not deny a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when the ameliorative effects of medication are not contemplated by the rating criteria.  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  The rating criteria applicable to disabilities of the spine do not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication, and hence those effects must be discounted.  See Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, No. 23-1798 (March 12, 2025) (holding that Jones applies to rating musculoskeletal disabilities).

Here, the record does not show that the Veteran's back symptoms or functioning have been alleviated by medication.  In September 2018 and September 2019, he stated that medication did not help his back pain.  He reported taking Goody's powders in September 2019, but not at the time of the December 2018 examination.  Thus, the December 2018 examination captures the severity of his back disability without the ameliorating effects of medication, and therefore the Board is not denying a higher rating based on the relief provided by medication.  

With regard to ankylosis, the December 2018 VA examination and June 2020 private examination show findings that the Veteran has not had ankylosis of the back.  The Board notes that the criteria for a higher rating based on ankylosis can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare-up.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 11 (2021).  This is because "ankylosis is, in essence, a complete limitation of motion."  Id. at 10.  Thus, an evaluation based on ankylosis may be assigned if there is functional loss that is the equivalent of ankylosis.  Id. at 11.  As discussed above, the Board finds that the Veteran has not had complete limitation of the back, and indeed finds that the persuasive evidence weighs against a higher rating based on any additional limitation of motion or functional loss during flare-ups or with repeated use of the back over time.  Thus, the record does not show the functional equivalent of ankylosis.  Accordingly, the criteria for a higher rating under the General Rating Formula based on ankylosis, favorable or unfavorable, or its functional equivalent, have not been met. 

The General Rating Formula instructs that associated neurologic abnormalities are to be rated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code.  The Board has remanded the issue of entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left and right lower extremities, a neurologic abnormality, for consideration by the AOJ in the first instance, as discussed further below in the remand section of this decision.  The record does not show any other possible neurologic abnormalities associated with the Veteran's back disability. 

Because the Veteran has not had IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine, as found in the December 2018 VA examination and June 2020 private examination, the Formula for Rating IVDS does not apply. 

The revisions to the rating schedule applicable to disabilities of the spine that went into effect on February 7, 2021 only clarify when DC 5247 applies, which pertains to rating IVDS.  As the evidence shows that the Veteran has not had IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine during the period under review, the revisions to the rating schedule are not relevant to the evaluation of his back disability. 

In sum, the criteria for an initial rating higher than 10 percent for the Veteran's low back disability have not been met.  As the persuasive evidence is against a higher rating, the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

(Continued on next page)

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve associated with a lumbosacral strain.

2. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve associated with a lumbosacral strain.

Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  Id.  The remand must specify the action to be taken by the AOJ.  Id.

Here, the June 2020 private examination shows diagnoses of radiculopathy of the Veteran's left and right lower extremities involving the sciatic nerve associated with his low back disability.  

The AOJ has not adjudicated the issue of entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremities, which is an issue that is encompassed by the scope of this claim.  In that regard, "VA is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for the proper evaluation level for the primary service-connected disability."  Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203 (2021).  The June 2020 private examination reasonably raises the issue of entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy secondary to the Veteran's back disability. 

Accordingly, the AOJ erred in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty because it did not adjudicate the reasonably raised issue of entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy.  Therefore, remand is warranted for the AOJ to correct that error by adjudicating that issue in the first instance to ensure his right to one review on appeal.  See Hickson v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 394, 399 (2010) (holding that the AOJ should consider new evidence in the first instance and decide the matter so as to preserve for the claimant the right to one review on appeal under 38 U.S.C. § 7104).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Adjudicate the issues of entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the Veteran's right and left lower extremities as secondary to his service-connected low back disability.  See June 2020 Private Examination (VA DBQ for back disabilities). 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Rutkin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.