Citation Nr: A25032120
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240326-426394
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo (claimed as dizziness) as secondary to tinnitus is granted.

The appeal of a duty to assist (DTA) error during the higher-level review (HLR) for benign paroxysmal vertigo (claimed as dizziness) is dismissed.

The appeal of a DTA error during the HLR for sleep apnea is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for any sleep disability, to include sleep apnea, as secondary to tinnitus is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is in approximate balance regarding whether the Veteran's benign paroxysmal vertigo is due to or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus disability, and therefore the benefit of the doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran.

2. The July 2023 HLR decision did not constitute a final, appealable decision with respect to entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo.

3. The July 2023 HLR decision did not constitute a final, appealable decision with respect to entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo as secondary to a service-connected tinnitus disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310. 

2. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal of a DTA error during the HLR for benign paroxysmal vertigo have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal of a DTA error during the HLR for sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from August 1978 to November 1978 and from July 1990 to January 1991. 

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran timely appealed the rating decision in a March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the rating decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim for a sleep disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will reopen and issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Lastly, the Board notes that in the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran attempted to appeal the issue of entitlement to service connection for a low back disability, which the AOJ denied in an August 2021 rating decision. The August 2021 rating decision became final as the Veteran did not timely appeal the rating decision to the Board nor sought review of the decision by the AOJ. If the Veteran would like VA to reopen his claim for service connection for a low back disability, he may file a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application, as referenced above. See also February 2025 VA Letter to Veteran (describing how to properly file his request for VA to review a previously denied claim).  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1153; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.306.  

To establish service connection the evidence must demonstrate: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus or link between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires competent and credible evidence demonstrating: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). An increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury shall not be service-connected if it is due to the natural progression of the nonservice-connected condition. Id. at 447-48. 

Reasonable doubt concerning any matter material to the determination is resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo (claimed as dizziness) as secondary to tinnitus.

The Veteran contends that his benign paroxysmal vertigo is related to service, secondary to his service-connected disabilities, to specifically include tinnitus. See March 2024 Notice of Disagreement.

Generally, a favorable finding made by a VA adjudicator or the Board is binding on all subsequent adjudications by the AOJ and the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The AOJ made explicit favorable findings that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of a benign paroxysmal vertigo disability. See March 2024 rating decision. Additionally, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran is service connected for his primary disability, tinnitus. Id. The Board is bound by these findings, and they will not be revisited. The first and second elements for the Veteran's secondary service connection claim have been established. 

The only remaining question is whether there is medical evidence establishing a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the service-connected disability.

Medical evidence in favor of a nexus includes a February 2023 VA examination and February 2023 and February 2024 medical opinions that found the Veteran's benign paroxysmal vertigo was less likely than not due to his tinnitus disability. However, in providing a negative nexus, the examiner made an argument in favor of finding that the Veteran's benign paroxysmal vertigo disability is caused or aggravated by his tinnitus. In the February 2024 medical opinion, the examiner stated: 

Records indicate the Veteran occasionally experiences dizziness as a transient symptom potentially associated with headache and/or tinnitus, however there is no indication there is a unique a [sic] separate chronic condition of dizziness or a more formal diagnosis of vertigo that is not merely a transient symptom of another primary condition. 

The Veteran has a current diagnosis, and the medical evidence weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's benign paroxysmal vertigo is caused or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus disability. Resolving all reasonable doubts in the Veteran's favor, service connection for the Veteran's benign paroxysmal vertigo is warranted.

The appeal of a DTA error during the HLR for benign paroxysmal vertigo.  

The appeal of a DTA error during the HLR for sleep apnea. 

On the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran indicated that he was appealing the July 2023 HLR decision with respect to entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo and sleep apnea. The July 2023 decision identified a DTA error during the HLR for benign paroxysmal vertigo and sleep apnea and returned the claims for development. 

A duty to assist error advising the Veteran of future action to be taken by the AOJ is not a final appealable decision. See Shipley v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 458, 461-62 (2011) (finding that a deferred decision does not constitute an adjudicative decision for which a Notice of Disagreement may be filed because it is not a final decision). Therefore, it was an administrative error for the Board to accept the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement as to the July 2023 HLR decision because that was not a final, appealable decision on the claims of entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo and sleep apnea. Moreover, the Board is granting entitlement to service connection for benign paroxysmal vertigo and remanding the claim for sleep apnea herein; the appeals are dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for any sleep disability, to include sleep apnea, as secondary to tinnitus.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected tinnitus. See March 2024 Notice of Disagreement. 

After reviewing the evidence of record, and considering Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009), the Board has combined and expanded the scope of the Veteran's claim to encompass any sleep disability, to include obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). This will provide the most potentially favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the Court's holding in Clemons.

The Veteran was afforded a VA sleep apnea examination in February 2023 which confirmed his diagnosis of OSA. In the accompanying medical opinion, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's sleep apnea was due to or the result of his tinnitus disability. As rationale, the examiner stated that OSA is not caused by ringing in the ears and opined that the Veteran may have interrupted sleep in addition to OSA that is due to his tinnitus but stated that this would be subsumed under his tinnitus diagnosis. They provided no further rationale for their conclusion and did not clarify the distinction between OSA and interrupted sleep due to tinnitus. 

In a February 2024 medical opinion, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's sleep apnea was due to or the result of his tinnitus disability. As rationale, the examiner stated that there is a paucity of support in the medical literature and in the current generally accepted medical consensus to establish a nexus between tinnitus and the eventual development of sleep apnea. The examiner further stated that it is statistically more likely that the Veteran's sleep apnea is secondary to his advancing age, increasing weight, and male gender, and the combination of those three, well-established risk factors. 

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision because the medical opinions did not adequately address the secondary service connection issues of both causation and aggravation. The examiners did not provide separate findings and rationales with respect to the independent questions of causation and aggravation and, instead, focused on the issue of causation. See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018) (holding that causation and aggravation are independent concepts and should have separate findings and rationales). Additionally, the Board notes that a medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008). 

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

Here, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not ensuring the Veteran was provided an adequate medical opinion and a remand is necessary to correct this error. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's sleep disability, to include OSA. If deemed necessary, the Veteran should be scheduled for an examination. The record must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner in conjunction with this evaluation. 

2. The examiner should first identify all sleep disabilities present at any point during the period on appeal. 

If any diagnoses are rendered other than OSA, the examiner should address direct causation and render an opinion as to whether the disability is at least as likely as not related to service. Provide a thorough rationale to support the opinion(s). 

3. The examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran's sleep disabilities were caused or aggravated (worsened) by his service-connected disabilities, to specifically include tinnitus. Causation and aggravation are two separate inquires, and both must be answered thoroughly for each of the Veteran's diagnoses.

(a.) If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the degree of additional disability resulting from the aggravation (specifying the baseline level of disability and current level of severity, based on consideration of VA's rating schedule). 

The examiner is reminded that for secondary service connection purposes, the term "aggravation" means any incremental increase in the severity of the claimed disability due to a service-connected disability. 

4. In formulating the requested opinions, the examiner should explain the distinction between OSA and "interrupted sleep due to tinnitus," as referenced in the February 2023 medical opinion. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating the above requested opinion. A clear explanation for all opinions requested herein would be helpful, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, they should explain why.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cress, L., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.