Citation Nr: A25032976
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 220915-277825
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

The March 6, 2025, Board decision addressing the issue of whether new and relevant evidence had been received sufficient to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is vacated.

The March 6, 2025, Board decision addressing the issue of whether new and relevant evidence had been received sufficient to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability resulting from service-connected disability (TDIU) is vacated.

The March 6, 2025, Board decision addressing the issue of entitlement to TDIU is vacated.

New and relevant evidence having not been received, the application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability remains denied.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to TDIU is granted.

Entitlement to TDIU is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On March 6, 2025, the Board erroneously denied the Veteran's right shoulder and TDIU claims under the Direct Review lane; however, upon further review, the Veteran had submitted an additional VA Form 10182 on December 20, 2024, requesting review of this appeal under the Evidence Submission lane.

2. In a July 2019 rating decision, a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder strain (claimed as psoriatic arthritis in the shoulder) and surgical repair internal derangement shoulder and replacement (claimed as psoriatic arthritis in the right shoulder).

5. Evidence received since the July 2019 RO decision is not relevant with regard to the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability.

6. In a September 2019 rating decision, a VA RO denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to TDIU.

7. New evidence was received after the September 2019 rating decision that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to TDIU.

8. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not render him unable to obtain or maintain a gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for vacatur of the Board's March 6, 2025, denial of the appeal of the Veteran's application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability under the Direct Review lane have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7104 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1000 (2024).

2. The criteria for vacatur of the Board's March 6, 2025, denial of the appeal of the Veteran's application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to TDIU under the Direct Review lane have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7104 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1000 (2024).

3. The criteria for vacatur of the Board's March 6, 2025, denial of the appeal of the Veteran's claim for entitlement to TDIU under the Direct Review lane have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7104 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1000 (2024).

4. New and relevant evidence has not been received, and readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is not required.  38 U.S.C. § 5108 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501, 20.1103 (2024).

5. New and relevant evidence has been received, and the claim of TDIU is readjudicated.  38 U.S.C. § 5108 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501, 20.1103 (2024).

6. The criteria for entitlement to TDIU have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.18, 4.25 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1975 to February 1979 and from July 1979 to July 1995.

1. The March 6, 2025, Board decision addressing the issue of whether new and relevant evidence had been received sufficient to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is vacated.

2. The March 6, 2025, Board decision addressing the issue of whether new and relevant evidence had been received sufficient to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to TDIU is vacated.

3. The March 6, 2025, Board decision addressing the issue of entitlement to TDIU is vacated.

In August 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (the Appeals Modernization Act or AMA), Pub. Law 115-55, which created a new claims and appeals process for pursuing VA benefits.  In an October 2021 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) determined that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted with regard to the Veteran's claim for entitlement to TDIU and his claim for service connection for surgical repair internal derangement shoulder and replacement (claimed as psoriatic arthritis in the right shoulder).  On September 15, 2022, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) appealing the denial of these claims.  He requested the "Direct Review" lane, indicating that he did not want a Board hearing and would not submit any additional evidence in support of the appeal.  In a September 21, 2022, letter, the Board acknowledged the Veteran's appeal request and informed him that the appeal had been placed on the Direct Review docket. 

According to the fax cover sheet and the header information on the documents, along with the VA Form 10182, additional medical evidence was submitted.  Some of these medical records were duplicate copies of evidence that had already been associated with the file during a period of time when evidence was allowed to be associated with the file.  A September 2022 letter from the representative presented argument in support of the appeal, which could be considered as this is not evidence.  However, the representative also submitted new private medical evidence dated August 30, 2022, addressing the TDIU claim.  As a result, this new evidence submitted with the VA Form 10182 on which the Direct Review option was selected created uncertainty as to which Board review option the claimant intended, triggering the Board's duty to seek clarification under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f).  See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  

Pursuant to Edwards, a clarification letter was sent on November 18, 2024, informing the Veteran and his representative that this additional evidence could not legally be considered by the Board and directing the Veteran to request a switch in AMA dockets, if he wished for the additional evidence to be considered.  On December 20, 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 electing the Evidence Submission lane with regard to these appeals in response to the November 18, 2024, letter.  

The Board may vacate an appellate decision at any time upon request of the appellant or his or her representative, or on the Board's own motion, when an appellant has been denied due process of law or when benefits were allowed based on false or fraudulent evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.1000.

On March 6, 2025, the Board issued a decision that denied an application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability and readjudicated and denied the issue of entitlement to TDIU.  However, the Board erroneously adjudicated these claims under the Direct Review lane, as the Veteran's December 2024 VA Form 10182 electing the Evidence Submission lane had unfortunately not yet been uploaded into the Caseflow system as of March 6, 2025.

Accordingly, the Board's March 6, 2025, denials are vacated on the Board's own motion on account of the adjudications being erroneously conducted under the Direct Review lane, as opposed to the Evidence Submission lane.  Although the Veteran is within the 120-day appeal period, a search of pending dockets on the website for the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) does not show that a Notice of Appearance has been filed with respect to that Board decision, so vacatur as to these denials is appropriate at this time.

The Board will reconsider these appeals at this time under the Evidence Submission lane.

Separately, the Board notes that the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, on March 20, 2025, indicating that he wished to file a supplemental claim with regard to the denial of entitlement to TDIU in the March 6, 2025, Board decision.  However, as noted, the March 6, 2025, denial of entitlement to TDIU is being vacated, and that portion of the decision is being replaced with this determination.  The Veteran, however, is always free to file a new supplemental claim with regard to the new Board decision, if he chooses.  

Procedural Matters

The Board has thoroughly reviewed all evidence in the claims file.  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence and on what this evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim, and the Board's reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the Veteran.  The Veteran must not assume the Board has overlooked evidence not explicitly discussed herein.  

As discussed above, this appeal will be adjudicated under the "Evidence Submission" lane.  Under the AMA, when a claimant seeks appellate review through the Board's Evidence Submission docket, the Board only may consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 4, 2021, AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with or within 90 days after his December 20, 2024, VA Form 10182 was submitted.  38 U.S.C. § 7113 (c); 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  The Board notes that, with his December 20, 2024, VA Form 10182, the Veteran resubmitted new private medical evidence dated August 30, 2022, addressing the Veteran's TDIU claim.

To the extent that additional evidence has been associated with the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not permitted, the Board may not consider this evidence.  This includes any evidence added to the file after the October 2021 decision that was not resubmitted within a proper evidence window, as well as any evidence added to the file more than 90 days after the December 20, 2024, VA Form 10182.  However, the Veteran is always free to file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

VA regulations provide that, "[u]pon request, a claimant is entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim . . . before VA issues notice of a decision on an initial or supplemental claim."  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(1).  That regulation does not indicate that the claimant is entitled to pre-decisional notice of this optional hearing.  In fact, 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1) provides that, following a decision, "[c]laimants and their representatives are entitled to notice of any decision made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or the granting of relief . . . [including] the right to a hearing on any issue involved in the claim as provided in paragraph (d) of this section ...."  Read together with § 3.103(d), the only notice § 3.103(b) requires is that a claimant be provided notice of the right for a hearing with notification of the decision (by definition, a post-decisional notice).  In November 2022, VA amended VA Form 21-526EZ and in May 2024 VA amended VA Form 20-0995 to inform claimants of the right to a hearing at any time during the claims process.  The claim in this appeal was submitted in July 2020.  However, the Board finds that any error in the failure to inform the Veteran of the right to a pre-decisional hearing before the RO was harmless error.  

In Bowen, the Court found that when a claimant is denied a hearing before the RO, there is no due process violation if he or she is subsequently offered the opportunity for a hearing before the Board, even if a hearing was not requested or conducted, as long as there is no violation of due process concerning the Board hearing opportunity.  Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253-4 (2012).  The facts in the case can be differentiated on several levels, to include that the Veteran did not actually request an RO hearing and the issue in Bowen was not one of notice.  Regardless, the Board cannot find a basis to conclude that the underlying holding and logic of the Bowen case would not lead to the same finding of no prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.  The October 5, 2021, notification letter informing the Veteran of the rating decisions included a VA Form 20-0998, Your Right to Seek Review of Our Decision, outlining the Veteran's appeal options, to include a hearing before the Board.  Additionally, in the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran was provided with an option to request a hearing with a Veterans Law Judge.  The Veteran instead selected evidence submission review by a Veterans Law Judge, and the form explicitly states that by choosing this option, the Veteran does not want a Board hearing.  Because the Veteran was provided with notice of the right to appeal to the Board, as well as the right to a Board hearing, there was no due process violation in the processing of the claim or any suggestion that the Veteran was prejudiced by the failure of VA to provide a hearing at the RO level.  See Bowen. 

The Board notes that, in August 2022, the SFC Heath Robinson Honoring Our PACT Act, Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 ("PACT Act") was passed.  Under the PACT Act, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical nexus opinion when a veteran submits a compensation claim and has evidence of a disability and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), but the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a) (see PACT Act, Sec. 303).  In this case, a December 2022 VA Memorandum noted that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations at some point between August 1, 1991, to September 10, 2001.  However, in VA's sub-regulatory guidance, an exception to the above applies for claims based on physical trauma.  VBA Letter 20-24-06, Exception to TERA Examination and Medical Opinion Requirement at page 12 (June 12, 2024).  Therefore, the Board has no basis under the PACT Act upon which to order a medical examination/opinion related to the Veteran's right shoulder condition claim, as there is no indication that this disability could be due to anything other than a physical trauma.  In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran has indicated previously throughout the claims file that his shoulder disability was due to psoriatic arthritis in the shoulder.  However, as July 2019 VA examination determined that there was no diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis of either shoulder, the Board does not find that a remand under the PACT Act for a medical examination/opinion related to psoriatic arthritis is warranted due to a lack of diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis.

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues not addressed herein, to include regarding the duty to notify or the duty to assist, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in the active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110 (West 2002).  That an injury or disease occurred in service is not enough; there must be chronic disability resulting from that injury or disease.  If there is no showing of a resulting chronic condition during service, then a showing of continuity of symptomatology after service is required to support a finding of chronicity.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b).  Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service"-the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The law provides for compensation for Persian Gulf Veterans who suffer from a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that became manifest during active duty in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or became manifest to a compensable degree within the prescribed presumptive period and by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  The Board notes that the Veteran qualifies as a Persian Gulf Veteran as he served on active military service during the Persian Gulf War period in Southwest Asia.  See December 2022 VA Memorandum; 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (2023). 

New and relevant evidence having not been received, the application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability remains denied.

The Veteran seeks readjudication of previously denied claim of service connection for a right shoulder disability.  After reviewing the additional evidence added to the record since the previous denial of the Veteran's claim, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has not been added to the record.  Therefore, this claim will not be readjudicated.

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d).  New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (a)(1).  Relevant evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue.  Id.  Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.

The RO denied service connection for the Veteran's claimed right shoulder disabilities in a July 2019 rating decision on the basis that the Veteran's right shoulder disabilities neither occurred in nor were caused by service.  At the time of the July 2019 rating decision, the pertinent evidence of record included service treatment and personnel records, statements of the Veteran, VA treatment records, VA examination reports, Social Security Administration (SSA) medical records, and private medical records.  In the October 2021 rating decision, the RO determined that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted in order to warrant readjudication of the claim.  The newly submitted evidence consists primarily of VA and private treatment records, as well as the August 2022 private opinion concerning TDIU. 

With regard to these records, the Board finds that these records are new but not relevant to the claim of service connection for a right shoulder disability.  Specifically, these records do not address or reference the etiology of the claimed right shoulder condition.  These records do not tend to prove or disprove a matter at issue and are not relevant to the claim.  As such, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has not been submitted in order to warrant readjudication of the claim.

Accordingly, with no new and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate this claim, the claim may not be readjudicated.  The appeal is denied.

TDIU

Under VA regulations a TDIU rating may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the VA, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  If there is only one such disability, this shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent disability or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).  Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment.

For the above purpose of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable, (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident, (3) disabilities affecting a single body system (orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric), (4) multiple injuries incurred in action, or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

If a claimant does not meet the threshold criteria, a total disability evaluation may still be assigned, but on a different basis. It is the established policy of VA that all Veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b).  The rating boards are required to submit to the Director, Compensation and Pension Service, for extra-schedular consideration all cases of Veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, but who fail to meet the percentage standards set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).  Id. 

The Court has held that, pursuant to Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58,66 (2019), the proper standard for whether referral of an extraschedular TDIU claim to the Director, Compensation and Pension Service, is warranted is "whether there's sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable because of service-connected disabilities."  Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1, 10 (2021).

In determining unemployability for VA purposes, consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to age or any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.  The sole fact that a Veteran is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough.  The question is whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he or she can find employment.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993) (citing 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.15, 4.16(a)).

Importantly, disability ratings are based on the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from the disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  For a Veteran to prevail on a claim based on unemployability, it is necessary that the record reflect circumstances, apart from any nonservice-connected conditions and advancing age, which place that Veteran's case in a different category than other Veterans with an equal rating of disability.  Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App at 363.  The Veteran's service-connected disabilities, employment history, educational and vocational attainment, and all other factors having a bearing on the issue must be addressed.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b).

Substantially gainful employment is defined as work that is more than marginal, which permits the individual to earn a "living wage."  See Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991).  Marginal employment is defined as an amount of earned annual income that does not exceed the poverty threshold determined by the Census Bureau.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).  Marginal employment also may be held to exist on a facts-found basis when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold.  Id.  Such situations may include, but are not limited to, employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop.  Id.  Marginal work is not considered substantially gainful employment.

1. New and relevant evidence having been received, the application to readjudicate the matter of entitlement to TDIU is granted.

The Veteran seeks readjudication of a previously denied claim of entitlement to TDIU.  The October 2021 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had not been received.  However, after reviewing the additional evidence added to the record since the previous denial of the Veteran's claim, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been added to the record.  Therefore, this claim will be readjudicated.

Specifically, the claim for entitlement to TDIU was denied in a September 2019 rating decision on the basis that the Veteran had not been found unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  Since the September 2019 rating decision, the Veteran underwent several pertinent VA examinations addressing the severity of his service-connected disabilities in September 2021.  Specifically, the September 2021 VA Back Conditions examination noted that the Veteran experienced pain with work-related prolonged walking and standing, bending over, and lifting.  The September 2021 VA Foot Conditions examination noted that the Veteran's ability to perform occupational tasks was affected by his service-connected disability in that he experienced pain with work-related walking and standing. This evidence is new as it was not previously before adjudicators and is relevant as it tends to prove the Veteran's service-connected disabilities impact his employability.  The Board, therefore, finds that new and relevant evidence has been received and readjudication of the claim is granted.

2. Entitlement to TDIU is denied.

The Veteran is seeking entitlement to TDIU.  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the period on review currently before the Board under the AMA is limited to the period considered by the AOJ (i.e., ends at the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal or October 4, 2021).  The review period and the evidentiary windows are distinct concepts in AMA that are not interchangeable (the review period is the time which VA is assigning a rating for the issue on appeal; the evidentiary window is the time which evidence may be submitted and considered for the issue on appeal). 

Notably, the Veteran is service connected for the following: psoriatic arthritis, metatarsalgia of the left foot, to include the turning and hammering of the toes (30 percent); acquired pes cavus, left (10 percent, effective April 16, 2019; 30 percent, effective July 24, 2020); psoriatic arthritis, metatarsalgia of the right foot, to include the turning and hammering of the toes (20 percent); lumbar spine disability (20 percent); residual painful scars of the left foot (20 percent); psoriatic arthritis of the right knee (10 percent); ankylosis status post fusion left thumb fracture (10 percent); partial surgical amputation of 1st toe (10 percent); acquired pes cavus, right (10 percent); surgical painful scar, left thumb (10 percent); radiculopathy of the left lower extremity (10 percent, effective July 24, 2020); hiatal hernia (0 percent); kidney stones (0 percent); hydrocele epididymo-orchitis (0 percent); psoriatic arthritis of the right thumb (0 percent); partial surgical amputation of the 5th toe (0 percent); scar residuals of left thumb surgery (0 percent); and residual scars of the left foot (0 percent).

The Board find that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet the percentage requirements for entitlement to TDIU, as his combined rating was 90 percent for the entire period of time on appeal or dating back to the July 24, 2020, supplemental claim.  Moreover, the multiple ratings for orthopedic disabilities can be considered under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a)(2) and considered as one disability for the purposes of one 40 percent disability.  Accordingly, the Veteran has satisfied the schedular criteria for a TDIU consideration. 

However, where the percentage requirement for TDIU have been met, it does not automatically lead to the conclusion a Veteran is entitled to TDIU.  To prevail on a claim for entitlement to TDIU, the evidence must show that the Veteran was precluded, by reason of his service-connected disabilities, from obtaining and maintaining any form of gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational experience.

Turning to the merits of the appeal, the Veteran indicated on an April 2019 VA Form 21-8940 that he last worked in January 2016.  Previously, he had worked from May 1995 to January 2016 as a realtor.  He asserted that his psoriatic arthritis in his feet, lower back, and hands prevented him from working.  It was noted that his education included 4 years of college. 

First, it does not appear the Veteran actually stopped working in 2016, as he claimed.  On the VA Form 8940, he reported earning over $43,000 in the prior 12-month period, and this form was received in April 2019.  Moreover, during the May 2019 VA examinations, he stated he was "semi-retired" and still working 15 hours per week. Although he stated he had reduced his hours because of his arthritis, the fact is he was still earning a gainful wage (well above poverty level according to his own report) regardless of his reduced hours.  TDIU is not warranted merely because he cannot work full-time; it is only for veterans who do not have gainful income.

Second, while the Board does not doubt that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities impact his employability, the weight of the evidence does not reflect that his service-connected disabilities are of such severity so as to preclude his participation in substantially gainful employment.  In making this determination, the Board has reviewed all pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's statements, private medical records/opinions, VA medical records, and SSA records.

Specifically, with regard to the Veteran's service-connected scars, there is no lay or medical evidence reflecting that the Veteran's scars affect his employability in any way.  At a September 2021 VA examination, the examiner specifically noted that the Veteran's scars do not impact his ability to work.  The Veteran has not asserted otherwise. 

Likewise, with regard to the Veteran's service-connected hydrocele, kidney stones, and hiatal hernia, there is also no lay or medical evidence of record reflecting that these disabilities affect the Veteran's employability in any way.  The Veteran has not submitted or identified pertinent medical evidence documenting any effects of these disabilities on his employability.  Moreover, the Veteran did not indicate on his VA Form 21-8940 that these disabilities affect his employability. 

With regard to the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability, radiculopathy disability, feet disabilities, thumb disability, toe disabilities, and right knee disability, the Board does not doubt that these disabilities affect the Veteran's ability to work.  Specifically, a September 2021 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's thumb disability resulted in pain with work-related grasp and an inability to hold things tightly.  However, it was also noted that this disability did not affect sedentary activity.  In a September 2021 VA Foot Conditions examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's foot and toe conditions affected his employability in that he experienced pain with work-related walking and standing.  The examiner noted that there was no effect on sedentary work.  In a September 2021 VA Amputations examination, the examiner noted the partial surgical amputations of the Veteran's 1st and 5th toes resulted in pain with work-related standing and walking but did not affect sedentary employment.  In a September 2021 VA Back Conditions examination, the examiner noted the Veteran's lumbar spine disability and left lower extremity radiculopathy resulted in pain with work-related prolonged walking and standing, bending over, and lifting.  The examiner noted that there was no effect on sedentary work.  In a July 2019 VA Knee and Lower Leg Conditions examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran was best suited to sedentary work.  He should avoid standing and walking more than 5 to 10 minutes at a time.  He should avoid climbing stairs.  It was noted that the Veteran was a retired real estate agent.  He reported that he retired in 2016 due to the effects of pain from his back and psoriatic arthritis.

The Veteran also underwent pertinent VA examination in July and August of 2019.  The Board notes that these examinations revealed results similar to the September 2021 VA examinations.  Specifically, these examination reports reflect that the Veteran is best suited for sedentary work, and his service-connected disabilities manifest with difficulties related to grasping, lifting, bending, walking or standing for more than a few minutes at a time, running, jumping, and stair climbing.  

Additionally, the Board has reviewed the private medical records and SSA records.  The Board notes that the Veteran's SSA Disability Determination and Transmittal listed rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory polyarthropathies as primary diagnoses and affective/mood disorders as secondary diagnoses.  However, the Veteran was determined to be not disabled in this 2015 SSA determination. Private records show he received a number of lumbar injections for back pain. March 2019 February,  August, and December 2020 notes indicated that he was able to ambulate without assistance. His gait was slightly antalgic but with good balance on transitions. He was able to move all his extremities and joints with functional range of motion. A June 2021 note indicated the same, but also noted the Veteran reported that he was not being as active on a daily basis, as in the past, so recently he had been doing more around the house and in the yard.

In an August 2022 private opinion, H. H., D.O. determined that medical evidence shows that symptoms and limitations from the Veteran's current service-connected conditions are significant and limiting.  She discussed various VA examinations and noted that she consulted with the Veteran on August 30, 2022, at which time, he reported that he had significant limitations in sitting, standing, and walking due to his health conditions.  Standing was impaired by his poor balance due to his feet deformities, as well as his low back pain.  Bending and sitting were difficult due to his low back pain.  He noted, until recently, he had been receiving injections every 4 months for the past 2 to 3 years, but injections only provided a maximum of 10 days of improvement of symptoms.  He was able to walk a maximum of 300 feet at a time.  He reported that, if he did attempt this much distance with walking, he would then require a period of rest due to the "throbbing' in his feet.  When he did leave his home, he usually used a cane to help with balance.  He also had a history of left thumb fracture and subsequent surgical repair, which limited his ability to perform repetitive fine motor tasks.  The Veteran reported that he was able to perform activities of daily living independently and was able to help his wife with light chores for short periods of time, if he took frequent breaks.  He previously enjoyed bowling and golf, activities he was no longer able to enjoy due to his bilateral foot pain and foot deformities.  He reported that his pain caused some irritability and poor focus, and he was frequently changing positions in an assumption to lessen his pain.  He took medicine to help him sleep.   

The private examiner determined that the Veteran was unable to sit, stand, or walk for prolonged periods.  The Veteran had difficulty with bilateral manual dexterity and was unable to use his bilateral upper extremities on a repetitive basis and for fine motor manipulation.  He suffered from chronic foot, knee, and back pain, distraction due to pain and poor sleep resulting in daytime fatigue and poor focus.  The examiner determined that she, therefore, did not believe the Veteran was suited for even sedentary employment.  She opined that it was as likely as not the combination of the symptoms and limitations of his service-connected conditions have prevented him from engaging in substantial gainful employment on a consistent and sustained basis since at least the date of his April 16, 2019, claim. 

While the Board has considered this opinion, the Board finds that the other evidence of record does not support a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities were of such severity so as to preclude his participation in substantially gainful employment at the time of the October 2021 rating decision.  The August 2022 private opinion relied heavily on the pertinent 2019 VA examinations.  However, none of these VA examinations actually demonstrated that the Veteran was unable to perform sedentary work, nor did the 2021 VA examiners conclude that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevented him from performing sedentary work.  In fact, those examiners concluded the opposite. The private examiner's findings as to the severity of the Veteran's functional limitations, allegedly since April 2019, are not only contradicted by the VA examination reports, but by the private records. From March 2019 through June 2021, when receiving epidural injections, the Veteran was able to ambulate without assistance, with good balance on transitions, and move all his extremities and joints with functional range of motion. A June 2021 note indicated the Veteran reported that he was trying to increase his physical activity by doing more around the house and in the yard. These were not isolated references as April and May 2019 notes from his primary care physician noted he ambulated without difficulty and was able to get on and off the examining table without difficulty. Those notes also indicated his physical activity level was the same as the prior year and he had no difficulties with his activities of daily living.  Therefore, the private examiner's conclusions about the Veteran's limitations, based on a conversation with him in 2022, are simply not entirely supported by - and are contradicted on some points by - the contemporaneous medical evidence. 

To the extent the private examiner's opinions are consistent with the contemporaneous evidence, they certainly have been considered. There is no doubt the Veteran's service-connected disabilities affect his ability to maintain employment.  However, the fact that a disability impacts or affects his ability to work does not necessarily mean that it prevents him from working.

The August 2022 private opinion also indicated that the Veteran's disabilities resulted in distraction due to pain and poor sleep resulting in daytime fatigue and poor focus.  However, there is no other medical evidence of record to support such a finding. The Veteran raised no such complaints during the 2019 and 2021 VA examinations or in the private medical evidence of record.  Again, while that is based on a conversation in 2022, the contemporaneous medical evidence does not support such findings. 

In summary, the probative medical evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevent him from maintaining sedentary employment.  The VA examinations and the 2022 private evaluation are in accord that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities affect his ability to perform manual labor or labor that requires activities such as prolonged walking, standing, bending, or lifting. However, that is not the end of the inquiry, as it must be determined whether he retains the capacity to engage in sedentary work and whether he has experience in such. 

Here, the Board finds that the evidence does not support that he is unemployable as a result of his service-connected disabilities. Undoubtedly, some sedentary jobs require more fine motor skills than others, and the Veteran would likely be prevented from working in some sedentary positions as a result of his difficulty grasping or gripping objects. However, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would prevent him from performing other types of sedentary work. For example, the evidence does not reflect that he would be prevented from obtaining entry level work in a sedentary customer service environment, such as answering telephones in a call center.  The Veteran has a college degree, and he has never indicated any problems with his past employment that would render this type of work infeasible.  His prior experience as a realtor would involve skills such as communicating with people and working in an office environment, all of which would easily transition to a sedentary position. The 2022 private opinion indicated the Veteran is independent in his activities of daily living and able to help his wife with light chores, which also suggests he retains the physical capacity to work in a sedentary environment. The fact he needs to take breaks and change positions are the types of accommodations employers are legally required to provide to employees. Therefore, even considering the limitations from Veteran's service-connected disabilities collectively, the Board does find that the evidence supports that he is unemployable as a result of these disabilities.

Additionally, the Veteran's assertions of unemployability in his 2019 claim rely, in part, on limitations due to his shoulder condition.  However, he is not service-connected for his shoulder.

In summary, the preponderance of the lay and medical evidence weighs against finding that the Veteran is unemployable as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  While it is apparent that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities impact his ability to maintain employment in that he would likely be unable to perform physical labor and could be limited in the sedentary labor he could perform, the Board believes that the symptomatology associated with his service-connected disabilities, including the degree of occupational impairment present, is appropriately compensated via the ratings assigned to these disabilities.  Loss of industrial capacity is the principal factor in assigning schedular disability ratings.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.  Indeed, 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 specifically states: "[g]enerally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability."  See also Moyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 289, 293 (1992) and Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993) (noting that the disability rating itself is recognition that industrial capabilities are impaired).  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has not met the criteria for entitlement to TDIU.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Durham, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.