Citation Nr: A25032309
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240825-466282
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected left hip strain with limitation of the thigh is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for the period prior to April 24, 2024, and a compensable evaluation for the period thereafter, for service-connected left hip strain with limitation of flexion is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected right hip strain with limitation of the thigh is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for the period prior to April 24, 2024, and a compensable evaluation for the period thereafter, for service-connected right hip strain with limitation of flexion is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected left hip strain with limitation of extension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2006 to November 2006.

In November 2023, a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), was received that requested review of, inter alia, the disability evaluation of service-connected left hip strain with limitation of extension, addressed in a November 2023 rating decision.  The Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.

In August 2024, a new rating decision was issued.  The August 2024 rating decision, inter alia, increased the disability evaluations for service-connected right and left hip strain, limitation of extension, from 0 percent disabling to 10 percent disabling.  However, the disability evaluations for service-connected right and left hip strain with limitation of flexion were decreased from 10 percent disabling to 0 percent disabling.  The Board notes that "38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) does not apply where there is no reduction in the amount of compensation payable."  VAOPGCPREC 71-91, at 3 (Nov. 7, 1991).

In August 2024, a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), was received, electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the requirement that the Board delay issuing a decision until the period to request to switch dockets elapses pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

?

All issues on appeal.

The Board finds that remand is needed in order to address the following duty to assist errors.  First, the Board finds that there may be outstanding treatment records to obtain and to associate with the claim file.  For example, an April 2024 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran "will mak[e] appt outside of the VA."  CAPRI, August 2024 (some capitalization omitted).  The Board does not see private treatment records associated with the claim file.  Accordingly, upon remand, the Board asks that any outstanding relevant treatment records be associated with the claim file.

In addition, the Board finds that a new medical examination is needed.  The Board acknowledges the April 2024 VA examination but finds it to be inadequate for the following reasons.  First, the April 2024 VA examination report indicates "evidence of pain" in weight-bearing.  VA Examination Report, April 2024.  However, the Board does not see this described in terms of ROM.  Upon remand, the Board asks that this information be provided.  See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

In addition, the Board also seeks clarification regarding the Veteran's use of medication.  The April 2024 VA examination report states that the Veteran takes meloxicam and tramadol.  In addition, the examination report states that right and "left hip flare-ups are alleviated by medication."  VA Examination Report, April 2024.  Upon remand, the Board asks that an examiner clarify that the Veteran's disability was evaluated without considering the ameliorative effects of medication.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After securing any necessary consent forms from the Veteran, obtain any outstanding relevant treatment records, to include any private and/or VA treatment records, to include records contained in repositories accessible through VA, pertaining to the issues on appeal.

Obtain all necessary consent.  All efforts should be documented in the claim file.  If any records could not be obtained, this should be noted in the claim file.

2. Upon completion of the above, schedule the Veteran for a medical examination to evaluate the current level of severity of the service-connected disabilities on appeal.  The claim folder and all pertinent treatment records should be made available to the examiner for review, and review of such records should be noted in any subsequent report.  Obtain all necessary consent.

The Board asks that an examiner clarify that the Veteran's disability was evaluated without considering the ameliorative effects of medication.

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

The examiner is asked specifically to provide range of motion (ROM) testing (in degrees) for both hips for active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing.  Full ROM testing also must be conducted on the opposite joint unless the opposite joint is damaged, which includes any disorder that would make the joint in question abnormal.  If the opposite joint is determined to be damaged, and no ROM testing is conducted, this must be explained in the report.

In addition, for both hips, the examiner must discuss pain for ROM movements on active, passive, and repetitive use testing.  The examiner is asked to address the following questions:

(a) Are any ROM movements painful on active, passive, and repetitive use testing?  If yes, identify whether active, passive, and repetitive use.

(b) If yes (there are painful movements), does the pain contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM?  Please further describe the functional loss or additional limitation of ROM.

(c) If no (the pain does not contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM), explain why the pain does not contribute.

In addition, for both hips, the examiner must discuss pain when used in weight-bearing or in nonweight-bearing.  The examiner is asked to address the following questions:

(a) Is there pain when the joint is used in weight-bearing or nonweight-bearing?  If yes, identify whether weight-bearing or nonweight-bearing.

(b) If yes (there is pain when used in weight-bearing or nonweight-bearing), does the pain contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM?  Please further describe these limitations.

(c) If no (the pain does not contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM), explain why the pain does not contribute.

For all ranges and planes of motion where pain is noted, the exact point, in degrees of ROM, at which pain starts must be clearly noted.

The examiner must also attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups, as expressed in ROM.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Foster, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.