Citation Nr: A25032879
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240122-428763
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, other than PTSD, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left upper extremity, secondary to a back disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, secondary to a back disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right upper extremity, secondary to a back disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for vertigo, claimed as blurry vision, is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for chronic headaches is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a skin disorder, claimed as chronic rash, is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a kidney disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand little finger disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right leg disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder, claimed as respiratory distress, is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's hearing loss in both ears was characterized by no worse than Level I.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100, 4.86.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Army, on active duty from July 1978 to July 1985. His awards include the Good Conduct Medal, among others. 

This claim comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In a January 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran timely appealed that rating decision, however, he did not select a docket. After correspondence from the RO, he submitted another VA Form 10182 in March 2024, clarifying that he selected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 rating decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.

Where there is a question as to which of two separate evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Ratings for hearing loss, which range from noncompensable to 100 percent, are based on an organic impairment of hearing acuity as demonstrated by the results of speech discrimination tests together with the average hearing threshold levels as measured by pure tone audiometry tests in the frequencies of 1,000, 2,000, 3,000, and 4,000 Hertz (Hz). The degree of disability from service-connected hearing loss is rated based on 11 auditory acuity levels with Level I, representing essentially normal acuity, through level XI, representing profound deafness. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.85.

An alternative rating method may be used when the pure tone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies (1,000, 2,000, 3,000, and 4,000 Hertz) is 55 decibels or more, or when the pure tone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1,000 Hz and 70 decibels or more at 2,000 Hz. 38 C.F.R. § 4.86. VA will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIa based on whichever results in the higher numeral. Id. In hearing loss rating cases, an examination for VA purposes must be conducted by a state-licensed audiologist and must include a controlled speech discrimination test (Maryland CNC) and a pure tone audiometry test. Examinations are conducted without the use of hearing aids. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85(a).

Table VIa, "Numeric Designation of Hearing Impairment Based Only on Puretone Threshold Average," is used to determine a Roman numeral designation (I through XI) for hearing impairment based only on the puretone threshold average. Table VIa will be used when the examiner certifies that use of the speech discrimination test is not appropriate because of language difficulties, inconsistent speech discrimination scores, etc., or when indicated under the provisions of § 4.86.

The Veteran submitted a claim for an increased rating on August 30, 2022. Thus, the period on appeal begins on that date, plus the one-year look-back period. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). As such, the period on appeal begins August 30, 2021. The evidentiary window closes on the date of the February 2023 rating decision. 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran disagrees with his noncompensable rating for bilateral hearing loss. This rating, effective November 27, 2019, is assigned under 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, DC 6100, last adjudicated in the rating decision on appeal. 

Based on the evidence of record, a compensable rating is not warranted for the period on appeal. Specifically, at a VA examination in September 2021, the Veteran complained of hearing difficulty in noisy areas, television being too loud for others and has difficulty working on the phone. On the authorized audiological evaluation, pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	 35	35	45	60	70

LEFT	 40	40	55	65	75

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 88 percent in the right ear and of 80 percent in the left ear.

A new VA examination was scheduled for January 2023. Of note, the third-party contractor assigned with scheduling the examination provided a contact history document that same month. This document indicates that the Veteran was contacted several times via text, email, telephonic and courier means prior to his VA examination. However, the Veteran failed to report for his VA examination

In the rating decision on appeal, the RO informed the Veteran that he had missed his scheduled VA examination. To date, the Veteran has not responded nor provided good cause for failing to report to his VA examination. Critically, he has not disputed the report in the rating decision that he failed without good cause to report for the needed VA examination. 

Thus, the only examination of record during the period on appeal is the September 2021 VA audiological evaluation. Applying the results of this examination to Table VII, a noncompensable rating is for application. 

The evidence of record during the evidentiary window also includes VA treatment records. In general, these treatment records indicate the Veteran complained of worsening hearing loss. Unfortunately, during the period on appeal there are no audiograms or other complaints of record detailing the current severity of his hearing loss. 

In considering the appropriate disability rating, the Board has also considered the Veteran's statements that his hearing loss is worse than the rating he currently receives. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he has trouble hearing conversations on the phone and turns the television up loudly compared to others. In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability of his service-connected disabilities according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991).

In this case, the Veteran is not competent to state that his symptoms merit a higher rating for his hearing loss. The competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's claimed disability has been provided by the medical personnel who examined him during the current appeal and who rendered a pertinent opinion in conjunction with the evaluation. The medical findings (as provided in the examination report) directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board determines that a compensable rating is not warranted for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, other than PTSD, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left upper extremity is remanded. 

6. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded. 

7. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right upper extremity is remanded. 

8. Entitlement to service connection for vertigo, claimed as blurry vision, is remanded. 

9. Entitlement to service connection for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome is remanded. 

10. Entitlement to service connection for chronic headaches is remanded. 

11. Entitlement to service connection for a skin disorder, claimed as chronic rash, is remanded. 

12. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded. 

13. Entitlement to service connection for a kidney disorder is remanded. 

14. Entitlement to service connection for a left hand little finger disorder is remanded. 

15. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disorder is remanded. 

16. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral leg disorder is remanded. 

17. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder is remanded.

18. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder, claimed as respiratory distress, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a number of disabilities he contends are related to service. 

Unfortunately, a remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Where service records are missing or presumed destroyed, the VA has a heightened duty to assist. In this instance, while some efforts appear to have been made to locate the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs), it is unclear whether all efforts have been exhausted as there was not a formal finding of unavailability, and it does not appear the Veteran and his representative were apprised properly, as required by 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e) and (f).

Specifically, the record suggests that the Veteran's complete STRs may be unavailable. An August 2020 VA letter to the Veteran indicates that the RO requested STRs from the Department of the Army. In a response dated September 2020, it stated that "all available personnel records and STRs were shipped to the contracted scan vendor for upload into [the Veterans Benefits Management System]." While the rating decisions of record indicate STRs were uploaded in February 2020, these are solely the Veteran's dental records. 

Moreover, in another letter to the Veteran dated January 2023, the RO indicated it was requesting medical and physical evaluation board findings.  There is also a PIES request from September 2022, indicating that the RO had already been sent all available medical records. However, there is no indication that the Veteran has ever been clearly informed that his service treatment records are substantially unavailable.  

The Board notes that when obtaining records from a Federal department or agency, the VA must make as many requests as are necessary to obtain the relevant records and will end its search only after it concludes that these records either do not exist, or that further efforts to obtain these records would be futile. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). The Board notes that no formal finding of unavailability was ever issued regarding the Veteran's non-dental STRs, nor has the Veteran been provided the opportunity to obtain them via other means. This constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Thus, upon remand, the RO should attempt to locate the missing service treatment records. If the records cannot be located, the RO should make a formal finding of the unavailability of records and inform the Veteran of possible alternative evidence that can be submitted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO should attempt to obtain/locate any outstanding STRs/personnel records.  If any requested records are not available, the record should be annotated to reflect such, and the Veteran should be notified in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).  The Veteran should also be afforded an appropriate period of time to submit such records if they are in his possession or if he provides additional information regarding where such records may be.  

2. The RO should undertake any additional development deemed necessary.  ?

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	McDonald, Thomas K.