Citation Nr: A25032756
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240525-443504
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for right carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). 

Service connection for left CTS. 

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1994 to June 1998. 

This matter is on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision. 

In a May 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  

The Veteran listed a rating decision of February 2023 as the decision on appeal.  The NOD would be untimely as to that decision.  Thus, the Board will interpret the rating decision on appeal as one from February 2024, for which the NOD is timely.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for right CTS. 

Service connection for left CTS. 

The Veteran contends that he has bilateral CTS related to service.  Specifically, the Veteran claims that he has had bilateral CTS since active duty, and that his MOS of operation specialist required him to perform repeated use activities with his hands, including carrying heavy weapons, and heavy objects such as ammo, electronics, and fire hoses.  The Veteran stated that his pain, tingling, and numbness started during service and occurred while gripping and grasping objects.  See November 2022 Fully Developed Claim; see also September 2023 Higher Level Review (HLR) conference; see also November 2023 VA examination.  

Initially, in the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has bilateral CTS.  During a November 2023 VA examination, the examiner confirmed a bilateral CTS diagnosis.  Additionally, the AOJ established the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based upon the Veteran's work within the fire party during service.  The Board is bound by these?prior favorable findings, which were not clearly and unmistakably erroneous.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran was afforded a November 2023 VA examination in connection with his claims.  The diagnosis was bilateral CTS.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's bilateral CTS is less likely than not related to his established TERA because CTS is caused by inflammation of the medial and radial nerves by compression or direct pressure.  The examiner opined there is no evidence to support a nexus between carpal tunnel syndrome and toxin exposure, and therefore, there is no nexus.  However, the examiner failed to provide an etiologic opinion for the Veteran's bilateral CTS on a direct service connection basis separate from TERA.  

As such, remand is required to remedy this pre-decisional duty to assist error and to afford the Veteran a VA examination and medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral CTS on a direct basis.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by a neurologist to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral CTS.  The examiner should review the entire claims file and remand in conjunction with the examination. 

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral CTS had its onset in service or is etiologically related to service.

The examiner should address the Veteran's contentions that his bilateral CTS started in service and has continued since.

A rationale should be provided for opinions expressed.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resorting to speculation, the reason for this should be fully explained in the opinion.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fyffe, Michael C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.