Citation Nr: A25032228
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230104-311227
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Service connection for carpal tunnel syndrome of the right upper extremity is remanded.

Service connection for carpal tunnel syndrome of the left upper extremity is remanded.

Service connection for left wrist arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for left foot pes planus is remanded.

Service connection for left index finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for left little finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for left long finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for left ring finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for left thumb arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for right wrist arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for right index finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for right little finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for right long finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for right ring finger arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for right thumb arthritis is remanded.

Service connection for left toe joint pain is remanded.

Service connection for neck condition is remanded.

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Service connection for sleep disturbance is remanded.

Service connection for acne is remanded.

Service connection for a back injury is remanded.

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

Service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

Service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

Service connection for right elbow condition nerve damage is remanded.

Service connection for left elbow condition nerve damage is remanded.

Service connection for a penile condition is remanded.

Service connection for left shoulder condition is remanded.

Service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2009 to January 2013.  The Board recognizes the Veteran's service to his country and the sacrifices it entailed.

July 2022 and November 2022 rating decisions denied the service connection issues on appeal.

In a January 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran opted these matters into the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) by appealing the July and November 2022 rating decisions and electing the direct review. Therefore, the July 2022 and November 2022 are the decisions on appeal. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence at the time of the July and November 2022 rating decisions.

1. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

2. Service connection for carpal tunnel syndrome of the right upper extremity is remanded.

3. Service connection for carpal tunnel syndrome of the left upper extremity is remanded.

4. Service connection for left wrist arthritis is remanded.

5. Service connection for left foot pes planus is remanded.

6. Service connection for left index finger arthritis is remanded.

7. Service connection for left little finger arthritis is remanded.

8. Service connection for left long finger arthritis is remanded.

9. Service connection for left ring finger arthritis is remanded.

10. Service connection for left thumb arthritis is remanded.

11. Service connection for right wrist arthritis is remanded.

12. Service connection for right index finger arthritis is remanded.

13. Service connection for right little finger arthritis is remanded.

14. Service connection for right long finger arthritis is remanded.

15. Service connection for right ring finger arthritis is remanded.

16. Service connection for right thumb arthritis is remanded.

17. Service connection for left toe joint pain is remanded.

18. Service connection for neck condition is remanded.

19. Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

20. Service connection for sleep disturbance is remanded.

21. Service connection for acne is remanded.

22. Service connection for a back injury is remanded.

23. Service connection for headaches is remanded.

24. Service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

25. Service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

26. Service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

27. Service connection for right elbow condition nerve damage is remanded.

28. Service connection for left elbow condition nerve damage is remanded.

29. Service connection for a penile condition is remanded.

30. Service connection for left shoulder condition is remanded.

31. Service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

32. Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Board finds that remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error because the AOJ should have notified the Veteran of the time and place of the rescheduled examination for his bilateral hearing loss, bilateral wrist arthritis, left foot planus, left hand finger disabilities, right hand finger disabilities, left toe joint pain, neck condition, right elbow condition, right wrist arthritis, sleep apnea, sleep disturbance, acne, back injury, headaches, left hip condition, bilateral knee condition, left elbow nerve damage, penile condition, left shoulder condition, right shoulder condition and tinnitus.  

With regard to his carpal tunnel syndrome of the right and left upper extremities, the Veteran was provided a VA examination in September 2022 and the examiner provided a negative opinion, finding that the Veteran's carpal tunnel syndrome of the bilateral upper extremities was less likely than not due to service.  However, the examiner failed to consider the Veteran's notation of numbness and tingling in service upon separation in 2013.  Therefore, the Board finds that the examiner's opinion is inadequate, and an addendum opinion should be obtained to correct the duty to assist error associated with the inadequate opinion.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA audiological examination, conducted by a state-licensed audiologist, to evaluate the current severity of any hearing loss disability and tinnitus disability and to obtain an opinion as to the nature and etiology of any hearing loss disability and tinnitus disability.

(a.) The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner.

(b.) All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. The examination must include a puretone audiometry test and a controlled speech discrimination test using the Maryland CNC word list unless the examiner certifies that use of a speech discrimination test is inappropriate and provides a supporting rationale.

(c.) The examiner should elicit from the Veteran a complete history of his symptomatology, including any in-service symptomatology and treatment as well as his complete post-service history of symptoms and treatment.

(d.) Following a complete review of the record, the examiner must address whether it is approximately at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss had its onset in service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to service.

(e.) In providing their opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's conceded in-service noise exposure.

(f.) In offering any opinion, the examiner must consider the full record, to include the Veteran's lay statements. The opinions must reflect consideration of the Veteran's reports as to his history and symptomatology.

(g.) The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an orthopedic examination for: all fingers on his right hand, all fingers on the right hand, the bilateral wrists, the bilateral knees, the bilateral elbows, the bilateral shoulders, back disability, left toe joint pain, left hip condition and neck disability.  

(a.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(b.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(c.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(d.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(e.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(f.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a disability each of the fingers of the right hand, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as arthritis of all the fingers of the right hand. 

(g.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a disability each of the fingers of the left hand, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as arthritis of all the fingers of the left hand.

(h.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a disability of the bilateral wrists, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as disability of the bilateral wrists.

(i.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a disability of the bilateral knees, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as the disability of the bilateral knees.

(j.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a disability of the bilateral elbows, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as disability of the bilateral elbows.

(k.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a disability of the bilateral shoulders, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as disability of the bilateral shoulders.

(l.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a back disability, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as a back disability.

(m.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a left toe disability, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as disability of the left toe.

(n.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a left hip disability, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as a left hip disability.

(o.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has a neck disability, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as a neck disability.

(p.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment for all claimed disabilities. 

(q.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(r.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of all the fingers of the right hand, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(s.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of all the fingers of the left hand, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(t.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of the bilateral wrists, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(u.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of the bilateral knees, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(v.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of the bilateral elbows, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(w.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of the bilateral shoulders, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(x.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of a back disability, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(y.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of a left toe disability, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(z.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of a left hip disability, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(aa.) Regarding the Veteran's claimed disability of a neck disability, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for sleep apnea and sleep disturbance.  

(a.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(b.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(c.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(d.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(e.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(f.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has the claimed sleep disabilities, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as sleep apnea/sleep disturbance. 

(g.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment. 

(h.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition, relating to a sleep disability, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

(i.) Schedule the Veteran for an examination for his left foot pes planus disability.  

(j.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(k.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(l.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(m.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(n.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(o.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has the claimed left foot disability, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as a left foot disability. 

(p.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment. 

(q.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition relating to the left foot disability, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for his acne disability.  

(a.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(b.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(c.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(d.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(e.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(f.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has the acne disability, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as acne. 

(g.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment. 

(h.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition, relating to acne, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

5. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for his penile condition.  

(a.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(b.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(c.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(d.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(e.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(f.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has the claimed penile condition, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as the penile disability. 

(g.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment. 

(h.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition, relating to a penile condition, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

6. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  

(a.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(b.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(c.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(d.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(e.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(f.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has the claimed carpal tunnel syndrome, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. 

(g.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment. 

(h.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition relating to carpal tunnel syndrome, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

7. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for headaches.  

(a.) The claims folder should be made available to the examiner for review in conjunction with the examination.  

(b.) Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all special test and clinical findings should be clearly reported.  

(c.) The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran concerning the onset and nature of his symptomatology, and include it in the report of examination.

(d.) The Board leaves to the examiner's discretion what, if any, diagnostic testing is appropriate. If any testing is conducted, the examiner should record all results and findings, as well as any other indications of a disease, disorder, injury, or condition, and include it in the report of examination.

(e.) The examiner should provide a diagnosis if possible.

(f.) The examiner should expressly address whether the Veteran has the claimed headaches, or, alternatively, the Veteran has another disease, disorder, injury, or condition responsible for the symptoms or manifestations claimed as headaches. 

(g.) The examiner is advised a "disability" is not necessarily a formally diagnosed medical or physical condition-rather, it is the functional impairment associated with the symptoms of a medical or physical condition. Therefore, if the examiner cannot diagnose a disease, disorder, injury, or condition causing the Veteran's symptoms, they should describe, assess, and explain the Veteran's symptoms and identify any resulting functional impairment. 

(h.) For any disability, disease, disorder, injury, or condition relating to headaches, the examiner should make a finding as to whether it is approximately as likely as not it had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service.

8. All opinions, findings and conclusions should be supported by a complete rationale, including references to patient history, evidence in the record, medical knowledge, publications, or other sources of information relied on in the examiner's analysis. 

9. All opinions, findings and conclusions must take into account the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, which means the VA must find in favor of the Veteran when positive evidence is at least "approximately balanced" with or "nearly equal" to the negative evidence on any material issue. 

10. If any of the requested opinions or responses cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why this is so.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nadia Kamal, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.