Citation Nr: A25032944
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250303-519763
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1953 to July 1957.  He died in April 2023.  The Appellant is his surviving spouse.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2024 rating decision.  In a March 2025 VA Form 10182, the Appellant appealed this case to the Board and selected direct review of the claim.  Therefore, the Board's review is limited to the evidence reviewed in the December 2024 rating decision.  

The Board notes that in her March 2025 VA Form 10182 the Appellant also appealed a December 13, 2024, VA decision letter that denied her claim seeking burial benefits.  However, that claim was docketed in a separate Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) appeals stream and will be addressed in a separate Board decision.  Therefore, further discussion of the burial benefits claim is not necessary.  

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that this claim is "advanced on the docket (AOD)."  Accordingly, the Board finds that it is in the Appellant's interest that this matter be adjudicated without further delay.  The Board notes that Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) provides guidance under which the Veteran (or in the present case, the Appellant) may choose a docket review option during the latter of one year from the date that the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) mails notice of the decision or sixty days from the date the Board receives the notice of disagreement, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202(c)(2).  However, in this case, the delay, until one year from the notice of the rating decision on appeal, or until December 12, 2025, would not best serve the Appellant.  She has AOD status due to age, the evidence of record is not sufficient to grant the claim, and the Board must remand this matter to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which is discussed below in greater detail.  

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).  

Prior to death, the Veteran was not receiving compensation benefits for a service-connected disability.  His death certificate notes his immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest due to acute myocardial infarction and other significant conditions contributing to death included hypertension and prostate cancer.  

A November 1996 medical statement notes that the Veteran was first exposed to asbestos in 1953 when he was in the Navy and after service he was employed as an aluminum worker and worked around asbestos for 24 years.  He accumulated 32 pack years of cigarette smoking before quitting in 1986.  

In a September 2023 statement, the Appellant asserted that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos during his Naval service and that such exposure caused his prostate cancer.  She noted that he was treated for prostate cancer from 2021 until his passing in 2023.  

In September 2023, the Appellant submitted a medical article which briefly discusses a 1993 Danish study that tested workers at an asbestos cement factory and found a 36 percent increase in the observed number of prostate cancers.  She also included a letter referencing the Veteran's asbestos victim settlement claim from his private employer.  

In an August 2024 statement, the Appellant asserted that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos while serving on the USS Hornet and USS Kenneth A. Whiting and that his prostate cancer was due to his asbestos exposure.  She noted that he started smoking when he was in the Navy (1953-57) and quit in the 1980s.  The appellant also indicated that the Veteran worked at a metal production plant for 25 years.  

A November 2024 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum notes that the Veteran's asbestos exposure was conceded due to his exposure to asbestos while serving in the Navy.  

In a November 2024 VA opinion, the VA provider opined that the Veteran's myocardial infarction (which led to cardiac arrest) was less likely than not caused by the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities, as there is no known, established pathophysiologic (direct cause/effect) relationship between asbestos exposure and the development of myocardial infarction.  He indicated that the treatment records showed that the Veteran had a history of chronic hypertension, which is a significant risk factor for the development of myocardial infarction.  The provider also noted that age and lifestyle considerations (e.g. diet, weight, physical activity level, smoking, drinking) otherwise overwhelmingly cause hypertension.  He indicated that prostate cancer occurs secondary to ongoing testosterone production in males causing enlargement of the prostate in older age and/or cancer.  

The Board finds that the November 2024 VA opinion is inadequate because although the provider noted that medical literature indicated that there was no known established pathophysiologic relationship between asbestos exposure and the development of myocardial infarction and that the Veteran's history of chronic hypertension was a significant risk factor for the development of myocardial infarction, he did not explain why his hypertension was a likely etiology.  Also, he did not discuss whether the Veteran's asbestos exposure may have caused his hypertension and/or prostate cancer.  Also, although the opinion notes the article regarding asbestos exposure and prostate cancer that the Appellant submitted, the provider did not address it in his opinion.  He only noted that certain factors, (some of which the Veteran had, others he did not) caused hypertension and that prostate cancer can occur in males as they age due to ongoing testosterone production.  Failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate opinion under these circumstances is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  Therefore, development to obtain an adequate medical advisory opinion regarding service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is necessary.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following:

Arrange for the Veteran's record to be forwarded to a clinician (other than the provider of the November 2024 VA opinion) with appropriate expertise for review and an advisory medical opinion regarding the cause of the Veteran's death in April 2023.  Based on review of the claims file, to include a copy of this remand, the provider should furnish an opinion that responds to the following:

(a) The provider should initially express agreement or disagreement with the November 2024 VA provider's opinions (1) that the Veteran's asbestos exposure did not cause his myocardial infarction and (2) that the myocardial infarction was caused by his hypertension.  An explanation should be provided for the reason for the agreement or disagreement, and if the provider agrees that the myocardial infarction was caused by the Veteran's hypertension, rationale should be furnished to explain why the Veteran's hypertension caused the myocardial infarction.  

(b) Then opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension and/or prostate cancer was etiologically related directly to his service (was incurred therein), to include as due to his conceded exposure to asbestos?  In furnishing the opinions, the provider must consider (1) the Veteran's conceded exposure to asbestos during service, (2) the medical literature submitted by the Appellant that discusses a possible link between asbestos exposure and the development of prostate cancer, (3) the impact, if any, of the 32 pack years of cigarette smoking that he accumulated before quitting in 1986, and (4) the impact, if any, of his 24 years of exposure to asbestos that he accumulated post service during his employment as an aluminum worker.  

(c) If it is determined that the Veteran's hypertension and/or prostate cancer was not related to his service and/or exposure to asbestos, identify the etiology for the hypertension and prostate cancer that is considered to be more likely, and explain why that is so.  

(d) If the consulting provider is unable to furnish the requested opinions without resort to speculation, the provider should state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the provider (additional facts are required, or the provider does not have the requisite knowledge or training).  

The consulting provider should note the following regulatory guidance: A principal cause of death means that a medical condition was the immediate or underlying cause of death or was etiologically related thereto.  A contributory cause of death means that a medical condition, not related to the principal cause of death, combined to cause death; that it aided or lent assistance to the production of death.  It is not sufficient to show that it casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection.  

The consulting provider must explain the rationale for all opinions, with citation to the clinical/factual data as appropriate.  

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bayles, James J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.