Citation Nr: A25032553
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240829-469420
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his CLL is shown to be causally or etiologically related to an in-service injury, event or disease, to include exposure to burn pits and toxic substances. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for CLL have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty for the United States Army from August 2001 to March 2002 and again from January 2004 to November 2004. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the Agency of Jurisdiction (AOJ).

By way of procedural history, March 2021 rating decision denied service connection for CLL, finding that the evidence of record failed to indicate a relationship between the Veteran's current condition and his military service. In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a private nexus opinion, a new statement in support of claim, and a medical article indicating a significant positive association between cumulative airborne dioxin exposure and CLL risk, along with VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application. September 2023 rating decision confirmed and continued denial of service connection, and a timely VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review was submitted in September 2023. A duty to assist error was identified during the higher-level review of the claim as noted within October 2023 rating decision, and a special review of the file was mandated. Subsequent to this review, August 2024 rating decision continued denial of service connection. A timely VA Form 10182 was submitted requesting direct review of the matter. 

Initially, as the October 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) found a duty to assist error in the September 2023 rating decision, and requested readjudication of the issue, which was addressed in August 2024, the August 2024 rating decision is the decision on appeal for purposes of determining the appropriate evidence window. As the August 2024 VA Form 10182 elected the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 rating decision. 

Lastly, the Board acknowledges the December 2024 request for withdrawal of the issue for service connection for CLL from a purported VA-accredited attorney. See December 2024 Third Party Correspondence. However, at the time VA received such correspondence, there was no VA Form 21-22a (Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative) appointing said attorney as the Veteran's representative on file. Moreover, even as the record presently stands, there is no indication that the Veteran had executed a VA Form 21-22a authorizing said attorney to act on his behalf. Indeed, the only valid VA Form 21-22 of record lists the Georgia Department of Veterans Service as the Veteran's proper representative. Accordingly, VA cannot recognize the listed attorney as the legal representative who can act on the Veteran's behalf. As such, the matter will be adjudicated on the merits.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is granted.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for CLL. The Veteran asserts he was exposed to toxic substances due to smoke from burning trash in burn-pits while serving in Iraq and Kuwait. 

Because the Board has determined service connection is granted based on a theory of direct service connection from toxic substances, it need not analyze theories based on presumptive service connection.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

Favorable findings noted in August 2024 rating decision include exposure to burn pits, manifestation of the claimed issue to a degree of 10 percent or more following service, and a current disability.

Therefore, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that is etiologically connected to his active military service. 

A private opinion was associated with the claims file in July 2023. Dr. W.B.F. opined that the Veteran's CLL is at least as likely as not linked to his military service. The rationale most pertinently states that the examiner himself was present in Iraq with the Veteran during the period of January 2004 through November 2004 and witnessed first-hand great damage due to a sulfur fire which was in very close proximity to their living quarters. He further explained that burn pits release several toxic substances to include dioxin, a known carcinogen linked to non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and that that the National Cancer Institute defines CLL as having the same makeup as small cell lymphocytic lymphoma, and therefore a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a medical article indicating a significant positive association between cumulative airborne dioxin exposure and CLL risk.

Upon examination in August 2023, the examiner opined that CLL was less likely than not caused by indicated TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The rationale states that "there are risk factors outside of military service such as male, advancing age, and BMI that far outweigh the factors identified in the TERA." The examiner went on to explain that medical literatures suggests that CLL is more common in males than females; primarily affects the elderly, with most patients being over 65 years of age at diagnosis; and obesity creates a 19 percent likelihood of developing leukemia compared to a healthy weight. Thus, it is more likely that these multi-factors have caused the development of the Veteran's condition, and not "solely caused by his exposure to burn pit." 

The Board finds the August 2023 opinion to be inadequate as it fails to apply the principles within the cited medical literature to the Veteran's specific circumstances. Moreover, the VA examiner failed to consider and address the submitted medical literature that demonstrated a significant positive association between cumulative airborne dioxin exposure and CLL risk. Lastly, the examiner failed to apply the correct legal standard finding burn pits less likely than not solely caused the Veteran's CLL, as opposed to finding that CLL was less likely than not proximately due to burn pit exposure. As such, no probative value is afforded this opinion. 

Pursuant to a higher-level review request, In August 2024, another VA provider reviewed the Veteran's records. The VA provider opined the Veteran's CLL was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. The rationale states that there are no records or evidence of any type of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia condition or pain during the Veteran's active service.  This opinion is of no probative weight because it is solely based on a lack of evidence showing in-service treatment or complaints for CLL. See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992) (the absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion).

Upon VA examination in August 2024, the examiner opined the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The rationale explained that several factors may increase the risk of CLL, to include age, sex, race, family history, and exposure to chemicals. Considering this, the examiner concluded that there is no pathophysiologic relationship between the indicated TERA and the Veteran's current diagnosis, and the Veteran's outside risk factors outweigh those of the TERA exposure. Once again, the Board affords this opinion no probative weight as the opinion is highly generic and fails to apply the principles within the cited medical literature to the Veteran's specific circumstances. Moreover, in finding that there is no pathophysiologic relationship between the indicated TERA and the Veteran's diagnosis, the examiner failed to address the submitted medical literature that demonstrated a significant positive association between cumulative airborne dioxin exposure and CLL risk. 

Upon review, the Board affords the July 2023 private opinion high probative value and great weight. In particular, the report shows the clinician contemplated the relevant evidence of record, to include relevant medical history and submitted medical literature, and provided a rationale, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the clinician offered a clear conclusion. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").

Considering the overall probative value of the positive opinion of record and the cumulative lack of probative value of the negative opinions of record, the Board finds the totality of the persuasive weight of the probative evidence of record is supportive of a grant of service connection for CLL. 

In sum, the Board finds the persuasive weight of the probative evidence of record supports a medical nexus between the Veteran's in-service burn pit exposure and his diagnosed CLL, and all elements of service connection have been established. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). Accordingly, service connected is warranted. 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Russell, Tangela

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.