Citation Nr: A25032991
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240925-478201
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for liver cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from May 1958 to February 1962 and September 1962 to September 1967.  The Board is thankful for the Veteran's service to our country.

Unfortunately, the Veteran died during the pendency of the claim.  The appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse as a substitute claimant for the Veteran.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2024.

The appellant initially requested the hearing option in the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD). In December 2024, the appellant withdrew the hearing request; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant or her representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.302(b).

1. Entitlement to service connection for liver cancer is remanded.

A remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error that occurred prior to the June 2024 rating decision on appeal.

Specifically, despite evidence of bladder cancer (Nehmer Granted) associated with herbicide exposure, and medical evidence that shows that the Veteran's bladder cancer may have metastasized to the liver (see September 2019 private treatment records), VA failed to obtain a medical opinion with regards to whether the Veteran's liver cancer is secondary to his service-connected bladder cancer. 

Accordingly, a VA medical opinion is necessary prior to analyzing the merits of this claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the likely etiology of the Veteran's liver cancer. The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner. 

After a review of the record, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's liver cancer had its onset during any period of service, or is otherwise related to such period of service? The examiner should specifically consider the Veteran's exposure to herbicides. 

2. Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's liver cancer was caused by, due to or results from the Veteran's bladder cancer? The examiner should also address whether the Veteran's bladder cancer metastasized to his liver.

Any medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate for the Board to consider; any medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.