Citation Nr: A25032275
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453663
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran is bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance due to service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §?1141(s); 38?C.F.R. §§?3.350. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Coast Guard from October 2010 to May 2018.

In August 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a decision denying the Veteran's claim on appeal. In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran requested the Direct Review. The Board notes that the evidentiary window based on the Veteran's selection is limited to the evidence of record as of the date the AOJ issued notice of the applicable decision. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's claim for entitlement to SMC based on housebound status was granted in a February 2023 rating decision, albeit incorrectly notated by the RO as SMC for aid and attendance (however, the corresponding rating codesheet correctly displays SMC based on housebound status was granted, effective May 22, 2018). Thus, this claim is no longer on appeal. 

Entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance.

The Veteran seeks SMC based on the need of regular aid and attendance of another person.

SMC is payable at a specified rate if the Veteran, as the result of service-connected disability, is bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and assistance. 38?U.S.C. §?1114(1); 38?C.F.R. §?3.350(b). Aid and attendance is appropriate if the record establishes a factual need for the benefits under the criteria set forth in 38?C.F.R. §?3.352(a). 

The criteria to establish a factual need for aid and attendance are listed under 38?C.F.R. §?3.352(a). Aid and attendance is warranted if the following criteria are met: the inability of a claimant to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any specific prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without such aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); the inability of a claimant to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment. 

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38?C.F.R. §?3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions which a veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. Id. 

Treatment records reveal complaints and treatment for the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, with no notations of the inability to ambulate without the assistance of another person. Also, the record reveals the Veteran is independent of activities of daily living. He regularly attended VA medical appointments and examinations, without the assistance of another, and the record is void of any symptoms that show a severity level of impairment that renders the Veteran bedridden or so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance. 

VA examinations assessing the Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not reflect he needs assistance with activities of daily living; however, he does have pain and limitations due to his disabilities. Specifically, May 2018 VA examinations for the Veteran's right knee, seizure, and back condition report his difficulty walking, running, standing, bending, and climbing stairs for prolonged periods of time; confusion and loss of consciousness; and limited range of back motion, but no indication these symptoms impacts his ability to complete activities of daily living. The May 2019 and October 2019 VA tinnitus examinations reports the Veteran's issues with falling asleep and migraines, but the examiner made no finding of an inability to perform daily tasks to do his service-connected condition. An October 2019 knee examination and several mental health examinations do not reveal symptoms that rise to the level of requiring the regular aid and attendance of another.

An October 2019 medical opinion found the Veteran remains independent of activities of daily living and ambulates independently without use of assistive device.

An October 2021 VA examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, the examiner noted the Veteran's nonservice-connected disabilities restricts his activities and functions and renders the need for assistance, such as the need for preparing meals, assistance with bathing and tending to hygiene needs, medication management, and management of financial affairs. The Veteran goes outside his property once a week to a park with his wife.

A November 2022 VA examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, the examiner noted the Veteran's nonservice-connected disabilities restricts his activities and functions and renders the need for assistance. Specifically, he is restricted to his home or immediate vicinity, requires an attendant for the examination, and has difficulty ambulating without attendant or use of assistive device. However, he can self-feed, dress/undress, bathe, groom, and attend to wants of nature.

Based on the above, the Board notes that while the evidence of record in its totality reflects treatment, complaints, and a level of functional impact of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, it does not readily show a severity level of impairment that renders the Veteran bedridden or so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance due to his service-connected disabilities. Specifically, there is no evidence that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities resulted in the inability to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable, adjust any specific prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without such aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.), feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness, attend to the wants of nature, or be so incapacitated, physically or mentally, to require care or assistance on a regular basis in order to protect himself from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment. 

While the Board acknowledges the portions of evidence in the record that shows the Veteran needs regular assistance with getting dressed, bathing, personal hygiene, feeding himself, medication management, financial affairs, and to protect oneself from the hazards/dangers of daily environment, the Board notes this evidence to be heavily outweighed by the notations that this assistance needed is solely due to his nonservice-connected disabilities. 

As such, the Board concludes that the persuasive evidence of record is against a showing that the Veteran does not show he is bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and assistance due to his service-connected disabilities, as required, is not in approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Therefore, the appeal is denied.

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carter, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.