Citation Nr: A25032010
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230331-335759
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

For the entire period on appeal, a 70 percent rating, and no higher, for obsessive compulsive disorder (service-connected psychiatric disability) is warranted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a Total Disability Rating Based on Individual Unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

For the entire period on appeal, the criteria for a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's psychiatric disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9411. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active-duty military service from March 1975 to August 1978. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

In the March 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the inferred claim of entitlement to TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. For the entire period on appeal, a 70 percent rating, and no higher, for obsessive compulsive disorder (service-connected psychiatric disability) is warranted.

The Veteran is seeking a 70 percent rating, for the entire period on appeal, for his service-connected psychiatric disability. See March 2023 VA Form 10182. Also, the Veteran is asserting that his psychiatric disability precludes substantially gainful employment. Id.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that in September 2022 the Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for anxiety on an improper form because entitlement to service connection for anxiety was previously denied. A re-opening of the claim would require a supplemental claim with new and relevant evidence. However, the AOJ began development prior to notifying the Veteran of the improper form. The development activities resulted in a September 2022 VA examination report with medical opinion that indicated that the Veteran's diagnosed major depressive disorder (MDD) and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) was related to military service. 

The Veteran submitted a proper form in January 2023. A March 2023 VA examination report revealed an obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) diagnosis that subsumed the MDD and GAD. Entitlement to service connection for MDD with GAD at 70 percent disabling was granted and, within the same decision, the diagnosis was switched to OCD (with the subsumed MDD and GAD) and a 50 percent rating was assigned. Here, the Veteran is asserting that the rating should remain at 70 percent. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. All benefit of the doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

While the Veteran's entire history is reviewed when assigning a disability evaluation, where service connection has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). However, the Court has since held that in determining the present level of a disability for any increased evaluation claim, the Board must consider the application of staged ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Evaluations for psychiatric disabilities are assigned pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

The Board notes that considerations in evaluating a mental disorder include the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The evaluation must be based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on an examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).

Further, rating evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed.Cir.2013). The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-3 (2002). Although a veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration in assessing their disability rating based on a mental disorder, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in "most areas" for that rating. Id.; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

January 2023 VA medical records showed that the Veteran endorsed anger and difficulties with work due to his psychiatric symptoms.

In a March 2023 VA examination report, the examiner noted, "Per DSM-5 obsessions are intrusive and unwanted and cause marked distress or anxiety in most individuals. Compulsions are not done for pleasure, although some individuals experience relief from anxiety or distress. The intrusive thoughts and need to engage in compulsions may wear on the individual's interpersonal relationships, performance at work and overall daily functioning. This can be overwhelming and difficult to manage, potentially leading the person to feel depressed."

The report also revealed occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication with such symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities. The Veteran endorsed trust issues, obsessive compulsive behavior, anxiety, frustration, and anger.

The Veteran reported a good relationship with his children, that he works out twice a week, that he does not socialize, and that his hobbies include reading, being with his dog and playing solitaire. The Veteran conveyed, "when I think about my service I break down. When going to the VA Hospital I get sad because last year they dropped me on my back and caused me pain in my wrist and tail bone. I have trust issues, sometimes it feels like we don't connect with my therapist, low frustration tolerance with everyone. I am constantly washing my hands and making sure I am clean. I do it about 30 times a day." The Veteran denied both suicidal and homicidal ideation. 

Accordingly, when reviewing the evidence in its totality, and in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms, listed and unlisted, are most closely approximated by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, a 70 percent rating for the entirety of the period on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Specifically, the Board finds that the Veteran's anxiety, depression, anger, and obsessive-compulsive symptoms are similar to symptoms of "difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting" and "unprovoked irritability" as listed criterion for a 70 percent rating. Indeed, the symptom of "obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities" is a criterion for a 70 percent rating. 

The next-higher 100 percent rating is not warranted in this case as the evidence does not indicate the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. The evidence shows that the Veteran enjoys good relationships with his children, engages in hobbies, and works out weekly. Further, the March 2023 VA examination report indicated that the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs. The record is otherwise devoid of any behaviors or symptoms that would closely approximate the criteria required for a 100 percent rating. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that, for the entire period on appeal, a 70 percent rating, and no higher, for obsessive compulsive disorder (service-connected psychiatric disability) is warranted. In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt, however, as the evidence is persuasively in favor of the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-782 (2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to a Total Disability Rating Based on Individual Unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

The Veteran is asserting that his psychiatric disability precludes substantially gainful employment. See March 2023 VA Form 10182. Specifically, a January 2023 VA medical record indicated that the Veteran endorsed difficulties with work due to his psychiatric symptoms.

A TDIU is when a total disability rating is assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities: provided that, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and that, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. Therefore, rating boards should submit to the Director, Compensation Service, for extra-schedular consideration all cases of veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, but who fail to meet the percentage standards. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

Unlike in the legacy system, the reasons for remand by the Board in the modernized review system are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors); and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

As such, the Board finds that the evidence raises the issue of TDIU prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. See January 2023 VA medical record. A remand for further development is warranted.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Seek any information that is not already of record deemed necessary to develop this inferred TDIU claim for the period on appeal and provide the Veteran a reasonable amount of time to respond.

2. Adjudicate the issue of entitlement to TDIU for the period on appeal.

 

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.T. Graham

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.