Citation Nr: A25032843
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240610-446075
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 70 percent rating, but not higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; it was not manifested by total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial 70 percent rating, but not higher, for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active military service with the United States Army from June to July 1987, November 1987 to November 1991, and with the United States Air Force from June to September 2006, January to September 2007, June 2008 to April 2009, August to September 2013, October 2013 to May 2014, with additional service in the Army National Guard.  

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 and requested higher level review (HLR) of a May 2023 rating decision.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 HLR rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the May 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801 (2024). 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (2024).  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating - PTSD 

The Veteran contends that his PTSD is worse than that accounted for by the currently assigned rating.  His PTSD is rated 30 percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 9411.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  

In a private December 2022 PTSD evaluation report, the examiner reported that the Veteran had just got married this year.  He had a pervasive mistrust and suspicion of others, a loss of pleasure and interested in previously favored activities , a problem focusing at times, and sometimes the interest and motivation to do those activities isn't there.  The Veteran has a general preference for social isolation and avoidance.  The Veteran stated that it was very easy for him to lose concentration, he explained that he gets frustrated and has to walk away which happens at work especially, he has some difficulty working with others, noting that his tolerance level was not what it used to be.  The examiner noted that emotionally his mood was predominantly negative and can change quickly and extremely.  Cognitively, his capacity for executive functioning has decreased, especially in the area of memory and attention.  The Veteran attempts to avoid trauma triggers, his sleep tends to be poor, and he had other vague somatic complaints as noted by the examiner.  Additional symptoms noted were feelings of detachment or estrangement from others, persistent inability to experience positive emotions, irritable behavior and angry outbursts, reckless or self-destructive behavior,  hypervigilance, depressed mood, anxiety, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, grossly inappropriate behavior, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, suspiciousness, and flattened affect.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had passive suicidal ideation, but no intent to harm self or others.  He was appropriate dressed and groomed.  His thought process was goal-directed and focused on the subject at hand. Insight and judgment seemed good.  The examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  

In April 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  He reported that he was married to his second wife for less than one year.  He had three adult sons with whom he had a close relationship.  He remarked that he had a few close friends with whom he saw occasionally.  He had been employed as a mail handler for the past thirty years.  He endorsed depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, disturbances of motivation and mood, chronic sleep impairment, nightmares, intrusive and distressing memories, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, difficulty trusting others and feeling close with others, reduced interest in activities, problems with concentration, easily aggravated and agitated, sometimes losing his temper, and occasional feelings of hopelessness.  The examiner remarked that the Veteran's symptoms were considered mild to moderate.  The examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  

After carefully reviewing the relevant evidence, the Board finds the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms warrant an initial 70 percent rating. In the aggregate, and particularly in consideration of the lay and medical evidence discussed above, the Board finds the evidence reasonably demonstrates the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. As noted, the Veteran reported social isolation; passive suicidal thoughts; sleep impairment, impaired focus and concentration; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations; irritability with angry outbursts, panic, depression, anxiety and other symptoms. Many of these symptoms are either explicitly listed under the criteria for a 70 percent rating or are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to those symptoms. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board finds the specific symptoms, combined with the overall severity of the Veteran's condition, warrant an initial 70 percent rating.

The Board further finds the most persuasive evidence does not support a rating in excess of 70 percent. The evidence of record does not show the Veteran's overall disability picture more nearly approximated the frequency, severity, or duration of psychiatric symptoms required for a 100 percent disability rating based on total occupational and social impairment. That is, the competent evidence of record does not show the Veteran experienced gross impairment in thought processes or communication, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

The Board therefore finds the relevant evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in total social and occupational impairment warranting a 100 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board has considered the requirement to resolve any reasonable doubt regarding the level of the Veteran's disability in his favor. The Board has done so in finding the Veteran's overall disability picture more nearly approximated that of a 70 percent disability rating. His symptoms did not more nearly reflect the frequency, severity, and duration of symptoms associated with the 100 percent rating.

Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other pertinent issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017). Entitlement to an initial 70 percent rating, but no higher, is granted. 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Ware, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.