Citation Nr: A25032207
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240615-447912
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder with residuals of a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder with residuals of a TBI does not result in total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran's migraine headaches have not been manifested by characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over last several months.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder with residuals of a TBI have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.124(a), 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8045-9400.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.20, 4.124a, DC 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2020 to March 2020.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

On the June 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran included issues of glenohumeral joint dislocation with instability, left shoulder labral tear and right shoulder strain with labral tear. In June 2024 correspondence, the Board notified the Veteran that those issues could not be docketed for appeal as time 10182 was not timely. Those issues are not before the Board. 

Increased Ratings

Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder with residuals of a TBI (psychiatric disability)

The Veteran is seeking a rating higher than his current 70 percent evaluation for his acquired psychiatric disorder. The claim has been pending since May 2023 when the Veteran submitted a Fully Developed Claim.

The Veteran's service-connected disability (generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder with residuals of a TBI ) is rated under Diagnostic Code 8045-9400. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. In this case, the hyphenated code indicates that the Veteran's TBI disability (Diagnostic Code 8045) is evaluated under its primary symptomology, generalized anxiety disorder (Diagnostic Code 9400).

Ratings under DC 9400 are assigned in accordance with the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name cause total occupational and social impairment.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is a Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a Veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Id. at 442; see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the Veteran's impairment must be due to those symptoms, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118. Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a holistic analysis that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

The Veteran was given a VA examination in July 2023 for his psychiatric disability, in part to determine whether there were co-existing psychiatric conditions. The Veteran's diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder and disorder due to traumatic brain injury was confirmed by the examiner. The examiner noted that they were unable to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis; stating that the symptoms of the disorders and their resulting impairments overlap and cannot determine their individual impact. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he has fatigue that causes difficulties with taking care of his own day to day activities such as doing household chores, running errands and managing personal hygiene. His fatigue also impacts his ability to concentrate. The Veteran reported sleeping an average 3 hours in a 24-hour period. He stated that when he lays down at night, his mind races and it takes him 2-hours to fall asleep and denied taking any naps after he gets off of work. Te Veteran further reported feeling nervous, excessive worrying, restlessness, difficulty relaxing, and that he gets annoyed easily. The examiner characterized the level of occupational and social impairment with regard to all mental diagnoses as "with reduced reliability and productivity." The symptoms identified by the examiner were depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; disturbances of motivation and mood, and; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported to the examination on time and presented with anxious mood. The Veteran was oriented in all spheres, eye contact was direct, grooming was adequate, and fully participated on the examination. 

The Veteran was given a VA examination in August 2023 for his psychiatric disability in connection with the claim for increased rating. The Veteran was diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder and mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury. The examiner noted that they were unable to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis to include the TBI diagnosis; stating that due to the interactive nature of the diagnosis it is impossible to filter out the exact impact of each diagnosis on the veterans social and occupational impairment. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he has fatigue that causes difficulties with taking care of his own day to day activities such as doing household chores, running errands and managing personal hygiene. His fatigue also impacts his ability to concentrate. The Veteran reported sleeping an average 3 hours in a 24-hour period. He stated that when he lays down at night, his mind races and it takes him 2-hours to fall asleep and denied taking any naps after he gets off of work. The Veteran further reported feeling nervous, excessive worrying, restlessness, difficulty relaxing, and that he gets annoyed easily. He denied any legal issues or problems with violence.

The August 2023 examiner characterized the level of occupational and social impairment with regard to all mental diagnoses as "with reduced reliability and productivity." The symptoms identified by the examiner were depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. The Veteran said he "gets angry when there is a bunch of people in one place." The examiner's observation of the Veteran during the examination was that the Veteran was pleasant and cooperative in his interaction as well as appropriately groomed and dressed. His speech was normal in rate and tone. His mood was dysphoric with restricted affect; thought process was logical and goal directed, and he did not appear to be responding to internal stimuli. The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation and his judgement and insight was fair. 

The Veteran was also afforded a specific VA examination for TBI in August 2023. The examiner did not find a TBI diagnosis. The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced significant migraine headaches which occur 3 to 4 times daily which last 45-60 minutes. The headaches were described as pulsating and constant. The Veteran denied a history of head injuries including any loss of consciousness and his TBI examination was normal. In the assessment of facts of TBI-related cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms of TBI, the examiner noted normal findings or no complaints. The examiner noted that the Veteran's initial injury during his fall during service had a diagnosis of pain in left shoulder without mention of head injury. 

The Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted. The Board finds the July 2023 and August 2023 VA examinations are probative evidence. The examiners characterized the Veteran's occupational and social impairment as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiners provided specific detailed symptoms that do not meet or more closely approximate the criteria for a 100 percent rating. There is no evidence that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder results in total occupational and social impairment and there was no evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting himself or others, disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, or his own name. Both VA examinations characterized the Veteran as oriented in all spheres.

The Board acknowledges the August 2023 examiner's notation of impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. The Board concludes, however, that the frequency, severity and duration of those symptoms do not result in a level of impairment that more close approximates the criteria for a higher rating.

The Board notes that the Veteran endorsed neglect of personal appearance and hygiene and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. The presence or absence of any one symptom listed in the criteria is not necessarily dispositive of any particular disability level. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 115. The neglect of personal appearance and hygiene is also contemplated by the 70 percent criteria.

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through their senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability of this disorder according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disabilities has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him or his medical records during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated. As such, the Board finds these records to be more probative than the Veteran's subjective observations.

In summary, the persuasive evidence of record is against the claim for a rating in excess of 70 for service-connected for generalized anxiety disorder, insomnia disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder with residuals of a TBI. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for his migraine headaches. The appeal has been pending since May 2023 with the claim for an increased rating for anxiety disorder with TBI.

The Veteran's tension headache disability is evaluated by analogy to DC 8100, for migraine headaches. 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a. Under that DC, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating, the maximum schedular evaluation, is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" was defined as describing migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018). The distinction between the 10 and 30 percent disability levels is the frequency of the headaches. A 10 percent rating is warranted when the prostrating headaches occur once every 2 months; 30 percent when the prostrating headaches occur once a month. 

These criteria are conjunctive; for a 50 percent evaluation, each of the following factors must be present. The headaches must be: (1) very frequent; (2) completely prostrating; (3) prolonged; and (4) productive of severe economic inadaptability. Id.

The 50 percent rating level also includes additional distinct criteria that are not found elsewhere in the DC. To satisfy the 50 percent rating criteria, the headache attacks must occur "very" frequently. Though the 10 and 30 percent ratings specify the number of headaches that must occur within a specific period, the 50 percent rating does not provide this level of detail. The phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency greater than once a month, which is enumerated in the 30 percent rating level, and once every 2 months, which is enumerated for the 10 percent. Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  Additionally, because the 50 percent rating requires "very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability," the use of the conjunctive "and" makes clear that the headaches must be long in duration. See Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360 (2007). "Prolong" is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Webster's New World Dictionary of American English 1080 (3d ed. 1986). Finally, the 50 percent rating criteria requires the headaches to produce or be capable of producing "severe economic inadaptability," which is interpreted as meaning either "producing" or "capable of producing" severe economic inadaptability. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440 (2004).

In rating headaches or migraines under DC 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).

The Veteran was given a VA examination in October 2023 during which the examiner noted a diagnosis of migraine headaches. The Veteran reported to the examiner that he experiences near-daily headaches, bilaterally, lasting several hours at a time. He notes photophobia and occasional sonophobia. He notes prostrating attacks a few times per year. The Veteran takes Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAID) for the headaches as needed. The Veteran described his related symptoms as pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of his head. The Veteran reported sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound but denied experiencing other non-headache symptoms; no nausea, vomiting, changes in vision or sensory changes (such as feeling of pins and needles in extremities). The Veteran indicated the duration of typical head pain was less than one day. The examiner noted the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks; the frequency of which is "with less frequent attacks. The examiner noted that when the Veteran experiences severe headaches, it may interfere with ability to perform physical labor and concentrate.

The Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted. A 10 percent rating is assigned for characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months. The October 2023 VA examination included that examiner's description of less frequent attacks. At no time during the period on appeal has the Veteran's headache disability manifested prostrating attacks (defined as causing extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, debilitation or incapacitation with substantial inability to engage in ordinary activities). At worst the Veteran has complained of throbbing pain to both sides of his head. The Board points out that VA's Headache Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) form itself includes the definition of the term "prostrating" for VA purposes and specific options of frequency of attacks and the examiner was instructed to use that definition when answering whether the Veteran had such attacks, and if so, the frequency. Given those instructions, the October 2023 VA examiner checked that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of headache pain occurring "with less frequent attacks." The form itself included an option for "once in 2 months." The examiner did not select that option. The examiner noted that the Veteran takes NSAID for his headaches. However, there's no indication the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report nor did the Veteran indicate he was on any pain medications at the time of the examination. There is no indication the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication and indeed, factored in the Veteran's description of his right and left throbbing head pain without discounting these symptoms. Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 56. Further, the Board, resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor.  As such, the Board concludes the examination of record is adequate to base a decision.      

Accordingly, persuasive evidence of record is against a compensable rating for migraine headaches. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. The claim for a compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.

 

 

M.E. Larkin

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. G. Perkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.