Citation Nr: A25032974
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240208-416142
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a chronic sinus disability is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 0 percent for migraines is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had a chronic sinus disability during or contemporary to the appeal period.

2. The Veteran's migraines disability did not manifest with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month or more over the last several months, or, very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a chronic sinus disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 0 percent for migraines have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2003 to April 2005, January 2008 to February 2009, and December 2016 to December 2017.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

On September 17, 2023, the AOJ issued a rating decision establishing service connection for migraines and assigning a 0 percent rating, and denying entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a sinus disability.  On September 28, 2023, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) requesting review of the September 17, 2023, rating decision.  On February 8, 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the September 17, 2023, rating decision.  

On September 8, 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) appealing the February 2, 2024, rating decision and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 17, 2023, AOJ rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider that evidence in this decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran wants VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify that evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a chronic sinus disability.

Service connection may be established for disability caused by disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  In order to establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence, generally medical, of a causal relationship between the claimed in service disease or injury and the current disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

Service connection may also be established for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in-service.  38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); Cosman v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 503 (1992).  The disease entity for which service connection is sought must be chronic rather than acute and transitory in nature.  For the showing of chronic disease in service, a combination of manifestations must exist sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word chronic.

Secondary service connection may be established for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of the facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  Lay testimony is competent when it regards the readily observable features or symptoms of injury or illness and may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran is competent to provide testimony concerning factual matters of which he has firsthand knowledge, such as experiencing a physical symptom such as pain.  Therefore, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of lay statements.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility.  Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while weight and credibility are factual determinations going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted.  Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67 (1997).

A Veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail.  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

While the Board must provide reasons and bases supporting a decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, every piece of evidence submitted by or on behalf of the Veteran.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence of record.  The Veteran should not assume that the Board has overlooked pieces of evidence that are not explicitly discussed.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000).

The threshold consideration for any service connection claim is the existence of a current disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there is no valid claim for service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a chronic sinus disability as due to burn pit exposure.

After a careful review of the evidence, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against of a finding that the Veteran has had a chronic sinus disability during or contemporary to the appeal period.

On a January 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, the Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran did not report any history of treatment for any claimed disability.

At a June 2023 VA examination for sinusitis and rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx, the examiner diagnosed allergic rhinitis and chronic cough.  The Veteran reported having had a cough, bronchitis, and sinus drainage since being deployed to Djibouti.  The Veteran was not diagnosed with any sinus disability and the examiner noted that the Veteran did not have any sinus condition or disability.  The Veteran also reported chronic cough, which was worse at night and when supine, and the examiner found that the Veteran's sinuses were tender to palpation on top over distal eyes and under eyes by the nasal bridge.  The examiner found no sinusitis or signs or symptoms attributable to chronic sinusitis.  X-ray imaging of the paranasal sinuses showed no significant soft tissue swelling, no evidence for acute fracture, and that the visualized sinuses were clear without mucosal thickening or air fluid level, with an impression of no sinus opacification or other acute finding identified.  The June 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's chronic cough was a symptom of rhinitis.

At a July 2023 Gulf War General Medical examination, the examiner did not find any evidence of sinusitis, rhinitis, or other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, or pharynx.  The Veteran reported having had a sinus X-ray that year, but the results were not available to the examiner.  The Veteran reported having to miss work, stating "bronchitis due to my breathing I have to miss work short of breath and the continuous coughing" despite no diagnosis of bronchitis or related condition made on examination.  The Veteran reported getting "bronchitis" two or three times a year with moderate symptoms and taking decongestants, flonase, and expectorants to treat.

The Board notes that service connection has been established for rhinitis.

The Board finds that the weight of the evidence does not show that the Veteran has or had a chronic sinus disability during the appeal period.  In June 2023, a VA examiner found that the Veteran had allergic rhinitis and a chronic cough as a symptom of that rhinitis, and service connection was established for that disability.  The examiner did not find sinusitis or any other sinus disability, and X-ray imaging of the sinuses did not show any abnormality or acute or chronic disability.  In July 2023, another VA examiner again found that a diagnosis of a sinus disability was not supported.  The weight of the evidence shows that any ear/nose/throat type symptoms support a diagnosis of rhinitis but not any sinus disability, and neither VA examiner found a sinus disability or attributed any reported symptoms to any sinus disability.  The Board notes that the Veteran's report of "sinus drainage" was noted on examination, and the May 2023 VA examiner attributed drainage to the diagnosed rhinitis.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports of symptoms, such as coughing and postnasal drip or sinus drainage, and the symptoms the Veteran identifies as "bronchitis."  The Veteran is competent to report experiencing symptoms, such as a cough or postnasal drip or similar.  However, the Veteran is not competent to diagnose respiratory disabilities in light of the specialized medical knowledge and training required to diagnose such disabilities or attribute particular symptoms to any such disability.  Accordingly, the Board affords greater probative weight to the contemporaneous medical evidence, provided by trained medical professionals, that does not support a finding of a chronic sinus disability during or contemporary to the appeal period.

The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had a current chronic sinus disability during or contemporary to the appeal period.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance, and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim for service connection for a chronic sinus disability is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 0 percent for migraines.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in the favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's entire history is to be considered when assigning disability ratings.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  A claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that may result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  The following analysis is undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

The Veteran's migraines have been rated pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8100 which provides ratings for migraines and other headache conditions.  Diagnostic Code 8100 provides for a maximum 50 percent rating for very frequent completely prostrating attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring an average of once every two months over the several months, and less frequent attacks warrant a 0 percent rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  Characteristic prostrating attacks are defined as migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018).

At a May 2023 VA headache examination, the examiner diagnosed migraine, including migraine variants, and found that the Veteran experienced pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain localized to one side of the head, pain on both sides of the head, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound.  The Veteran reported most headaches lasted 4 to 6 hours but some lasted 1.5 days.  The Veteran reported that typical head pain started on the right side and moved to both sides of the head.  The examiner found, or the Veteran reported, experiencing characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain with less frequent attacks than once every two months.  The examiner found that the Veteran did not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain.  The Veteran reported becoming sensitive to light, sound, and experiencing nausea and head pain prior to onset of a migraine.  The Veteran reported two to four weeks of work time lost in the preceding 12 months and reported having gone home from work 12 to 16 times due to a sensitivity to light and sound.

The Board notes that the examiner found, or the Veteran reported, experiencing characteristic prostrating attacks less than once every two months.  The Veteran reported having to leave work 12 to 16 times in the preceding 12 months due to sensitivity to light and sound or losing two to four weeks of work time.  The Veteran also reported experiencing nausea and vomiting.  The sensitivity to light and sound does not seem prostrating, as there does not appear to be any reduction in vitality or a production of powerlessness.  The fact that the Veteran was able to leave work after experiencing the symptoms suggests that the Veteran was not powerless during those particular types of events.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran experiences non-prostrating attacks  approximately 1 to 1.3 times per month, with sensitivity to light and sound that do not rise to the level of prostrating attacks.  While the Veteran reported experiencing nausea and vomiting, those symptoms were not indicated as a cause for leaving work, suggesting those symptoms occurred less regularly.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence does not show that the Veteran experienced characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over a several month period.  The weight of the evidence also does not show characteristic prostrating attacks averaging once a month or very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service.  However, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates a rating of 0 percent for migraines, and not higher, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the assignment of any higher initial ratings.  As the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the assignment of any higher ratings, the claim for any higher ratings must be and is denied.  The Board finds that there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for sleep apnea as due to or caused by exposure to burn pits.

November 2017 service medical records document that the Veteran reported being "bothered a little" by feeling tired or having low energy, trouble sleeping, trouble concentrating on things, headaches, and other symptoms.

At a May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported an inability to sleep on the back due to a chronic cough and drainage.

At a July 2023 VA Gulf War General Medical examination, a VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have sleep apnea.  When the examiner inquired about symptoms, the Veteran denied experiencing any sleep disturbances.  The Veteran reported having fatigue precipitated by a moderate lack of sleep.  The Veteran reported taking pain medication and resting in a dark room in response to that fatigue.  The Veteran also reported continuous fatigue since a deployment during service.

Although a general medical examination was conducted, that examination was only requested for irritable bowel syndrome, so it is unknown whether or not the examiner actually examined the Veteran for sleep apnea and inquired about symptoms that may be indicative of sleep apnea and warrant appropriate medical testing.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran was not examined for sleep apnea.

VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was signed into law on August 10, 2022.  The PACT Act included changes to medical examination requirements where there is documented toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

Under the PACT Act, if a veteran submits to the Secretary a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1110 with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during active service, and that evidence is not sufficient to establish a service connection for the disability, VA shall provide the veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  When a medical opinion involving a TERA is requested, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  An exception to the examination requirement exists if VA determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran submitted evidence.  38 U.S.C. § 1168.

The Board finds competent evidence of a current disability is met by the Veteran's claim for service connection for sleep apnea, which is effectively a lay statement reporting sleep apnea or at least some sleep-related symptoms.  The Veteran complained of sleep problems and some other related symptoms during active service, and also was exposed to burn pits and other related toxins during service.  The sleep problems during service are at least potentially related to the claimed disability, and it is conceivable that a respiratory disability such as sleep apnea could be related to burn pit exposure.  An examination is also warranted under the PACT Act provisions based upon the Veterans TERA participation of exposure to burn pits and other toxins during service.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that an examination is warranted.  An examination was warranted prior to issuance of the September 17, 2023, rating decision, and therefore a pre-decisional duty to assist error was made.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the purpose of assessing whether any sleep apnea disability is present and whether any diagnosed sleep apnea disability is etiologically related to service.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand, and should note that review in the report.  The examiner should diagnose any sleep apnea disability and provide both direct and TERA medical opinions for any diagnosed disability.

(a.) The examiner should examine the Veteran for any sleep apnea disability, to include conducting or requesting any tests, such as a sleep study, if warranted.  The examiner should opine whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran has sleep apnea, and should explain the basis for that finding.

(b.) The examiner should opine whether it is as likely as not that any diagnosed sleep apnea disability is related to service or any incident of service, to include the Veteran's reports of difficulty sleeping, headaches, and tiredness noted in service medical records.

(c.) The examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that any diagnosed sleep apnea disability was caused by, the result of, or otherwise etiologically related to TERA exposures of the Veteran during service.  The examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, and should acknowledge that consideration in the medical opinion.

(d.) The examiner should opine whether it is as likely as not that sleep apnea is due to, the result of or caused by the service-connected disabilities, to specifically include a psychiatric disability and rhinitis.

(e.) The examiner should opine whether it is as likely as not that sleep apnea has been aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected disabilities, to specifically include a psychiatric disability and rhinitis.  Aggravation need not be permanent.  Aggravation can be found where the service-connected disability prevents treatment of, or lessens the efficacy of treatment of, the nonservice-connected disability, resulting in increase of the nonservice-connected disability.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Hood, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.