Citation Nr: A25032402
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-453545
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (sleep apnea) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his service connected right knee disability, left knee disability, right shoulder disability, and major depressive disorder caused him to become obese; obesity was a substantial factor in causing his sleep apnea and hypertension; and but for his obesity, he would not have developed sleep apnea and hypertension. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypertension have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from October 1993 to September 1997.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a November 2023 supplemental claim rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In a July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, under the Appeals Modernization and Improvement Act (AMA), the Veteran elected Direct Review.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the related claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

The November 2023 rating decision included a specific finding of new and relevant evidence and readjudicated the Veteran's claims.  As the Board is bound by the favorable findings of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), the Board may proceed with addressing the issues of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and hypertension.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(c), 3.2501.  

SERVICE CONNECTION

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires competent and credible evidence demonstrating (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448-449(1995) (en banc).

Although obesity is not a disability for VA compensation purposes, it can constitute an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and another current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis.  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 302 (2020).  VAOPGCPREC 1-2017, explains this requires competent and credible evidence that: (1) the service-connected disability caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity; (2) obesity was a substantial factor in causing the claimed disability; and (3) the claimed disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the service-connected disability.  Id. at 304.

VA shall consider all information and medical and lay evidence of record. Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-782 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. 

The Veteran contends he developed sleep apnea as a "direct result" of his weight gain due to the inability to exercise due to the pain from his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions, and from the medications to treat the pain, including hydrocodone.  See August 2019 VA Form 21-4138, December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Specifically, the Veteran contends his weight has increased because he has suffered with over twenty five years of pain, swelling, stiffness, and instability, despite multiple surgeries, that affected his ability to move around, caused him to develop depression and anxiety, and even with a proper diet, he gained weight, which he believes was a "contributing factor" to his sleep apnea.  See December 2022 VA Forms 21-4138, June 2023 Informal Conference, July 2024 Statement in Support of VA Form 10182.  

The Veteran's sleep apnea diagnosis and service-connected right knee disability were noted favorable findings in the November 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran is also service connected for a left knee disability, a right shoulder disability, and depressive disorder secondary to his right knee disability.  

Turning next to whether the Veteran's current sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, the Board finds there is evidence weighing in favor of and against the claim.  As service connection is being granted on a secondary basis, no other theory of entitlement will be addressed.

The Veteran weighed 138 pounds on enlistment.  See April 1993 Report of Medical Examination.  During service, the Veteran injured both knees and his right shoulder multiple times, reported worsening bilateral knee pain and right shoulder pain, and was medically discharged for severe chronic patellofemoral syndrome in his right knee that caused a limping gait and prevented him from running, climbing, squatting, or walking more than five blocks.  See May 1994, December 1994, January 1997 Health Records, May 1997 Medical Board Report, July 1997 Report of Medical History.  The Veteran weighed 171 pounds prior to discharge.  See September 1997 SF 600.

The Veteran's VA and private treatment records after service and prior to his March 2016 VA sleep apnea diagnosis consistent of reports of pain, instability, and an inability to exercise prior to and after successive surgeries to his right knee and reconstructive surgery of his right shoulder.  See March 1999 Dr. N.M. Notes, March 2000 VA Examination, April 2000 Dr. M.D. Operative Report, November 2003 VA Surgery Note, April 2007, September 2008 Dr. J.H. Univ. Health Services Notes.  The Veteran reported that even after his reconstructive surgeries, pain in his knee and shoulder affected his daily activities because he could not use the stairs or run, it was painful to lift anything, his knee swelled if he walked "too much" or tried to do anything, his right knee was giving out under any pressure, and he had to use a knee brace and crutches depending on "how bad it hurt."  See June 2009, November 2012 VA Forms 21-4138, December 2012 VA Knee and Lower Leg Examination, August 2014 VA Primary Care Note, September 2014 VA Orthopedic Surgery Consult.  The Veteran has been diagnosed as obese since 2001 and weighed 218 pounds, with a body mass index (BMI) of 32.6 at the time of his March 2016 sleep apnea diagnosis.  See August 2003 VA History and Physical Note, March 2016 VA Primary Care Note.  

The Veteran was evaluated for a sleep study after his wife noticed he stopped breathing in his sleep, and he reported feeling fatigued and sleepy "all the time."  See March 2016 VA Primary Care Note.  At the time he was referred for a sleep study, his primary care provider made a specific notation of his "significant" history of high blood pressure and his obesity and BMI.  Id.  The Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea and prescribed a continuous positive airway pressure device (CPAP) in March 2016.

The Veteran was prescribed Tramadol, an opioid, for breakthrough pain regularly from July 2012, and in June 2017, he was provided an informed consent form to continue his long-term opioid use, which noted that long-term opioid use increased his risk for sleep apnea.  See July 2012 VA Primary Care Note, June 2017 Consent for Long-Term Opioid Therapy for Pain.  

Weighing against service connection are three negative VA opinions.  In an August 2019 VA opinion, obtained in response to a private opinion submitted by the Veteran and discussed below, the examiner acknowledged multiple risk factors for sleep apnea, including age, gender, and obesity, but opined that risk factor is not the same as a cause because everyone who is obese does not also have sleep apnea.  See August 2019 VA Opinion.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's sleep apnea diagnosis could not be confirmed, and further opined that the Veteran was obese because he was ingesting more calories than needed, not because of the physical restrictions or decreased activity due to his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions. They further stated that the etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea was his airway being sucked closed on inspiration during sleep, not his service-connected conditions or the medication to treat them.  Id.  The Veteran's March 2016 VA sleep study sleep apnea diagnosis was confirmed in a December 2022 VA sleep apnea examination.  In July 2023, two additional VA opinions were obtained, one for the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) and one for secondary service connection based on his right knee conditions.  The examiner opined that musculoskeletal conditions such as the Veteran's service-connected conditions are "not related to the pathophysiology of sleep apnea" and "additionally, the Veteran has a positive risk factor of obesity."  The same examiner provided a negative TERA nexus opinion with the rationale that the Veteran's risk factor for sleep apnea such as obesity, "outweighs" his TERA exposure.  

The Board notes that separate VA opinions were obtained on the cause of the Veteran's obesity as related to his hypertension.  In a December 2022 opinion, the examiner acknowledged that obesity is caused by "a number of factors" including diet, depression, medication, age, and a sedentary lifestyle.  In an October 2023 VA opinion, the examiner opined that the "most common causes of obesity are overeating and physical inactivity" because "sedentary people burn fewer calories", and that the Veteran's obesity was not caused by his right knee conditions.  The Board affords the examiner's opinions regarding the cause of the Veteran's obesity and etiology of his sleep apnea limited probative weight as they were speculative.  Furthermore, the examiners did not address the Veteran's statements that he was unable to exercise because it exacerbated his severe chronic knee and shoulder pain, his long-term opioid use, or that his medical records show he was frequently restricted from physical activity after successive knee and shoulder surgeries, had frequent instability, an antalgic gait, was required to wear a knee brace, his shoulder continued to pop out of his socket, and even had difficulty putting on his shoes and was unable to run, walk, or stand for prolonged periods.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (an examination with a medical opinion adequately informing the Board of the Veteran's disability while considering prior medical history requires thorough consideration of the Veteran's lay reports of symptomatology).

However, the Board finds that the VA opinions are not devoid of all probative value.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2012) (even if a medical opinion is inadequate to decide a claim, it does not necessarily follow that the opinion is entitled to no probative weight absent a finding the opinion is based on an inaccurate factual premise).  Rather, the Board finds the examiner's opinions that the Veteran's obesity was a risk factor for his sleep apnea that "outweighed" other risk factors, constitutes probative evidence weighing in favor of service connection.  

Also weighing in favor of secondary service connection is a July 2019 private opinion based on a complete review of the Veteran's service treatment records, medical records, and personal history.  See July 2019 Medical Opinion, July 2019 Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was at least as likely as not due to his service-connected orthopedic conditions, associated sleep loss, depressive disorder, decreased activity, weight gain, and obesity.  Id.  The examiner explained that obesity is a major risk factor in developing and aggravating sleep apnea and weight gain is commonly associated with orthopedic conditions that prevent an ability to properly exercise.  Id.  The examiner noted the Veteran's reports of being unable to exercise, or be active due to joint pain, stiffness, and weakness, and that his symptoms of sleep apnea became more apparent as his weight increased.  Id.  In support of the opinion, the examiner cited to and provided several medical journals and scientific articles that concluded chronic pain, depression, and the use of opioids are associated with and contribute to the development and worsening of sleep apnea.  Id.  The Board finds that the July 2019 private opinion sufficiently explains that the risk of developing sleep apnea is significantly increased by obesity; that the Veteran's obesity was caused by his inability to exercise due to his musculoskeletal conditions and aggravated by his sleep disturbance, depression, and opioid use; and that his obesity, depression, and long term opioid use caused or aggravated his sleep apnea.  Therefore, as the examiner considered the Veteran's medical history and provided clear conclusions with supporting medical evidence, the Board assigns this favorable evidence significant probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

After thoroughly assessing the evidence, and resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence shows the Veteran's inability to exercise due to his knee and shoulder disabilities caused him to gain weight and become obese; the risk of developing sleep apnea is significantly increased by obesity; and that the Veteran's obesity caused his sleep apnea.  Accordingly, the Board finds that obesity was an "intermediary step" between his service-connected disabilities and his diagnosed sleep apnea.  Therefore, service connection for sleep apnea is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran contends that he became obese due to his inability to exercise, due to over twenty-five years of chronic pain from his right knee conditions, and this caused him to develop hypertension.  See December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, December 2022 VA Forms 21-4138.  Specifically, the Veteran contends his obesity is "one contributing factor" to his hypertension, along with his long term use of pain medication, and his service-connected depression.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138, June 2023 Informal Conference, July 2024 Statement in Support of VA Form 10182.  

The Veteran's hypertension diagnosis, history of high blood pressure readings, and service-connected right knee disability were noted favorable findings in the November 2023 rating decision.  As previously discussed, the Veteran's service treatment records show that his weight began to increase in service after multiple knee and shoulder injuries and he was medically discharged in 1997 because his right knee prevented him from performing the physical requirements of his military duties.  He is also service-connected for a left knee disability, a right shoulder disability, and depressive disorder secondary to his right knee disability.  Further, the Board previously found that the Veteran's right knee, left knee, and right shoulder pain, instability, and successive surgeries continued to prevent him from exercising, causing him to gain weight and be diagnosed as obese by 2001.  

Turning next to whether the Veteran's hypertension was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, the Board finds there is evidence weighing in favor of and against the claim.  As service connection is being granted on a secondary basis, no other theory of entitlement will be addressed.

The Veteran's VA treatment records show increased blood pressure readings of 140/90 in October 2000, 154/97 in August 2003, 146/78 in January 2007, 143/103 in November 2014, 131/92 in September 2014, and 144/108 in March 2016.  See October 2000 to March 2016 VA Primary Care Notes.  The Board previously noted that when the Veteran was diagnosed obese in August 2003, it was noted that he had been obese since 2001.  See August 2003 VA History and Physical Note.  In August 2003 the Veteran was advised to exercise more and to try and lose weight.  See August 2003 VA Treatment Note.  The Veteran's private treatment providers diagnosed him with hypertension, anxiety, and chest pain shortly after he was diagnosed with severe osteoarthritis in both knees.  See September, December 2017 Covenant Medical Group Notes Dr. J.R.  VA treatment records between June 2017 and July 2019 show that the Veteran had a history of hypertension, had been using opioids long term to treat his musculoskeletal pain, was diagnosed with sleep apnea and used a CPAP but continued to have trouble sleeping, and was prescribed trazadone to help him sleep.  See e.g. September 2018 VA Primary Care Note, December 2018 Respiratory Therapy Note, July 2019 VA Treatment Note.

There are multiple VA opinions addressing the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension in the record.  

In a December 2022 VA opinion, the examiner acknowledged that hypertension could result from several factors or combinations of factors, including diet, chronic conditions, prescription medication, and lack of physical activity.  The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion based upon an inability to opine without speculation that the Veteran's hypertension was due to his obesity.  The Board finds the opinion inadequate as it is speculative and without sufficient rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, supra; see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007) (holding that a mere conclusion is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign the opinion). Therefore, the Board affords it limited probative weight.

An addendum VA opinion was requested due to the Veteran's conceded TERA exposure, and in a July 2023 VA opinion, the examiner explained that the etiology of hypertension is "poorly understood" but is most likely the result of numerous genetic and environmental factors that have multiple compounding effects on cardiovascular and kidney structure and function, including age, obesity, and physical activity.  The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion with the rationale that the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal conditions are not known causes of hypertension "and the Veteran has a positive risk factor of obesity."   In a corresponding July 2023 VA TERA opinion, the same examiner acknowledged the Veteran's exposures and opined that there was no nexus between his hypertension and his cumulative toxic exposures because the Veteran "has risk factors for hypertension such as obesity, that outweigh his TERA exposure." 

In October 2023, an addendum opinion was obtained to address whether the Veteran's hypertension was due to his obesity.  See October 2023 Exam Request.  In an October 2023 VA opinion, the examiner acknowledged the Veteran's diagnosed obesity and explained that hypertension occurs when there is abnormally high blood pressure that is not the result of a medical condition, and that it is often due to obesity, family history, or an unhealthy diet.  The examiner opined that the most common causes of obesity are overeating and physical inactivity, explaining "sedentary people burn fewer calories", and based the negative nexus opinion on the Veteran's obesity not being caused by his right knee arthroplasty.  In a separate, corresponding VA opinion, the same examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was due to obesity with the rationale that he was diagnosed with obesity prior to his hypertension diagnosis, and "his essential hypertension was caused by obesity condition." 

For the reasons set forth in the previous section, the Board has found that the Veteran's obesity was caused by his service-connected disabilities.  The Board therefore affords the October 2023 VA opinion on the etiology of the Veteran's obesity little probative weight, as the examiner did not address the Veteran's reports and treatment records showing that his bilateral knee pain and instability and right shoulder pain and instability caused issue with exercise.  See Miller, supra. 

However, the Board finds that the December 2022, July 2023, and the October 2023 VA opinions on the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension, provide probative evidence in support of service connection.  See Monzingo, supra.  The Board acknowledges that these were all negative nexus opinions, however, while the examiners indicate that the etiology of hypertension is "poorly understood" they also note that it could result from obesity as well as lack of physical activity, and they all concede the Veteran's positive risk factor of obesity "outweighed" other risk factors.  The Board finds that the VA examiners confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of hypertension, noted that his medical history showed a consistent lack of physical activity, and noted a diagnosis of obesity that preceded his hypertension diagnosis.  The October 2023 VA opinion specifically provided a clear conclusion and supporting rationale to support that "his essential hypertension was caused by obesity condition."  Therefore, the Board assigns this favorable evidence significant probative weight.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

After thoroughly assessing the evidence, and resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence shows the Veteran's inability to exercise due to his service-connected knee and shoulder disabilities caused him to gain weight and become obese; the risk of developing hypertension is significantly increased by obesity; and that the Veteran's obesity caused his hypertension.  Accordingly, the Board finds that obesity was an "intermediary step" between his service-connected disabilities and his diagnosed hypertension.  Therefore, service connection for hypertension is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zahn, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.