Citation Nr: A25032584
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-471746
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's currently diagnosed sleep apnea did not have its onset during service and is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2002 to May 2004.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In August 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).   

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) [(table)].

The Veteran is seeking service connection for sleep apnea on the basis that, while such disorder was officially diagnosed after service, it nevertheless initially manifested therein as he experienced relevant symptoms, to include daytime tiredness, snoring, witnessed apnea events, and restless sleep, in service.  In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that he has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, as demonstrated by a January 2023 sleep study.  The Board is bound by such favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

However, the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis referable to sleep apnea, and reflect his consistent denial of any sleep impairment therein, to include January 2003 and January 2004 Reports of Medical History wherein he denied frequent trouble sleeping.  Nonetheless, in support of his theory of service connection, the Veteran has offered a June 2023 written statement from his spouse, C.P., recounting her observance of his in-service symptoms (as she had been with him since the early 2000s) of gasping for air and cessation of breathing, with a continuity of such symptoms thereafter.

Nonetheless, after his separation from service in May 2004, the Veteran's post-service treatment records reflect his explicit denial of sleep apnea and using a CPAP in May 2018.  Indeed, the first post-service sleep-related complaint is documented in a January 2023 VA treatment record, at which time a sleep study was scheduled to determine if he had sleep apnea as he reported trouble sleeping and snoring very loudly, and his spouse indicted that he had stopped breathing for short periods throughout the night.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to report his own in-service experiences capable of lay observation and his spouse, C.P., may also competently report her observations of his symptoms.  However, as neither the Veteran nor C.P. have any known or reported medical expertise, they lack the requisite competence to either diagnosis sleep apnea during service based on such observed in-service symptoms or provide a medical opinion linking the Veteran's post-service diagnosis of sleep apnea to service.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994) (a lay person is competent to report symptoms based on personal observation when no special knowledge or training is required); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that a lay person is not considered competent to testify regarding medically complex issues).  As such, the Veteran's and C.P.'s own assertions regarding the onset or causation of his sleep apnea cannot serve to substantiate his claim, and competent medical evidence is required to address such matters.  

In that regard, in July 2023, a VA examiner opined that that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or was caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support thereof, she indicated that the Veteran reported he developed obstructive sleep apnea and was experiencing such symptoms in service in relation to being tired throughout the day.  Here, the examiner noted that the Veteran's January 2003 and January 2004 Reports of Medical History reflect that he denied any issues with trouble sleeping.  She further noted that the first report of possible sleep apnea was in 2023 when the Veteran called in on January 5, 2023, to report trouble sleeping and his spouse reported loud snoring and witnessed apnea episodes.  In this regard, the examiner observed that a February 2023 VA treatment record showed the Veteran would be scheduled for a diagnostic evaluation for obstructive sleep apnea and that "he has a history of insomnia, fragmentation sleep, fatigue, sleepiness, as well as being overweight and sinus allergies.  Interaction of obstructive sleep apnea with these conditions was discussed."  Here, she noted the veteran underwent a sleep study on January 3, 2023, which revealed obstructive sleep apnea. 

Additionally, the examiner explained that, per medical literature, sleep apnea was caused by obesity, medications, enlarged neck, older age, male gender, smoking, etc., and literature further elaborated that obstructive sleep apnea occurred when the airways became blocked many times when the individual slept and reduced or stopped airflow.  She further noted that the Veteran was initially diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in 2023, which was 19 years after he left service, and his primary care provider indicated that he being overweight and having chronic allergies was a likely contributing factor to the development of his disability.  Here, the examiner noted that daytime sleepiness or tiredness was not a cause of obstructive sleep apnea, and was actually a symptom of the disability; however, there was no objective documentation within the record of continued complaints of daytime tiredness with respiratory complaints.  She further observed that the Veteran denied any lung abnormalities or sleep apnea on a pre-operative intake form dated in May 2018, and he was noted to have a BMI greater than 25, as mentioned by his primary care provider in February 2019 and May 2022 (which were both prior to his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea).  Thus, the examiner concluded that, based on the record, the Veteran's BMI of greater than 25 and his history of chronic allergies were more likely the cause of the development of his obstructive sleep apnea in 2023 versus any reported tiredness he experienced during service. 

The Board affords great probative weight to the July 2023 VA examiner's opinion as such considered all of the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's and C.P.'s lay statements and his relevant medical history, and provided a complete rationale, relying on and citing to the records reviewed.  Moreover, the opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data as well as detailed and reasoned medical explanations connecting the two.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  Notably, there is no medical opinion to the contrary.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's currently diagnosed sleep apnea did not have its onset during service and is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service.  Accordingly, service connection for sleep apnea is not warranted.  In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim for service connection for sleep apnea, such doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Koria B. Stanton, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.