Citation Nr: A25032373
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-451639
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lung condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to his active duty service, to include as a result of his toxic exposure risk activities (TERA), or manifested within one year of service discharge. 

2. The evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the erectile dysfunction was caused or incurred in service, to include due to his toxic exposure.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1974 to May 1977.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2024 decision.  In June 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2024 decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of a lung condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service.  38?U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.  Entitlement to service connection requires evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain conditions, such as diabetes mellitus, are considered to be a "chronic disease" listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) and therefore, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) applies. See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015). For these reasons, the presumptive service connection provisions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) for service connection based on "chronic" symptoms in service and "continuous" symptoms since service are applicable. Id. For the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time. With chronic disease as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes. If a condition noted during service is not shown to be chronic, then, generally, a showing of continuity of symptoms after service is required for service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

The VA administers the law under a broad interpretation resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is denied.

The Veteran contends that his diabetes mellitus type II was caused by service.  Specifically, he asserts that he performed a urine analysis for sugar diabetes and "continually had borderline diabetes" since service. See May 2023 VA Claim.

The Veteran is currently diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type II.  See January 2024 VA Examination Report. Thus, the first element of service connection is met. 

A March 28, 1976, service treatment record shows that the Veteran completed a urinalysis for sugar diabetes.  The examiner marked the note as "ny for sugar." There are no service treatment records showing a positive finding of diabetes.

The Board notes that the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran did participate in a TERA during active military service in his military occupational specialty of operations specialist exposing him to asbestos and jet fuel. Thus, the Board finds the second element of service connection, an in-service incurrence, has also been met. 

The remaining inquiry is whether the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II is related to his service.

The Board finds that the persuasive evidence of record weighs against a finding that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to his active duty service.

To that end, in a March 2024 VA examination report, the examiner opined that the diabetes was "less likely than not" incurred in or caused by the Veterans service.  He reasoned that "there is no in-service records to determine elevated blood sugar on lab reports."

Concerning a toxic exposure risk activities theory, in a January 2024 VA examination, the same examiner opined that the diabetes was "less likely than not" caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  He reasoned that "there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of T2DM at issue and the TERA."  Moreover, he reported that the Veteran is obese and "there is scientific evidence and medical literature that correlates T2DM with Obesity."

The Board finds these opinions adequate; they are consistent with the evidence, and the conclusions are well supported with an alternate theory of etiology.  Moreover, the Board interprets the March 28, 1976, service treatment record as "[not yet diagnosed] for sugar" and thus there is no in-service diagnosis of diabetes of record, which is consistent with the VA examiner's opinions.  As such, the Board assigns great probative weight to these opinions.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

There is no positive medical opinion evidence of record.

Concerning the Veteran's statements that he had "borderline diabetes" since service, the Board notes that the Veteran has not shown that he has the specialized education, training, or experience to diagnose the claimed disability. While lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, the diagnoses and etiologies of diabetes are complex medical matters in the field of medicine that fall outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Thus, the Veteran's lay statements have minimal probative value, and the medical findings have a greater probative value.

Additionally, the Board has considered the Veteran's claim under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307; 3.309, for chronic diseases presumption.  However, since the Veteran was first diagnosed with diabetes in 2022, 45 years after service, and was not diagnosed with diabetes within one year of separation, this presumption is not applicable. See September 21, 2022, VA treatment record.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to his active duty service, to include as a result of his toxic exposure risk activities.  Instead, the evidence weighs persuasively for finding that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II was caused by his obesity.

Thus, as the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-doubt doctrine does not apply, and the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is denied.

The Veteran contends that his erectile dysfunction is directly and secondarily related to his service.  See March 2023 VA Claim.

Service treatment records are silent for diagnoses or complaints relating to erectile dysfunction.

The Veteran is currently diagnosed with erectile dysfunction.  See January 2024 VA Examination Report.

The initial inquiry is whether there is an in-service disease or injury for direct service connection.  

The Board finds that there is not.  To that end, service treatment records are silent for complaints related to erectile dysfunction.  Further, the Veteran has not submitted any evidence, lay or otherwise, asserting complaints of erectile dysfunction during service.  

Despite missing Shedden element two, an in-service disease or injury for direct service connection, as noted above the Veteran participated in a TERA.  Therefore, the inquiry moves to whether the Veteran's claimed erectile dysfunction was caused or incurred by his TERA.

In this regard, in a March 2024 VA opinion, the examiner opined that the erectile dysfunction was "less likely than not" caused by the Veteran's total potential exposure because "there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition(s) at issue and the TERA."  The examiner further reasoned that the Veteran has a risk factor of diabetes type II that far outweighs the TERA risk factors "in which there [is] scientific evidence and medical literature that correlates T2DM with ED."

The Board finds this opinion adequate as the examiner fully considered the history and pertinent evidence of record and supported the conclusion with a thorough and well-reasoned explanation. As such, the Board assigns great probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

There is no positive medical opinion evidence of record.

The Board does not reach the question of secondary service connection since the Veteran has not provided a specific argument to a primary service-connected condition, and the persuasive evidence of record shows an etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is to his nonservice-connected diabetes mellitus type II.

Concerning the Veteran's statements that he has erectile dysfunction due to service, the Board notes that the Veteran has not shown that he has the specialized education, training, or experience to diagnose the claimed disability. While lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, the diagnoses and etiologies of erectile dysfunction are complex medical matters in the field of medicine that fall outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Thus, the Veteran's lay statements have minimal probative value, and the medical findings have a greater probative value.

In conclusion, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was incurred in service or due to TERA. 

Thus, as the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-doubt doctrine does not apply, and the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for lung condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a lung condition that is related to service.  Specifically, he asserts that he was "diagnosed with chronic scarring involving the right lung... [and] chronic coughing" due to asbestos exposure aboard the USS Saratoga.  See June 2023 VA Claim.

In a May 3, 2023, VA treatment record, the Veteran was notified that he had several lung nodules measuring 4 mm in right lower lobe that were new since 2021 CT scan.

In a May 30, 2023, VA treatment record, the results of a CT scan show that the Veteran's lung nodules have resolved, however there was evidence of scarring and/or chronic atelectasis. 

In a May 30, 2023, VA treatment record, the Veteran was notified that his lung nodules have resolved in a recent CT scan and that chronic scarring involving the right lower lobe was stable.

In an August 22, 2023, VA treatment record, the Veteran was prescribed albuterol for complaints of a cough, that was noted as "likely multifactorial" during a visit for an allergy consult.

In a November 2023, VA examination, the examiner rendered a negative medical opinion concerning a current diagnosis of a respiratory condition.  She reasoned there was no current diagnosis because "there is no objective evidence of a current lung nodule or a respiratory condition at this time."  She noted that "Albuterol was given for management of symptoms such as chest tightness, shortness of breath and cough, which the veteran all reported were current symptoms." However, the examiner did not adequately address whether the presence of lung scarring, or chronic atelectasis, was objective evidence of a disability.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Moreover, she did not explain whether the Veteran's cough symptoms created a functional impairment of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018).  As such, the Board finds the opinion inadequate.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Given the findings of lung scarring, and/or chronic lung collapse (atelectasis), and a current complaint of a cough with albuterol treatment, see May 30, 2023; August 22, 2023, VA treatment records, the Board finds that a new examination is required to determine whether there is a current diagnosis or if the Veteran's cough symptoms result in an equivalent functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders, supra.  To the extent possible, the examiner must state the etiology of the cough; notably whether the cough is the result of other disabilities, such as the service-connected allergic rhinitis or sinusitis.

Thus, while the Board regrets further delay, a remand is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1, 12 (2001) (emphasizing the Board's duty to return inadequate examination reports); Hicks v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 417, 421 (1995) (inadequate medical evaluation frustrates judicial review).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to address the claimed lung condition.  The examiner must address the following:

(A) The clinician must address whether there is a current diagnosis of a respiratory condition, considering VA treatment records showing lung scaring, chronic atelectasis, and chronic cough.

(B) To the extent possible, identify the etiology of any respiratory condition found.

(C) If no diagnosis is found, opine whether there is functional impairment of earning capacity based on any current respiratory symptoms.

(D) For any respiratory diagnosis found, or functional impairment, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's lung condition was due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service.  

In rendering these opinions, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures, including exposure to asbestos 

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered. 

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. J. Hall, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.