Citation Nr: A25032362
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-426617
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee strain is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hallux valgus is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, his bilateral pes planus was permanently aggravated during his active service.

2.  The Veteran's bilateral knee strain is etiologically related to his active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for bilateral pes planus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1153, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.306.

2.  The criteria for service connection for a bilateral knee strain have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from January 1999 to October 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 AMA rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of November 2023 rating decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2023 decision. In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision.  38?C.F.R. §§ 3.2601(f), 20.301.

As the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis and hallux valgus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Moreover, the Board notes that in the March 2024 HLR decision on appeal, the RO implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been submitted to readjudicate the Veteran's claims for service connection currently on appeal.  This is a favorable finding that the Board will not disturb. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Generally, to establish service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of 1) a current disability, 2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and 3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection may also be warranted for a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest during active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations, Afghanistan, Israel, Egypt, Turkey, Syria, or Jordan, during the Persian Gulf War, or that became manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more anytime thereafter.  See PACT Act, Pub. L. No 117-168, sec. 405(a), (d) (2022); see also 38 U.S.C. § 1117, as amended by Public Law 117-16838; C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).

The record shows that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations.  As such, the Veteran is considered a Persian Gulf War veteran.  The Veteran's current condition has been attributed to a known clinical diagnosis of conclusive pathophysiology and etiology.  Thus, the law and regulations providing for presumptive service connection for Persian Gulf veterans with qualifying chronic diseases are not applicable.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317.

Additionally, pursuant to the PACT Act, veterans who served in, or in the air space above, Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, and the United Arab Emirates on or after August 2, 1990, or Afghanistan, Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Yemen, or Uzbekistan on or after September 11, 2001, are presumed to have in-service toxic exposure, to include burn pits and other toxins (BPOT).  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1119, 1120, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303; PACT Act, Pub. L. No. 117-168 § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).

Certain enumerated diseases will be presumed related to service for veterans with in-service toxic exposure, to include BPOT. 38 U.S.C. § 1120. Neither pes planus nor a knee strain is one of the enumerated diseases.

Additionally, every veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111.

In order to rebut the presumption of soundness at service entry, there must be clear and unmistakable evidence showing that the disorder pre-existed service and there must be clear and unmistakable evidence that the disorder was not aggravated by service. The Veteran is not required to show that the disease or injury increased in severity during service before VA's duty under the second prong of this rebuttal standard attaches. VAOPGPREC 3-2003 (July 16, 2003); Jordan v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 261 (2003); Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Cases in which the condition is noted on entrance, are however, governed by the presumption of aggravation of a preexisting disability contained in 38 U.S.C. § 1153. This statute provides that a preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated by active service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless clear and unmistakable evidence shows that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease. 38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306. In such cases, the record must simply show that there was a permanent increase in severity during service to trigger the presumption of aggravation. See Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096.

Aggravation may not be conceded where the disability underwent no increase in severity during service on the basis of all the evidence of record pertaining to the manifestations of the disability prior to, during, and subsequent to service. 38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304, 3.306(b). Temporary or intermittent flare-ups of a preexisting injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered "aggravation in service" unless the underlying condition itself, as contrasted with mere symptoms, has worsened. See Jensen v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 304, 306 -07 (1993); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 320, 323 (1991); Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 297 (1991).

Moreover, due regard will be given to the places, types, and circumstances of service and particular consideration will be accorded combat duty and other hardships of service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.306 (b)(2).  The development of symptomatic manifestations of a preexisting disease or injury during or proximately following action with the enemy or following a status as prisoner of war will establish aggravation of a disability. 

1.  Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus. 

The Veteran contends that his bilateral pes planus was permanently aggravated during service due to intense physical activity in service.  For the reasons that follow, and resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for bilateral pes planus is warranted. 

Turning to the record, the RO has found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral pes planus.  Such is favorable finding that the Board will not disturb. Thus, the first element of service connection has been met.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) shows that moderate, asymptomatic bilateral pes planus was noted at service entrance.  Thus, the presumption of soundness does not attach to this condition, but the presumption of aggravation is for potential application.

The Veteran contends that he began to experience foot pain in service during his deployment.  He contends that jumping off high vehicles, walking, and running on rocky terrain caused him to begin having foot pain and that the pain has continued to the present. See December 2022 VA fee-based examination; June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim; VA treatment records. 

A September 2005 Post-Deployment Assessment shows that the Veteran reported concerns regarding his feet.  He also reported that he engaged in direct combat where he discharged his weapon during his deployment. 

Further review of his STRs shows that no separation exam was conducted, and thus, the severity of the Veteran's pes planus was not examined at service separation. 

In April 2023, a VA fee-based opinion was obtained at which time the examiner opined that the Veteran's pes planus which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression during service.  However, the examiner's rationale was solely based on a lack of evidence in the STRs documenting aggravation. As the opinion is based solely on an absence of evidence and does not appear to consider the Veteran's statements regarding in-service foot pain or the September 2005 Post-Deployment Assessment, the Board affords the opinion no probative weight. 

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a private opinion by Dr. R.B. who opined that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.  A cogent rationale was provided for the opinion.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the Veteran's preexisting bilateral pes planus underwent an increase in severity during service. Specifically, at service entrance, the Veteran's pes planus was asymptomatic. However, the September 2005 Post-Deployment Assessment indicates that the Veteran began having foot issues/concerns proximately following action with the enemy.  Additionally, the June 2023 private opinion, which the Board finds to be the most probative, indicates that the Veteran's pes planus was aggravated by service.  The Veteran also has consistently reported that his foot pain began in service around the time he was deployed.  See VA treatment records.  In addition, no separation examination was conducted that would have provided useful information regarding the severity of the Veteran's pes planus at separation. 

Furthermore, there is no clear and unmistakable evidence that the increase in the Veteran's pes planus is due to the natural progress of the disease. In this regard, the Board acknowledges that an opinion regarding such has not been obtained. However, the Board will not remand for such an opinion as such would be tantamount to remanding for negative evidence. See Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003).     

In light of the foregoing, and resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's preexisting bilateral pes planus was permanently aggravated during his active military service. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for bilateral pes planus is granted.

2.  Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee strain.

The Veteran contends that his current bilateral knee condition is related to extensive physical activity in service.  For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that service connection is warranted. 

As with the Veteran's pes planus, the RO also found that the Veteran has a current bilateral knee disability.  As such, the first element of service connection has been met.

The Veteran contends that his current knee condition is related to jumping off high vehicles, standing and walking for long hours, walking on rocky terrain, and carrying heavy armor during his deployment. See December 2022 VA fee-based opinion; June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. 

A review of the Veteran's STRs shows that the Veteran reported concerns regarding his knees on his September 2005 Post-Deployment Assessment.  As noted above, no separation exam was conducted. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the second element of service connection, an in-service event, has been met.

Turing to the third element of service connection, a causal nexus, the Board finds this element also has been met. 

The Veteran has competently and credibly reported that he has experienced knee pain in and since service.  See VA treatment records; June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. 

In December 2022, a VA fee-based opinion was obtained at which time the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was related to his active service.  However, in the rationale, the examiner noted that there were no complaints of knee pain in the Veteran's STRs.  Such is inaccurate, as noted above, the Veteran reported knee concerns on his September 2005 Post-Deployment Assessment. 

In light of such deficiency, an addendum opinion was obtained in May 2023.  While the examiner considered the Post-Deployment Assessment the examiner continued to provide a negative nexus opinion explaining that the Veteran's STRs do not document a chronic bilateral knee condition.  However, it does not appear that the examiner considered the Veteran's reports of experiencing knee pain since service.  

In light of the foregoing, the Board assigns limited probative weight to the December 2022 and May 2023 VA fee-based opinions.

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a private opinion by Dr. R.B. who opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition is related to his active service.  Dr. R.B. reviewed all of the relevant evidence of record and explained that it is likely that the Veteran's ongoing accumulating impact to his knees due to activities such as physical training, marching, running, hiking with heavy gear plus body weight, as well as heavy lifting, pushing, pulling, bending, squatting, jumping, landing, etc., in service would cause accumulated damage to the Veteran's knees leaving them vulnerable to further damage and accelerated degeneration over time, which would be expected to progress to the current diagnosis over time.  Dr. R.B. also discussed studies regarding musculoskeletal injuries in Army populations and discussed how lower limb joints can be injured with physical activity.  

The Board finds this opinion, supported by a rationale based on an accurate medical history with clear conclusions and supporting data, is highly probative.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Accordingly, as the most competent and probative evidence indicates that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition is related to his active service, the Board finds that service connection for a bilateral knee strain is warranted.  As such, the claim is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis and hallux valgus

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis and hallux valgus.  The Board finds that additional development is necessary prior to adjudication.

In December 2022, a VA fee-based opinion was obtained at which time the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's foot condition was related to his active service.  The examiner noted in his rationale that he was unable to find any records in the Veteran's claims folder pertaining to foot pain during the time he was in service.  However, as noted above, the Veteran's September 2005 Post-Deployment Assessment noted concerns regarding his feet.  Additionally, it does not appear that the examiner addressed the diagnosis of hallux valgus in the opinion. 

Although new opinions were obtained in April 2023 for the Veteran's plantar fasciitis and hallux valgus, the opinions addressed the presumption of aggravation, not direct service connection.  As neither plantar fasciitis nor hallux valgus were noted on the Veteran's entrance examination, the presumption of aggravation is not for application.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that a new opinion addressing whether the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis and hallux valgus is directly related to service should be obtained on remand.

While the Board acknowledges the June 2023 private opinion, Dr. R.B. only provided an opinion addressing the Veteran's bilateral pes planus.  Thus, such is insufficient to grant the claims for plantar fasciitis and hallux valgus, which are separate diagnoses from his pes planus.

 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot conditions from a qualified medical professional.  The need for a physical examination is left to the discretion of the VA examiner.  The examiner must review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand. 

The examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis and/or his bilateral hallux valgus had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, active service, to include 1) the September 2005 notation of foot concerns, and/or 2) physical activity in service such as jumping off high vehicles, walking, and running on rocky terrain. 

In so opining, the examiner should consider the Veteran's reports of experiencing foot pain in and since service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.  The rationale must consider and discuss the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Mortimer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.