Citation Nr: A25032841
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 210922-187364
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension (HTN) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The most probative and persuasive evidence reflects that the Veteran's kidney cancer is at least as likely as not etiologically related to his active-duty service.

2. The most probative and persuasive evidence reflects that the Veteran's HTN was caused by his service-connected asthma.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

The criteria for service connection for HTN are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1975 to November 1980, with subsequent service in the Army National Guard which appears to include active-duty combat service as a door gunner, although those files are not included in the record. He received the Good Conduct Medal and the Aircraft Crewman Badge.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2020 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) of the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In September 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), and elected the Evidence Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the notification of the December 2020 AOJ rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the NOD in September 2021. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer is granted.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Generally, to establish service connection for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in service, there must be (1) competent evidence of the current existence of the disability for which service connection is being claimed; (2) competent evidence of incurrence of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) competent evidence of a nexus or connection between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred in service. Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 236 (2010); Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); cf. Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2004) (citing Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999)).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is shown to be proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by (3) an already service-connected disability. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc) (additional disability resulting from aggravation of a nonservice-connected disorder by a service-connected disorder is also compensable under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310).

In this appeal, the Board must determine the value of all evidence submitted, including lay and medical evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The evaluation of evidence generally involves a three-step inquiry. First, the Board must determine whether the evidence comes from a "competent" source. 

Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (footnote omitted).

Competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions. Competent medical evidence may also mean statements conveying sound medical principles found in medical treatises. It would also include statements contained in authoritative writings such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(1). 

Competency is a legal concept in determining whether lay or medical evidence may be considered, in other words, whether the evidence is admissible as distinguished from credibility and weight, factual determinations going to the probative value of the evidence, that is, does the evidence tend to prove a fact, once the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997). Competency is a question of fact, which is to be addressed by the Board. Jandreau, v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (2007). 

The Board must then determine if the evidence is credible, or worthy of belief. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007) (Observing that once evidence is determined to be competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible). The third step of this inquiry requires the Board to weigh the probative value of the proffered evidence in light of the entirety of the record.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (2017); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). 

Analysis.

The Veteran seeks direct service connection for his kidney cancer which he contends was caused by exposure to multiple oils, toxic chemicals, and fumes during service while performing his duties as a helicopter repairman and fire control crewman.

For the reasons discuss below, the Board finds that the most probative and persuasive evidence is at least in approximate equipoise regarding the probable etiology of the Veteran's kidney cancer, and thus, the Board will resolve all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor in granting his appealed issue.  See, Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

In the December 2020 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed by a VA medical center with a current disability, a "kidney lesion as an active problem." Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the first element of direct service connection (evidence of a current disability), has already been established. As such, the crux of the first appealed issue is whether the most probative evidence reflects element (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and element (3) a medical nexus - a causal relationship between the Veteran's kidney cancer and the disease or injury he incurred or aggravated during service. See generally, Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Within the 90-day evidentiary window following the Veteran's September 2021 NOD, the Veteran submitted a September 2021 personal lay statement which documented his exposure to chemicals in service. The Veteran stated during active service he was regularly exposed to different oils, chemicals, and fumes, such as jet fuel, aviation gas, diesel fuel, and petroleum. Additionally, the Veteran stated he was exposed to smoke and other chemicals while assisting in battling fires. The Veteran stated he did not have a mask or respirator to wear while performing these duties, therefore he remembers inhaling different fumes from the oils, chemicals, and fuels throughout his service.  The Veteran also remembers the high frequency of incidents when fuel would spill on his body. The Veterans DD-214 confirms the Veteran served as a helicopter repairman and fire control crewman during his active-duty service.

Regarding the above, the Board, as the finder of fact in these matters, notes that the Veteran's reports of in-service exposures to toxic fuels and associated fumes are consistent with the duties and assignment of his MOS as a helicopter repairman and fire control crewman.  To this extent, element (2) to establish direct service connection for kidney cancer has been demonstrated.  

In further support of his contentions, the Veteran submitted a September 2021 private medical opinion, which addresses element (3) a medical nexus necessary to establish direct service connection. The clinician reviewed the Veteran's claim file, updated VA medical records, private medical records, compensation and pension examination, and lay statements. The clinician noted the Veteran had a procedure done in 2019 that diagnosed the right kidney lesion as "papillary renal cell carcinoma." The clinician identified at least two well-established agents that the Veteran has been exposed to during service that are known carcinogens, particularly for kidney cancers. The clinician opined that (1) the Veteran's kidney cancer was at least as likely as not caused by his multiple exposures during service, and (2) the Veteran's kidney cancer is "within a high degree of certainty" caused in part by the chemicals the Veteran was exposed to during service. As rationale, the clinician cited several research studies and articles to support his opinions that exposure to jet fuel, aviation gas, petroleum, and fighting fires causes kidney cancer in particular. The clinician stated he had, "diligently reviewed the medical literature on these conditions.  The records for which I have reviewed appear complete and there is no indication that any other relevant records exist.  I am of the opinion that the material I have reviewed is more than adequate for me to reach the opinion I have provided in this report. I know of no other information that would alter the opinions I have provided herein." 

The Board notes that the AOJ did not request a medical examination or opinion to assist the Veteran in establishing a medical nexus between the injuries he experienced during service to the two disabilities at issue in this case, which the AOJ has conceded.  As a result, the September 2021 private medical opinion is the only medical opinion addressing the Veteran's theories of entitlement on appeal.  

The Board has considered the medical evidence of record. The Board notes that the private clinician is a medical professional competent to opine as to the etiology of the Veteran's kidney cancer. There is no evidence that the clinician is not credible. Moreover, the clinician provided an analysis based upon both subjective and objective information to form an opinion based upon medical expertise. As such, the Board affords the September 2021 private medical examination and opinion significant probative weight and finds it adequate to establish element (3) a medical nexus.

In light of the foregoing, because of the credible evidence of in-service injury of chemical exposure, including symptoms consistent with at least two known carcinogens, particularly for kidney cancers, the Board finds that direct service connection for kidney cancer is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a) (Service connection connotes many factors but, basically, it means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces).

2. Service connection for HTN as secondary to asthma is granted.

The Veteran seeks service connection for his HTN as secondary to his already service-connected asthma, which he contends was caused by his asthma and the medications he had to take to treat his asthma.

For the reasons discuss below, the Board finds that the most probative and persuasive evidence is at least in approximate equipoise regarding the probable etiology of the Veteran's HTN, and thus, the Board will resolve all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor in granting his appealed issue.  See, Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

In the December 2020 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed by a VA medical center with a current disability, "benign hypertension." Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Moreover, in a July 2020 Board of Veterans' Appeals Decision, the Board granted direct service connection for the Veteran's asthma. Therefore, two elements of secondary service connection (evidence of a current disability and evidence of a service-connected disability), have already been established. The final element needed to prove entitlement to secondary service connection in this case is a medical nexus showing the Veteran's HTN was caused by or aggravated by his already service-connected asthma.

To that end, and as previously discussed above, the Veteran submitted a September 2021 private medical opinion, which also addressed the medical nexus necessary to establish secondary service connection for the Veteran's HTN as secondary to his already service-connected asthma. Again, the clinician reviewed the Veteran's claim file, updated VA medical records, private medical records, compensation and pension examination, and lay statements and noted in detail the Veteran's decades-long struggle with his service-connected asthma and subsequent development of HTN. The clinician noted the significantly strong relationship between asthma, the medications used to treat asthma, and the development of HTN. The clinician opined that (1) the Veteran's asthma and asthma medication was much more likely than not a contributor to the development of the Veteran's HTN, and (2) "Based on my training, experience and review of the relevant records, all of the opinions I have provided in this report meet the standard of being at least as likely as not in favor of the Veteran. In fact, my opinions in this matter are actually much higher than that standard as my opinions are within a high degree of certainty." As rationale, the clinician cited multiple articles and studies to support his opinion that HTN often occurs in the presence of asthma, and the effects of asthma medication can result in HTN. 

Having already found this clinician competent and credible, the Board finds this positive opinion significantly probative as it includes a clear conclusion based on the clinician's extensive review of the Veteran's available medical history and VA documentation, with supporting data and well-reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). The Board finds the final element of secondary service connection, here a medical nexus showing the Veteran's already service-connected asthma caused the Veteran's HTN, is satisfied. 

In conclusion, after a review of the Veteran's claims file, and the evidence of a significantly strong relationship between asthma, the medications used to treat asthma, and the development of HTN, the Board finds the most probative and persuasive evidence supports a grant of service connection for HTN as secondary to service-connected asthma. Accordingly, service connection for HTN as secondary to asthma is granted. 

As a final note, the Board wishes to underline that this appealed issue is being granted based on the causation prong of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 and Allen without concession of aggravation of the nonservice-connected disability by the service-connected disability. As such, the award downstream from this allowance shall not be subject to a rating offset upon implementation by the AOJ.

_______ ____

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Prevost, Katherine L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.