Citation Nr: A25032665
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-444576
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (to include depression, anxiety, and mood disorder) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Affording the Veteran the benefit of doubt, the evidence is approximately balanced (nearly equal) in favor of finding the Veteran's currently diagnosed GERD (See August 2021 VA examination), and its objectively observable symptoms began in service and continued since service, thereby establishing a causal link (nexus) between his military service and his currently diagnosed GERD. [The August 2021 rating decision provided favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD and the onset of the Veteran's GERD was during active duty; the Board finds this is sufficient to establish service connection based on a facts found basis due to the persistence of the Veteran's symptoms during and since active-duty military service.]

2. The more probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has any currently diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder, nor is there any specific assertion or statements that the Veteran has symptoms which cause functional impairment. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are met for service connection for GERD. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria are not met for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (to include depression, anxiety, and mood disorder). 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2012 to May 2015. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2023 (GERD), September 2013, and January 2024 (acquired psychiatric disorder higher level review (HLR)) rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

By law, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. In this case, a September 2022 rating decision that was later subjected to HLR and the other rating decisions noted above.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

After reviewing the evidence of record, and in light of Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the Board has recharacterized the issues of service connection for depression, anxiety, and a mood disorder to encompass any acquired psychological disorder, to include depression, anxiety, and a mood disorder. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability caused by disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  To establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

The Board has reviewed all evidence in the claims file, with an emphasis on the evidence relevant to these appeals. Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, every piece of evidence of record. Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The Board will summarize the relevant evidence as appropriate and the analysis will focus on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as to the claims.

1. Service connection for GERD 

The August 2021 rating decision provided favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD and the onset of the Veteran's GERD was during active duty; the Board finds this is sufficient to establish service connection based on a facts found basis due to the persistence of the Veteran's symptoms during and since active-duty military service.

Affording the Veteran the benefit of doubt, the evidence is approximately balanced (nearly equal) in favor of finding the Veteran's currently diagnosed GERD (See August 2021 VA examination), and its objectively observable symptoms began in service and continued since service, thereby establishing a causal link (nexus) between his military service and his currently diagnosed GERD. 

As such, entitlement to service connection for GERD is granted.

2. Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (to include depression, anxiety, and mood disorder)

Factual Background

In June 2022, VA received the Veteran's claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and a mood disorder.

In August 2022, the Veteran attended a VA psychological examination. During this examination, the Veteran reported no psychiatric symptoms. The examiner indicated the Veteran did not have any mental disorders that conform to DSM-5 criteria. Additionally, the examiner remarked that the Veteran's treatment records are silent for any mental health treatment. Consistently, the Veteran himself reports that he has never received any mental health treatment, including any treatment in    the service or any psychotropic medication. The examiner opined that the Veteran's reports seem consistent with his history indicating he has been able to maintain stable employment subsequent to his discharge. The Veteran reported that he believes he has had more problems with anger control since his discharge, though there is no other evidence supporting this statement. He denied any trauma in service. As such, the examiner stated that there is not sufficient evidence to support any diagnosis of a mental health condition for the Veteran. The examiner also noted that the Veteran also did not report any mental health treatment from any private source.

Upon review of the Veteran's VA treatment records, there is no probative evidence of any mental health treatment or reported symptoms. 

Further, the Veteran's service treatment records routinely contained denial of any mental health symptoms or treatment.

The Veteran has not identified any private treatment provides and has not made any statements pertaining to symptoms or diagnosis of a mental health condition.

Analysis

Upon review of the Veteran's lay statements with regard to the claimed acquired psychiatric disorders, the Veteran is competent to report on factual matters of which he had firsthand knowledge; however, besides the claim for depression and anxiety, the Veteran has made no statements regarding any specific symptoms he experiences or diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). 

Further, there is no basis for concluding that a lay person is competent to discern whether any given symptoms constitute a diagnosis of a mental health condition, or are related to service, in the absence of specialized medical training, which in this case is not established. 38 U.S.C. § 1153(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), 3.159(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Because of this, the objective medical findings and opinions provided by the August 2022 VA examiner have been accorded greater probative weight in determining that service connection is not warranted.

There is no competent medical evidence showing a diagnosis of any acquired psychiatric disorder during the appeal period. The most fundamental requirement for any claim for service connection, on either a direct or secondary basis, is that the Veteran must first establish he or she has the condition claimed. See Degmetich v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 208 (1995); 104 F.3d 1328 (1997); see also Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). In other words, the evidence must show that, at some point during the appeal period, the Veteran has the disabilities for which benefits are being claimed. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).

The Board has also considered whether any reported symptoms might cause functional impairment to the extent that a diagnosis is presumed, however, there is no probative evidence of symptoms which cause functional impairment. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018) (despite lack of a formal diagnosis, symptoms may count as a disability for VA compensation purposes if they cause functional impairment).

Based on the above analysis, the more probative evidence is against the claims. The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and this service connection must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for sleep apnea

In May 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for sleep apnea and has also asserted that this condition is secondary to his service-connected disabilities. As of this decision, the Veteran is service connected for tinnitus and now GERD. The AOJ has not obtained any medical opinions or conducted a VA examination for the Veteran's sleep apnea. Importantly, prior to the decision in this matter, an August 2021 VA examination noted sleep disturbances caused by esophageal reflux. 

The Board is unable to determine if these "sleep disturbances" are related to the Veteran's claim for service connection for sleep apnea or simply a symptom of the Veteran's GERD based on the information contained within the claims file. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991) (VA may only consider independent medical evidence to support its findings and is not permitted to base decisions on its own unsubstantiated medical conclusions).

The Board finds it necessary to remand this matter to correct an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (providing that the Board "may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim").

The Board finds a VA examination and medical opinion is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should arrange for a VA examination of the Veteran to determine the nature and likely cause of any sleeping disorder disability, including sleep apnea. Based on review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) For each sleeping disorder disability diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability was either caused or aggravated by the Veterans service-connected disabilities? Please explain why. 

(b.) For each sleeping disorder disability diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability was either incurred in or otherwise related to the Veteran's active-duty service? Please explain why.

The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to provide information about observable symptoms and events. The examiner should assume, for the purposes of the opinions, that the Veteran's reports are both accurate and credible.

The examiner is also reminded that, by law, observable symptoms persisting since service may be sufficient to establish a causal link (nexus), absent clear and convincing medical evidence to the contrary. By law, a lack of medical evidence is not considered "clear and convincing."

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is further reminded that, by law, despite lack of a formal diagnosis, symptoms may count as a disability for VA compensation purposes IF THEY CAUSE FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.

A detailed explanation (rationale) is required for all opinions provided. By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested.

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael E. Williams

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.