Citation Nr: A25032585
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240820-468375
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an automobile allowance is granted, subject to the regulations governing payment of monetary awards.  

FINDING OF FACT

Competent medical evidence of record reasonably shows that the Veteran's service-connected parkinsonism disease with dementia and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is manifested by loss of use of both feet.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for eligibility for an automobile allowance have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.350(a)(2), 3.808, 4.63.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from August 1964 to August 1968.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 26, 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which, in relevant part, found new and relevant evidence was received but continued to deny the claim for entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance, and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only.

On August 20, 2024, VA received a VA Form 10182 wherein the Veteran selected the Board Hearing Lane and expressed disagreement with the portion of the July 26, 2024 rating decision pertaining to "Entitlement to an Allowance for an Automobile Grant."     

On December 4, 2024, a virtual Board hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge; a hearing transcript has been added to the record.  

Accordingly, the Board's review is limited to evidence on record at the time of the July 26, 2024 rating decision, testimony at the Board hearing, and evidence received within 90 days following the hearing.  See 38?C.F.R. §?20.302(a).  

For the sake of clarity, under the Board hearing option, the Board may not consider evidence that accumulated between the July 2024 rating decision (more precisely, the evidence which the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) considered in the decision) and the December 2024 Board hearing.  See 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.302(a).  Upon review of the record, there is no extant evidence which accumulated during this time frame.  See Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).  

The Board makes a final procedural observation prior to adjudicating the claim. The July 2024 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim; the Board is found by that favorable finding and will proceed to adjudicate the claim on the merits.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

?

Entitlement to an automobile allowance is granted. 

Legal Criteria

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808, a certificate of eligibility for financial assistance in the purchase of one automobile or other conveyance and basic entitlement to necessary adaptive equipment will be provided to a Veteran who has one of the following: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes: Central vision acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends as angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury: Deep partial thickness or full thickness burns resulting in scar formation that cause contractures and limited motion of one or more extremities or the trunk and preclude effective operation or an automobile; (5) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; or (6) for adaptive equipment eligibility only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips.

The term "loss of use of the hand or the foot" is not defined under 38 C.F.R. § 3.808.  For purposes of special monthly compensation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.63, loss of use of a hand or a foot will be held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthetic.  The determination is to be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability to grasp, manipulate objects, balance, or propel oneself forward.  38 C.F.R. § 4.63.  For purposes of eligibility for specially adapted housing, "loss of use" exists when there is "deprivation of the ability to avail oneself" of that extremity, and functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination.  Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).

The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value.  Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). 

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another.  38?C.F.R. § 4.3.  When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Appellant and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b).  When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim of the Appellant, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable and the claim will be denied on its merits.  38?U.S.C. §?5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Factual Background

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an automobile allowance for a van.  See June 14, 2024 VA Form 21-4502.  He contends such is warranted based on loss of use of both feet.  Id.

The Veteran has established service connection for multiple disabilities, including (as pertinent here) parkinsonism with dementia and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), rated 100 percent; stooped posture of the left and right side, associated with parkinsonism with dementia and PTSD, each side rated 20 percent; and loss of automatic movements of the left and right side, associated with parkinsonism with dementia and PTSD, each rated 0 percent.  See July 2024 rating codesheet.  Additionally, the record shows the Veteran is currently in receipt of special monthly compensation (SMC) at the intermediate rate between subsections (l) and (m) from June 1, 2022, and was previously in receipt of SMC at the (m) rate from June 2021 through May 2022.  Id.

Competent (medical) evidence tends to show the Veteran's parkinsonism with dementia results in loss of use of both feet.  An April 2018 private treatment record notes the Veteran has experienced several falls due to balance issues.  A June 2021 private treatment record notes a physician found he has neuropathy with weakness and ataxia to the "point [he] cannot walk and also has dementia."  A July 2021 private treatment record notes the Veteran's balance "continues to be poor" and that he needs assistance to stand up and transfer.  He is able to use a walker if someone holds the gait belt.  It also notes that he can feed himself and brush his teeth, but he requires assistance for all other activities of daily living (ADLs).  Physical examination showed the Veteran "Needs great assistance to stand up.  Gait is deferred due to imbalance."  A February 2023 VA treatment record (nursing home record) notes the Veteran was found on the floor of his room, sitting in front of his wheelchair.  He explained he fell when trying to go to the restroom.  And an August 2023 home health treatment record notes the Veteran requires maximum assistance / taxing effort to leave home, and that his confusion makes it unsafe to go out alone.  

An April 2024 VA examination report by a nurse practitioner notes that the Veteran has a history of Parkinson's disease and dementia resulting in severe impairment of functional ability.  She noted that the Veteran is not able to walk or stand without assistance and that he has to be transported from the bed to the chair.  She further noted that he is "not mobile, severely deconfined mentally and physically and cannot operate a motorized scooter, wheelchair, walker or a cane for mobility."  In a separate report of the same date, she wrote, "Veteran has a history of Parkinson's disease and dementia and functional deconditioning.  Veteran requires 24 hours and requires assistance with all IADL/ADLS [sic]."  

A May 2024 VA peripheral nerves conditions examination report (by a different examiner) notes that examination of the lower extremities was "normal except rigidity in all extremities and [V]eteran not being able to stand on his own.  He had normal strength.  He has slim body and with less muscles mass in lower extremities..."  In a separate report of the same date, the physician noted the Veteran still has both of his feet.  He then wrote: 

His feet would have close to normal function if it was not for the Parkinson disease, cognitive defect, and general debility for multiple comorbidities.  The current remaining function of his lower extremities is that [V]eteran is unable to ambulate using his lower extremities without support by another person due to lack of coordination, cognition and muscle rigidity. 

May 2024 VA treatment records note the Veteran is unable to self-propel and is not ambulatory.  A separate record notes that a "Prosthetic consult for vehicle modifications will be submitted after [wheel]chair is determined."

In a June 2024 statement, the Veteran (or perhaps his spouse) wrote that the Veteran has loss of use of both feet due to dementia and Parkinson's disease.  He is unable to drive and it is difficult for him to be placed in a vehicle without a ramp.

In a July 2024 addendum, the May 2024 VA examiner clarified that the Veteran is not able to ambulate or stand without assistance.  "With assistance he is only able to stand and walk to be able to use bathroom and change position such as moving from chair to bed[.]"

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran's wife testified that the Veteran's dementia prohibits his mind from telling his feet to move.  She explained how she and the Veteran's son move him into their current van.  She explained their van is not "heavy duty enough" to accommodate a wheelchair ramp.  However, she knows of different brands of vans that accommodate a ramp and noted that there are wheelchairs that can lock into place in the van during transport.  The Veteran's son testified that the Veteran is unable to ambulate and requires assistance with transfers.

Analysis

Upon longitudinal review of the record, including both the competent (medical) and lay evidence, the Board finds the Veteran meets the criteria for entitlement to an automobile allowance for a van based on loss of use of both feet.

The Veteran has established service connection for parkinsonism with dementia and PTSD, rated 100 percent from June 2021.  Notably, a March 2022 rating decision granted service connection for loss of automatic movements in the left and right sides as related to parkinsonism with dementia and PTSD.  

Competent (medical) evidence is at least in equipoise that the Veteran's parkinsonism with dementia and PTSD is manifested by loss of use of both feet.  The Board acknowledges the May 2024 VA examiner's finding that the Veteran's feet are objectively normal (based on appearance and on peripheral nerve testing); however, that examiner explained that the Veteran would have close to normal function if it was not for the Parkinson disease, cognitive defect, and general debility for multiple comorbidities.  He further explained that because of such disability, the Veteran is unable to ambulate without the support of another person.  Additionally, clinical records and an April 2024 VA medical opinion (outlined above) are consistent in showing the Veteran is unable to ambulate, is unable to self-propel, is unable to stand or transfer without assistance, has sustained multiple falls, and is not mobile due to weakness of the lower extremities and balance issues; these functional limitations have been associated with his parkinsonism with dementia.    

In summary, the evidence is in at least approximate balance that the Veteran's service-connected parkinsonism with dementia and PTSD is manifested by loss of use of both feet.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to an automobile allowance has been met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.808.  The claim for entitlement to an automobile allowance is granted.

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Dupont, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.