Citation Nr: A25032806
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240110-407047
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hand and/or finger disability, to include right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand and/or fingers disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's cervical strain is due to his military service, to include parachute jumps.

2. Evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's left knee strain is due to his military service, to include parachute jumps.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the favor of the Veteran, evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's right hand/finger disability, to include upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, is at least as likely as not due to his service-connected right shoulder disability.

4. Resolving reasonable doubt in the favor of the Veteran, the Veteran had qualifying service in Southwest Asia and his IBS has manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more during a six-month period.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for cervical strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for left knee strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a right hand and/or finger disability, to include right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, as due to either right shoulder disability or cervical strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

4. The criteria for service connection for IBS have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1117, 1118, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2000 to May 2003, with confirmed service in Southwest Asia.  See VA From DD-214, June 2021.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the August 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  See VA Form 20-0999, Higher-Level Review Return, October 2022.

In May 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the rating decision on appeal regarding entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, a left knee disability, and left and right hand/finger disabilities.  It deferred the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for a cervical disability and IBS.  See Rating Decision, May 2023.  In June 2023, the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal regarding entitlement to service connection for a cervical disability and IBS.  See Rating Decision, June 2023.

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal regarding the claims for entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, a left knee disability, and left and right hand/finger disabilities, and evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal regarding the claims for entitlement to service connection for a cervical disability and IBS.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss and a left hand/finger disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during active military service. ?38 U.S.C. § 1110;?38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).? Service connection may also be granted for any disability diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.? 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).? Generally, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, also known as the "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi,?381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67?(Fed. Cir. 2004);?38 U.S.C. § 5103(a). 

Service connection?may be granted on either a direct or secondary basis.  Entitlement to?service connection?on a?secondary?basis requires competent medical or lay evidence of: (1) a current disability that is not already service connected; (2) at least one service-connected disability; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the service-connected disability, showing that the current disability was either proximately due to or the result of the service-connected disability or that the current disability was made worse by the service-connected disability. ?38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Allen v. Brown,?7 Vet. App. 439?(1995). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is granted.

The Veteran contends service connection is warranted for a cervical spine (i.e., neck) disability.  Specifically, he believes his neck disability resulted from either cold weather and his job duties during service, or parachute jumps.  See VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, June 2021 (cold weather and job duties), and C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021 (parachute jumps).

Regarding the first element of service connection, the June 2023 AOJ decision on appeal favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a cervical strain.  See Rating Decision, June 2023.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, which is supported by the record.  See C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021.  Accordingly, the first element of service connection has been met.

Regarding the second element of service connection, the Veteran's VA Form DD-214 documents that he received a parachutist badge, thus, the evidence supports the Veteran's assertion that he participated in parachute jumps.  See VA From DD-214, June 2021.  Accordingly, insofar as the Veteran asserts that his neck condition is the result of parachute jumps in service, the second element of service connection has been met.

As to the final element of service connection, the evidence conflicts. Four VA examinations and/or opinions have addressed the question of whether the Veteran's neck disability, diagnosed as a cervical strain, is due to service.

The first, from October 2021, opined the Veteran's cervical strain is less likely than not due to service.  The VA clinician rationalized that the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for neck complaints, and that the current neck disability is a disability with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis not related to service in Southwest Asia.  Recognizing that this opinion did not address the Veteran's theory of developing a neck disability due to parachute jumps, the AOJ requested a second opinion, which was obtained in July 2022.  See C&P Exam, July 2022 ("The previous exam request did not request an opinion on whether or not the neck condition was at least as likely as not due to parachute jumps.  Please re-examine the evidence....").

The second July 2022 VA opinion found the Veteran's cervical strain at least as likely as not due to service.  Specifically, the VA clinician rationalized that the Veteran participated in parachute jumping, that medical literature supports notable joint injuries following parachute jumps, that the Veteran's current symptoms were consistent with his history as shown by the VA Form DD-214, which shows he participated in parachute jumps, and that the Veteran's current symptoms and history are consistent with medical records to find the Veteran's cervical strain is at least as likely as not due to his in-service parachute jumps.  The Board finds this opinion adequate, as it addressed the Veteran's descriptions of his in-service duties (i.e., parachute jumping) and contained a reasonable medical explanation connecting the current symptoms steaming from his cervical strain to his in-service parachute jumping.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (VA clinician must provide "not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.").  To the extent the AOJ has characterized this opinion as speculative, the Board does not agree.  See Rating Decision, August 2022 (incorrectly noting "[a]fter review of your VA Examination providing a positive nexus between your cervical strain and military service, it is apparent the examiner is clearly speculating.").  However, the opinion does not contain speculative language.  Compare Polovick v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 48, 54 (2009) (holding that doctor's statement that veteran's brain tumor "may well be" connected to Agent Orange exposure was speculative"), Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (noting that the use of the term "could," without additional rationale or supporting data, is speculative), Goss v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 109, 114 (1996) (noting that the use of the phrase "could not rule out" was too speculative), with C&P Exam, July 2022 (containing none of the Court specified speculative language).  Instead, it contains citation to medical evidence of correlation to support the medical opinion that the Veteran's cervical strain is at least as likely as not due to his in-service parachute jumps.  The Board cannot find fault with July 2022 clinician's application of supportive medical literature.

Nevertheless, based on the AOJ's mischaracterization of the July 2022 VA clinician's opinion, it requested a third opinion on whether the Veteran's cervical strain is due to service, including his parachute jumps, which was obtained in January 2023.  The January 2023 VA clinician opined the Veteran's cervical strain less likely than not related to his military service; however, it did not address the Veteran's in-service parachute jumps.  Accordingly, the opinion is inadequate as to whether the Veteran's cervical strain is due to his parachute jumps.

Recognizing the January 2023 opinion did not address the Veteran's parachute jumps, the AOJ requested a fourth opinion, which was obtained in May 2023.  The May 2023 VA clinician opined the Veteran's cervical strain is less likely than not due to his parachute jumps.  In so finding, the clinician rationalized "scant data" supported such a nexus, pointing to the Veteran separating from service 20 years ago, and stating that "without evaluation or reported concern during service, an after service/post-service event, or injury is a more likely etiology."  The Board finds this opinion inadequate.  It relied too heavily on the lack of documented in-service neck complaints.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (stating that the Board erred in relying on a medical examiner who "ultimately relies not on the objective medical evidence, but rather the absence of such in reaching her opinion that the onset of the appellant's psychiatric symptoms did not occur during service").

Given that the October 2021 and January 2023 opinion did not address the Veteran's parachute jumps and that the May 2023 opinion has herein been determined to be inadequate, the Board is left with one viable, adequate medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's cervical strain is at least as likely as not due to his in-service parachute jumps, and it is a positive opinion.  As such, the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's cervical strain has a nexus to his in-service parachute jumps such that the third element of service connection has been met.

As all three elements of service connection have been met for the Veteran's cervical strain disability, the claim must be granted.  Shedden,?381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain is granted.

The Veteran contends he developed a left knee disability due to service.  Specifically, he believes it stems from his parachute jumping during service.  See VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, June 2021.

Regarding the first element of service connection, the rating decision on appeal favorably found the Veteran to be diagnosed with left knee tendinopathy and left knee strain.  See Rating Decision, May 2023.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, which is supported by the record.  See C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021 (bilateral knee tendinopathy), and C&P Exam, July 2022 (bilateral knee strains).  Accordingly, the first element of service connection has been met.

Regarding the second element of service connection, as noted above, the Veteran's VA Form DD-214 documents that he received a parachutist badge, and thus, the evidence supports the Veteran's assertion that her participated in parachute jumps.  See VA From DD-214, June 2021.  Accordingly, the second element of service connection has been met.

Three VA examinations and/or opinions have addressed whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed left knee disabilities are due to service.

The first, from October 2021, found the Veteran to be diagnosed with acute tendinitis (also diagnosed/described as knee tendinopathy) not related to service in Southwest Asia 18 years ago.  See C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021.  It did not include discussion of a left knee strain.  Moreover, as to whether the Veteran's tendinitis or tendinopathy is due to service, the examiner did not provide explanation beyond "[t]his is an acute and treatable condition."  See id.  Accordingly, the Board finds it inadequate for lacking the necessary medical explanation.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 301 (VA clinician must provide "not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.").

The second opinion, which was obtained in August 2022 after a July 2022 VA examination during which the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral knee strains, found the Veteran's bilateral knee strains at least as likely as not due to his in-service parachute jumps.  The VA clinician pointed to the Veteran's participation in airborne school, where he would jump out of airplanes and land very hard on the ground, his descriptions of knee pain beginning after these activities, and cited to a study showing an incidence of knee symptoms in male military personnel to conclude the Veteran's bilateral knee strains (inherently including a left knee strain) are at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's parachute jumps during service.  The Board find this opinion adequate as it considered the Veteran's participation in parachute jumping, the physical impact of parachute jumps, and included citation to literature supporting an incidence of knee problems in servicemembers following training.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 301.

The third opinion, from January 2023, found the Veteran did not have a current left knee diagnosis, and thus did not have a left knee disability due to service.  Since the Veteran at this point had been diagnosed with two current left knee disabilities: left knee tendinopathy and a left knee strain, the Board finds this opinion inadequate for being based on an inaccurate factual premise.  Reonal?v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (opinions based on inaccurate factual premise have no evidentiary value).

Given that the October 2021 and January 2023 VA opinions have herein been deemed inadequate, the Board is left with one adequate, viable opinion on whether the Veteran has a left knee strain that is due to service; specifically, his parachute jumping.  The opinion is positive.  Accordingly, the third element of service connection has been met.

With all three elements of service connection met for the Veteran's left knee strain, the claim must be granted.  Shedden,?381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right hand and/or finger disability, to include right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy, as due to either service-connected right shoulder disability or cervical strain is granted.

The Veteran contends he developed a right hand and/or finger disability due to service; specifically, due to cold weather or his job duties.  See VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, June 2021.  The record also reasonably raises the possibility that he has a right hand/finger disability that is secondary to either his service-connected right shoulder and/or cervical strain.  The Board finds service connection is warranted on a secondary basis.

In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) explained that in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim.  In light of the Court's decision in Clemons, the Board has recharacterized the Veteran's herein claim for a right hand/finger disability to include right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy.  This will provide the most favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the Court's holding in Clemons.  When describing the symptoms sought for service connection, the Veteran has described experiencing tingling, numbness, and shooting pain that will sometimes start from the right shoulder down to his fingers.  See C&P Exam, July 2022.

Moving now to the evidence and reasons for this grant, the record conflicts regarding a current disability.  In October 2021, a VA examiner found no objective findings to support a diagnosable hand or finger condition. A July 2022 examination report noted a diagnosis of right upper extremity cervical radiculopathy based on nerve symptoms revealed at the examination and the Veteran's reports of pain that shoots down from his right shoulder to his fingers.   See C&P Exam, July 2022. Lastly, although a January 2023 examination reflected hand strain, the examiner noted normal range of motion and grip strength, and opined that the Veteran's cervical radiculopathy "would contribute to hand/finger pain." Thus, with regard to a current condition, the Veteran's diagnoses of cervical radiculopathy and hand strain satisfy the first element of secondary service connection.  

The Veteran is also service-connected for a right shoulder disability, rated under two diagnostic codes.  Moreover, the Board granted service connection above for a neck condition.  Thus, the second element of secondary service connection has been met.  See Rating Decision - Codesheet, June 2024.

Regarding the third element, the record does not include an opinion explicitly linking the Veteran's right upper extremity radiculopathy or hand strain to his service-connected right shoulder.  However, in finding that the Veteran's right shoulder is at least as likely as not related to service, a VA clinician found that, "over the years, the shoulder pains progressed... did physical therapy and [has] had surgeries... [but he] continues to experience pain in the shoulder and tingling, numbness shooting down the right shoulder to the finger."  See C&P Exam, August 2022.

Moreover, as noted previously, the Veteran has been diagnosed with "cervical radiculopathy." The diagnosis alone provides evidence that the Veteran's radiculopathy is caused by his now-service-connected neck condition. With regard to hand strain, no examiner has opined on the relationship between it and a service-connected condition. Regardless, a January 2023 examiner noted that the Veteran's cervical radiculopathy would "would contribute to hand/finger pain," and thus, may be the cause of the Veteran's hand symptomatology.

The Board finds this evidence demonstrates a reasonable likelihood that the Veteran's right upper extremity radiculopathy is at least at least as likely as not due to his service-connected right shoulder and/or cervical disabilities such that the third element of service connection has been met.

Notably, the Board considered remanding to obtain an opinion to specifically address the question of a nexus between the Veteran's hand/finger symptomatology and his service-connected shoulder and neck conditions; however, the Board notes that requesting such an opinion could be construed as ordering development of negative evidence, which is prohibited, since the evidence already may be reasonably resolved to find a nexus in this case.

In sum, with all three elements of secondary service connection met, the Veteran's claim for a right hand/finger disability, to include right upper extremity radiculopathy, must be granted.

4. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is granted.

At the outset, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran had active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  The June 2023 rating decision on appeal favorably found that his personnel records confirm service in Afghanistan such that he qualifies as a Persian Gulf War veteran.  See Rating Decision - Narrative, June 2023.

Service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for a Persian Gulf Veteran who exhibits objective indications of qualifying chronic disability, including resulting from undiagnosed illness, that became manifest either during active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 21, 2026, and which by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).  A "qualifying chronic disability" includes a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness, such as IBS, that is defined by a cluster of signs of symptoms.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1117, 1118; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.

In claims based on qualifying chronic disability, unlike those for "direct service connection," there is no requirement that there be competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed illness and service.  Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8- 9 (2004).  Notably, laypersons are competent to report objective signs of illness.  Id.

Given the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia, the ultimate question before the Board is thus whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of IBS, a qualifying chronic disability, that manifested to a compensable degree during or after his service in the Persian Gulf War.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007) (stating that the "requirement that a [veteran] have a current disability before service connection may be awarded for that disability... is satisfied when a [veteran] has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim").

Here, the June 2023 rating decision favorably found the Veteran has a current diagnosis of IBS, as evinced by his May 2023 VA examination.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, which is supported by the cited evidence.  See C&P Exam, May 2023 (diagnosing IBS), see also Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received July 2021, dated February 2018 (diagnosing IBS with diarrhea).  

Additionally, the evidence indicates the Veteran's IBS has manifested to a compensable degree for at least six months.  In this regard, a compensable disability rating for IBS requires frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.  Here, evidence shows the Veteran treated with Bentyl for abdominal cramps related to his IBS in 2020.  See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received July 2021, dated April 2020 (showing prescription for Bentyl three times a day as needed for cramping).  It also shows that he continues to need Bentyl to treat abdominal cramps he recently reported occur six to seven times a day.  See C&P Exam, May 2023 (including medical history of cramping six to seven times a day and Bentyl medication for control of IBS).  Plainly, 2020 to 2023 is at least six months.  Accordingly, the Veteran's IBS is considered "chronic" as it has existed for six months or more.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a).

In sum, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's IBS manifested to a compensable degree following his service in Southwest Asia.  As such, service connection is warranted on a presumptive basis.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

The Veteran contends he developed bilateral hearing loss due to extremely loud noise he was exposed to during service.  See VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, June 2021.  The Board finds a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error prior to adjudication of this claim.  Specifically, remand is warranted to provide the Veteran an adequate VA examination and opinion on whether his hearing loss for VA purposes is due to service.

Two VA examinations and opinions address the Veteran's hearing loss.  The first, from August 2021 shows hearing loss for VA purposes in the Veteran's right ear, but not his left.  In this regard, for the purposes of applying the laws administered by VA, impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  The August 2021 examination shows the Veteran had an auditory threshold of 40 decibels at the 4000 Hertz frequency.  See C&P Exam, August 2021.  None of the auditory thresholds in the Veteran's left ear at the frequencies 500 Hertz to 4000 Hertz were 40 decibels or greater, and no three were 26 decibels or greater.  Speech discrimination scores were 96 percent in both ears.  

As to the Veteran's right ear hearing loss for VA purposes, the VA clinician opined it to be less likely than not related to the Veteran's military service, rationalizing that "there are no records from service showing hearing thresholds."  However, the Board finds this opinion inadequate.  VA clinicians addressing whether a hearing loss disability is due to service are not limited to evidence of a threshold shift or evidence of a hearing loss disability during service to establish a hearing loss disability is at least as likely as not finding due to service.  Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 164 (1993) (finding a VA examination that discounts a nexus to service solely because the Veteran did not incur a hearing loss disability during service is inadequate and, instead, the VA clinician must address the significance of in-service noise exposure, the significance of any threshold shifts from entrance to separation, continuity of symptomatology, and whether the Veteran had post-service noise exposure).  

The second VA hearing loss examination, from December 2022, shows no hearing loss for VA purposes in either of the Veteran's ears.  See C&P Exam, December 2022.  Testing at this examination did not reveal auditory thresholds at the frequencies 500Hz to 4000Hz at 40 decibels or above, and no three thresholds were 26 decibels or greater.  The speech discrimination scores were 94 percent in both ears.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  Nevertheless, although the December 2022 clinician checked the box indicating that the Veteran's right ear hearing loss is due to service, she provided only the following rationale: "the moderate hearing loss is at [8000 Hertz] and does not meet VA criteria."  The explanation provided seems to weigh against the opinion.  Given this inconsistency, the Board is unable to rely on it to find the Veteran's right ear hearing loss is at least at least as likely as not due to his noise exposure during service.

Accordingly, the Veteran has not been provided an adequate opinion on whether his right ear hearing loss is at least as likely as not due to his military noise exposure, and a remand is warranted to provide the Veteran another VA hearing loss examination and opinion.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left hand and/or fingers disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

The Veteran contends he developed a left hand and/or finger disability due to cold weather or his job duties during service.  See VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, June 2021.  The Board finds a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error before adjudication of this claim.  Specifically, the Veteran has not been provided an adequate opinion on whether his currently diagnosed left carpal tunnel syndrome is due to service.

In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) explained that in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim.  In light of the Court's decision in Clemons, the Board has recharacterized the Veteran's herein claim for a left hand/finger disability to include left carpal tunnel syndrome.  This will provide the most favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the Court's holding in Clemons, as the Veteran has described that his fingers lock up, as well as numbness and tingling.  See C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021, and C&P Exam, July 2022.  

Moving on to the evidence and reasons for this remand, the record includes VA examinations and opinions from October 2021, July 2022, August 2022, and January 2023 on the question of whether he has hand and finger disability or disabilities due to service.

The October 2021 examination report reflects no hand or finger diagnoses despite the Veteran reporting that his fingers lock up.  See C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021.  The examiner found "no objective or physical findings" at the examination.  See C&P Exam, received January 2022, dated October 2021.

The July 2022 VA peripheral nerves examination report includes a diagnosis of left carpal tunnel syndrome considering that palpating the Veteran's left wrist caused tingling and numbness shooting to his middle finger.  See C&P Exam, July 2022.  However, a VA clinician then opined as to whether the Veteran's left carpal tunnel syndrome was due to "left & right lower extremity, back," not whether the Veteran's left carpal tunnel syndrome was due to his military service.  See C&P Exam, August 2022.

At the January 2023 VA examination addressing the Veteran's left hand/fingers claim, he was diagnosed with a bilateral hand strain.  See C&P Exam, January 2023.  The clinician also noted a diagnosis of left carpal tunnel syndrome and found this would produce hand/finger pain, but did not opine as to whether the Veteran's left carpal tunnel syndrome is due to service.

Accordingly, the Veteran has not been provided an adequate examination as to whether his currently diagnosed left carpal tunnel syndrome is at least as likely as not due to service and a remand is warranted to provide one.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral hearing loss.  The electronic claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the clinician.  The clinician must elicit a complete history as to the Veteran's diminished hearing acuity from his separation from service to the present.

After review of the relevant evidence and interview of the Veteran, the clinician is asked to address:

(a)	Whether the Veteran has a current hearing loss disability for VA purposes in his left ear as well as his right ear;

a.	If so, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is due to his in-service noise exposure, to include noise exposure from 240B gunner, AT4, 249 saw, M60, Javelin AB, explosions, and enemy fire as recorded in the December 2022 VA examination report;

b.	If not, whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed right ear hearing loss is due to his in-service noise exposure, to include noise exposure from 240B gunner, AT4, 249 saw, M60, Javelin AB, explosions, and enemy fire as recorded in the December 2022 VA examination report.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's currently diagnosed left carpal tunnel syndrome.  The electronic claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the clinician.  Following review of the relevant evidence, the clinician is asked to opine on

(a.)  whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed left carpal tunnel syndrome is at least as likely as not due to service, to include cold weather and his job duties during service.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed left carpal tunnel syndrome is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected cervical condition.  Separate opinions as to causation and aggravation are requested. 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Infante, Peter

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.