Citation Nr: A25032442
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 191126-45976
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for unspecified anxiety disorder is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for residuals, status-post operative lumbar discectomy and fusion with degenerative disc disease (hereinafter, lumbar spine disability) is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left foot hallux rigidus with degenerative joint disease, left first metatarsophalangeal joint is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (hereinafter, TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder was manifested by psychiatric symptomatology productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, without more severe manifestations resulting in deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a 50 percent rating for unspecified anxiety disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9413.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1986 to March 2000. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2019 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  

Within the framework of the AMA, in November 2019, the appellant submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected Evidence Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

The Board notes evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  Specifically, the Veteran submitted a letter in October 2021 in which he identified additional treatment providers and reported worsening symptoms.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for lumbar spine disability, entitlement to a compensable rating for left foot hallux rigidus with degenerative joint disease, left first metatarsophalangeal joint, and entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In an August 2023 decision, the Board denied the Veteran's increased rating claims on appeal.  The Board additionally remanded the service connection claim for cervical spine disability.  The Veteran appealed the portion of the Board's decision denying increased ratings to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In an October 2024 Order, the Court vacated the Board's decision and remanded for readjudication in compliance with a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR).  In pertinent part, the JMR found that the Board did not address the adequacy of the September 2019 VA lumbar spine examination, did not adequately address all applicable diagnostic codes relevant to rating the left foot disability, and did not address relevant treatment records pertaining to the service-connected psychiatric disorder.  The JMR further found that the Board did not address the Veteran's assertion that he had been unable to obtain and maintain gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities, which was raised in an October 2021 letter.

During the pendency of the appeal, a January 2025 rating decision granted service connection for degenerative arthritis of cervical spine and separate ratings for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy and cervical scar.  Therefore, as the AOJ granted the benefit sought on appeal with respect to that issue, it is no longer before the Board.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that particular rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Staged ratings are appropriate for an increase rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder.

The Veteran filed his increased rating claim on July 10, 2019.  

Prior to the appeal period, a September 2016 psychiatric intake assessment shows the Veteran reported having suicidal thoughts but denied any plan or prior attempt.  He also reported feelings of hopelessness and despair, and he had experienced significant impairment in social or occupational functioning.  Other symptoms included disturbed sleep, irritability or aggression, anxiety, depression, apathy, lack of spontaneity, affective liability, speech difficulty, and changes in personality.  The Veteran was fully oriented with normal memory function.  Associations were withing normal limits and he had good judgement.  There was no evidence of delusions, disorganized thinking, hallucinations, or grossly disorganized catatonic behavior.  He reported that since his separation from service he had worked in government agencies in a field related to his military occupational specialty (MOS).  He was not receiving psychiatric treatment.  

A December 2016 treatment record shows the Veteran was focused on his mood swings and how they seemed to come from nowhere.  He also discussed how his mood swings had hampered his work and personal relationships over a significantly long period of time.  He further discussed self-sabotage and its relation to self-esteem.  In January 2017, the Veteran was focused on progress that he had made and that he was more comfortable with himself with less self-critical thinking.  He also reported that many areas of his life had seen improvement.  He was appropriately groomed and dressed and fully oriented.  He had normal speech, and his mood was mostly anxious with congruent affect.  His thought process was mostly logical.  The Veteran denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation.

VA medical records include an April 2017 mental health record showing the Veteran reported experiencing anger and frustration in response to his military service.  His goal was to reduce his level of distress.  The record noted a prior March 2017 treatment record which shows the Veteran reported that his triggers were sometimes small or unidentifiable.  He also reported feeling as though he did not have control over how he came across to others during his mood swings, and that he lashed out verbally towards others which affected his work and personal relationships, but he denied reckless or self-destructive behavior.  Other symptoms included intrusive memories and guilt regarding failures in his life, such as leaving West Point, leaving the CIA, relationship failures, and not being allowed to reenlist in the Marines due to fighting.  He felt detached from others and was depressed over the realization that his behavior and anger had caused all of his problems.  He also endorsed hypervigilance and exaggerated startle response on rare occasions, which was precipitated by a distinct sound.  He denied reckless or self-destructive behavior.  He loved his current job as a network engineer, which required a lot of traveling and gave him pride.  He also reported being halfway through his MBA program.  The Veteran was appropriately dressed and well-groomed.  His speech was normal and thought processes were goal-directed and linear.  He denied auditory or visual hallucinations, delusions, paranoia, and suicidal or homicidal ideation.  His insight and judgement were good.

The Veteran described his life as going well in May 2017, including his work and relationship which had given him a lot of confidence and purpose in life.  He also reported that working on his communication had paid off in both of these areas of his life.  He was less quick to judge or make comments.  In July 2017, the Veteran was focused on problems at work and how it was affecting his PTSD.  He discussed strategies on how to deal with people in helpful ways.  He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.

A September 2017 private treatment record shows the Veteran was focused on his propensity toward mood swings and how they affected his relationships.  He had put lot of effort toward his relationship, and he described having a better self-awareness towards his reactiveness and desire for control.  He was appropriately groomed and dressed, fully oriented, and had normal speech.  His mood was mostly anxious with congruent affect.  He had a mostly logical thought process and denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation.  Another September 2017 treatment record shows he reported feeling angry about a recent break-up, and he felt betrayed.

An October 2017 private treatment record noted symptoms of hypervigilance, survivor's guilt, anger response, and lack of honest communications.  In January 2018, the Veteran reported having started a new job and that things were hectic.  He was terminating his treatment until he was settled in with his new job.

During the appeal period, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2019.  He was diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder, and the VA examiner indicated such was manifested by psychiatric symptomatology productive of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  The Veteran currently worked as a cyber security consultant.  Previous employment included work as a chef, after which he transitioned into IT and worked as a network engineer.  He also reported having 17 jobs in 19 years due to angry outbursts.  He previously drank heavily to modulate his mood, and he currently reported being a moderate drinker.  Current symptoms included anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  The Veteran was casually dressed and well-groomed.  He was alert and oriented, and there was no evidence of psychosis.  His speech was fluent with normal volume, rate, and prosody.  He denied feelings of depression, and he described his mood as okay.  He also denied having suicidal or homicidal ideation.

The Veteran's service-connected unspecified anxiety disorder has been rated as 30 percent disabling pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9413.

Diagnostic Codes under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 assign a 30 percent rating for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment with an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of an inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal) due to such symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, panic attacks more than once a week, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks), impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.  

A 70 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting), or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for a psychiatric disorder manifested by total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  If the evidence shows that the veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002); Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that an increased 50 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted throughout the appeal period.

In this regard, the evidence shows the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder was manifested by symptoms that included anger and irritability, symptoms specifically contemplated by a 50 percent rating.  While irritability is not noted as a symptom in the September 2019 VA examination, the Veteran did report employment difficulty due to angry outbursts.  Moreover, shortly prior to filing his claim in July 2019, treatment records dated in 2017 and 2018 show consistent reports of anger and angry outbursts as a symptom, and his treatment centered around controlling his reactiveness.  Therefore, based on the treatment records, the Board finds that the Veteran exhibited symptoms specifically contemplated by and warranting a 50 percent rating.

The Board has considered assigning a higher rating but finds that the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder was not manifested by symptoms such as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals interfering with routine activities, intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech, near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance or hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting, or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

In making this determination, the Board recognizes that approximately three years prior to his claim on appeal, the Veteran reported having had suicidal thoughts.  However, he denied any plan or attempt at that time, and his treatment records during the appeal period show that he consistently denied having suicidal or homicidal ideation.  Additionally, the evidence does not reflect that any suicidal thoughts or ideation impacted the Veteran's social or occupational functioning.  Therefore, suicidal ideation has not been shown to be a symptom productive of impairment associated with the service-connected unspecified anxiety disorder during the appeal period.

The Board further recognizes that the rating criteria for a 70 percent rating contemplate impaired impulse control such as unprovided irritability with periods of violence.  The treatment records do show that irritability has been a symptom reported by the Veteran and targeted by his treatment.  The Veteran also reported that he was not allowed to reenlist in 2000 due to fighting.  However, the record does not show that the Veteran has reported any periods of violence during the appeal period, including the one year look-back period.  Shortly prior to the appeal period, his treatment records show that his anger symptoms had improved and that he had a better self-awareness towards his reactiveness.  As the Veteran's treatment records show that his anger symptoms had been manageable, the Board finds that his symptoms have not risen to the level of impaired impulse control as contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria, particularly impaired impulse control resulting in periods of violence.

The Board has also considered the effects of the Veteran's symptoms on his occupational impairment.  While the Veteran reported during his VA examination that he had 17 jobs in 19 years due to angry outbursts, he also reported that he was currently halfway through his MBA degree.  The evidence further shows that in April 2017, he reported that he loved and felt pride in his current job, and the evidence does not show that his symptoms had impaired his ability to perform or resulted in the loss of employment since he filed his claim in July 2019.  Accordingly, the Board does not find that his symptoms had resulted in occupational impairment as contemplated by a higher 70 or 100 percent rating.

Lastly, the Board recognizes that the October 2024 JMR noted a November 1995 STR documenting that the Veteran's treatment included anger management.  However, this evidence is clearly outside the period of consideration and the evidence of record does not show that his treatment during the appeal period consisted of anger management.  The Board has further considered other treatment records identified in the JMR which are also dated prior to the appeal period.  Those records are addressed in the above analysis.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected unspecified anxiety disorder; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings is not warranted.  Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).    

In sum, the evidence of record supports the assignment of a 50 percent rating, but no higher, throughout the appeal period.  The claim is granted to this extent.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for lumbar spine disability.

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for left foot hallux rigidus with degenerative joint disease, left first metatarsophalangeal joint.

The Veteran underwent a VA lumbar spine examination in September 2019.  He denied having flare-ups but did report functional loss due to constant aching pain in his lower back with symptoms worsened with standing and walking.  Range of motion (ROM) testing revealed forward flexion to 75 degrees with pain causing functional loss.  The Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, and the examiner indicated that pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination did not significantly limit functional ability during such episodes.  The examiner further found that repeated use over time did not cause functional loss and stated that the procured evidence offered no basis for additional loss of function or motion during such episodes.

He also underwent a VA foot examination in September 2019.  He denied having flare-ups and reported functional loss due to pain in the left hallux with and without weight-bearing and swelling in his bilateral feet with prolonged standing and walking.  He also reported that he could not walk without pain in his left big toe.  His left foot was not manifested by hallux valgus.  His left foot hallux rigidus was manifested by mild or moderate symptoms.  The examiner noted pain upon examination and stated that pain contributed to functional loss, including pain on movement, weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, and swelling.  The examiner further noted that pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination did not significantly limit functional ability when the foot was used repeatedly over a period of time.

The Board finds the September 2019 VA examinations inadequate.  Specifically, despite both examinations noting pain causing functional loss, and despite the Veteran reporting that his lumbar spine and left foot symptoms were worsened with standing and walking, the examiner stated that there was no evidence that functional ability for either condition was significantly limited following repeated use over time.  The examination reports thereby provide conflicting findings as to functional loss.

Based on the inadequacies present in the September 2019 VA examinations, a duty to assist had existed to obtain additional VA examinations.  A remand is therefore warranted to cure the duty to assist errors.

3. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

In an October 2021 letter, the Veteran asserted that he was currently unemployed, and he noted periods of unemployment prior to and during the appeal period.  As noted above, the Court has found that this letter raised a claim for entitlement to a TDIU.  The claim for a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the remaining claims on appeal.  See Parker v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 116 (1994); Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both are adjudicated).  As the claims should be considered together, it follows that, any Board action on the TDIU claim, at this juncture, would be premature.  Hence, a remand of this matter is warranted pursuant to a regulatory duty.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected lumbar spine disability.

The examiner should conduct range of motion studies, assess any functional impairment due to such factors as pain and weakness, and express this functional impairment in terms of further loss of motion, if possible.  The examiner should test the range of motion in active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weight-bearing.  

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

		A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected left foot hallux rigidus with degenerative joint disease, left first metatarsophalangeal joint.

The examiner should conduct range of motion studies, assess any functional impairment due to such factors as pain and weakness, and express this functional impairment in terms of further loss of motion, if possible.  The examiner should test the range of motion in active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weight-bearing.  

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lamb, Christopher

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.