Citation Nr: A25032070
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434002
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as major depression and an anxiety condition, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2019 to March 2021.  

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review Docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the October 2023 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran's request for service connection included claims for major depression and an anxiety condition.  See June 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.  In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disorder that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record. In light of Clemons, the Board has recharacterized the Veteran's claims to encompass any acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the Court in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the April 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as major depression and an anxiety condition, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his active service caused him to develop an acquired psychiatric condition. See June 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ).  

The October 2023 rating decision on appeal included a favorable finding that the evidence showed a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service in that he reported a complaint of depression or excessive worry during his February 2021 separation examination.  See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility (submitted April 2022).  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  

The Veteran also reported during his February 2021 separation examination that he had been evaluated or treated for a mental condition and had received counseling.  Id.  The Veteran's statements regarding his mental health were not discussed further by a clinician during the February 2021 separation examination and the Report of Medical Examination was not completed.   

Post-service VA treatment records show that in June 2023 the Veteran was diagnosed with major depressive disorder and anxiety disorder.  See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility (submitted June 2023). The Veteran reported experiencing mental health symptoms for several years.  Id. He also reported mood symptoms since discharge that had worsened over the past year, and stated that issues that occurred in service included several friends committing suicide. Id.     

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination related to his acquired psychiatric disorder.  In determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided or medical opinion be obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration:  (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C.  § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). With respect to the third factor, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The Board notes that the Veteran has been diagnosed by a VA clinician with major depressive disorder and anxiety disorder, there is a conceded event during his active service in that the Veteran reported experiencing depression, and the Veteran stated that several friends committed suicide during his active service. Also, the record does not otherwise contain sufficient evidence to decide the Veteran's claim.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the requirements for a VA examination have been met. McLendon v. Nicholson, supra. The failure to obtain an examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disorder and, if so, its nature and etiology.  The need for an in-person examination or telehealth examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The entire claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. All findings and the rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided in a report. 

The examiner should provide an opinion as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder had its onset during service or is etiologically related to service? The examiner should address the impact, if any, of the Veteran's reports of depression or excessive worry during his February 2021 separation examination.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge. 

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Philip W. Zarone, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.