Citation Nr: A25032830
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-438243
DATE: April 9, 2025

ISSUES

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD").

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right navicular fracture, residual pain ("right foot").

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is GRANTED.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot is GRANTED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's PTSD most closely approximates occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood.  

2. The Veteran's right navicular foot fracture is manifested by moderately severe impairment, including pain, compromised weight bearing, and requiring an ace wrap or compression sleeve; severe symptoms were not shown.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but not higher, for PTSD has been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R.  §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for an initial disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right foot have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R.  §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1997 to February 2005, from June 2009 to June 2010, and from March 2011 to April 2012.

On March 8, 2022, the Veteran filed a claim for a disability rating with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for PTSD and right foot.  On June 17, 2022, the VA Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision granting service connection for PTSD at 50 percent and right foot at 10 percent.

On May 22, 2023, the Veteran filed a higher-level review claim for an initial increased rating for PTSD and right foot with the VA.  On August 30, 2023, the RO issued a rating decision confirming PTSD at 50 percent and right foot at 10 percent evaluation.  

On May 3, 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board).  The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request.  In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the claims decided, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Although the Board has an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting this Decision, there is no requirement that every piece of evidence submitted by the Veteran or obtained on his behalf be discussed in detail.  Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim.  Gonzales v. West,?218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81?(Fed. Cir. 2000); Timberlake v. Gober,?14 Vet. App. 122, 128-130?(2000). 

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate Diagnostic Codes (DCs).  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Board shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Board must consider all the evidence of record and make appropriate determinations of competence, credibility, and weight.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005).

When considering the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, the Board will consider the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 199, 125-26 (1999).  The Board will also consider the appropriateness of "staged" ratings based on the facts found.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).  

Staged ratings are appropriate in any increased-rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified.  Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 505.

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1272, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Disabilities must be viewed in relation to their entire history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The Board is required to interpret reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  The Board is also required to evaluate functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness and the effects of the disabilities upon the claimant's ordinary activity.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

PTSD

The Veteran is service connected for PTSD with an initial rating of 50 percent, effective February 4, 2022.  See June 2022, Rating Decision.  The Veteran contends his service-connected PTSD warrants an initial higher rating.  See May 2024, VA Form 10182.

PTSD is rated under Diagnostic Code 9411 that applies the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders under the Schedule of ratings - mental disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

A 50 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped, speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather, "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptom, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas"-i.e., "the regulation . . . requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Vasquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). The Board must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination." Id. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2022 in which the examiner noted occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  His symptoms were noted to include anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mid memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting).  

The Veteran reported that since returning from deployment, he experiences chronic sleep difficulties.  He sought out night shift as a police office because he feels safer sleeping during the day.  He endorsed avoidance of trauma cues (e.g., being confined in vehicles for too long).  He reported hypervigilance in which he avoids crowds, sits with back to wall facing exits when in public, has large dogs for protection and intimidation, keeps guns throughout the house and sleeps with a gun next to him, and runs drills with his wife and children to prepare in case of emergencies.  He has feelings of anger, increasing forgetfulness, and loss of interest in activities.  He experiences difficulty breathing, swallowing, and hot flashes when he lays down to sleep; approximately 2-3 times per week.  He also reported reckless behavior.  Specifically, that he sometimes performs stops on duty as a cop and does not inform others.  Finally, he reported he tried out for a special unit at work but withdrew, due to certain situations required for the position reminded him of his time deployed.

Additionally, the VA examiner completed psychological testing to assess symptom severity.  The examiner found the Veteran had severe PTSD symptoms.  PTSD symptoms endorsed by the Veteran were as follows:  disturbing memories (quite a bit); disturbing dreams (quite a bit); re-experiencing events (moderately); cued distress (extremely); cued physical symptoms (extremely); avoiding internal reminders (extremely); avoiding external reminders (extremely); trouble with recall (not at all); negative beliefs (quite a bit); blaming self/ others (not at all); negative feelings (extremely); loss of interest (extremely); feeling distant from others (not at all); feeling numb (quite a bit); feeling irritable (extremely); reckless behavior (quite a bit); being "super-alert" (extremely); feeling easily startled (a little bit); difficulty concentrating (quite a bit); and trouble sleeping (extremely).

The Veteran's VA treatment records were reviewed.  See February 2023, CAPRI.  In April 2022, the Veteran sought mental health treatment at the VA clinic for adjustment disorder.  The examiner found the Veteran's reported symptoms may be consistent with moderate to severe anxiety PTSD.    

The Veteran reported symptoms of depression.  The Veteran reported the following symptoms:  little interest or please (several days); feeling down, depressed or hopeless (several days); trouble sleeping (more than half the days); tired, low energy (several days); poor appetite, over-eating (not at all); feelings of failure, guilt (not at all); trouble concentrating (several days); motor retardation, agitation (not at all); thoughts better off dead/ hurting self (not at all).  The examiner found the Veteran's symptoms of depression were mild.  

Additionally, the Veteran reported symptoms of anxiety.  The Veteran reported the following symptoms:  feeling nervous, anxious or on edge (several days); not being able to stop or control worrying (several days); worrying too much about different things (several days); trouble relaxing (more than half the days); feeling restless, hard to sit still (more than half the days); becoming easily annoyed or irritable (more than half the days); afraid as if something awful might happen (several days).  

Finally, the Veteran reported symptoms of PTSD.  The Veteran reported the following symptoms:  disturbing memories (quite a bit); disturbing dreams (quite a bit); re-experiencing events (moderately); cued distress (extremely); cued physical symptoms (moderately); avoiding internal reminders (extremely); avoiding external reminders (extremely); trouble with recall (a little bit); negative beliefs (extremely); blaming self/ others (quite a bit); negative feelings (extremely); loss of interest (moderately); feeling distant from others (quite a bit); feeling numb (a little bit); feeling irritable (quite a bit); reckless behavior (quite a bit); being super-alert (extremely); feeling easily startled (moderately); difficulty concentrating (moderately); trouble sleeping (quite a bit).  The examiner reported the Veteran experienced an IED while deployed.

Upon review, the Board concludes that the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  The Board has considered all the evidence of record and engaged in a holistic analysis in reaching this conclusion.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017) ("VA must engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment.").

The Board finds the March 2022 VA examiner's finding, that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, to be of little probative weight.  This finding is not supported by the record, nor the VA examiner's identification of the Veteran's symptoms during examination.  

Specifically, the examiner identified symptoms that the Veteran had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances in a work or work like setting and demonstrated quite a bit of reckless behavior.  These symptoms are consistent with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, and not occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  

The Board finds the April 2022 VA examiner's findings that the Veteran had moderate symptoms of anxiety, with symptoms reported from several to more than half the days, highly probative.  

Finally, the Board finds highly probative that both the March 2022 and April 2022 examiners found the Veteran's PTSD symptoms were severe.  The PTSD symptoms from both the March and April examinations, as a whole, demonstrate the Veteran's continuous panic (anxiety), impaired impulse control (reckless behavior), and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  This evidence demonstrates the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD are of the severity to cause an occupational and social impairment associated with a higher disability of a 70 percent evaluation.

Based on a review of the evidence of record, the criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent for PTSD, but not higher have been met.  

Symptoms more closely approximating a 100 percent evaluation such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behaviour; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, were not shown.  The Veteran's record does not reflect delusions, hallucinations, suicidal or homicidal thoughts.  No social, marital or family problems were reported or identified.  Additionally, while the March VA examination does note short term memory loss, it does not reflect such memory loss such as present for the names of close relatives, occupation or the Veteran's own name.

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  The record indicates the Veteran remains gainfully employed. 

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood.  As such, the Board concludes the criteria for an initial 70 percent rating for PTSD were met, therefore the claim is granted.

Right Foot

The Veteran is service connected for his right foot with an initial rating of 10 percent, effective February 4, 2022.  See June 2022, Rating Decision.  The Veteran contends his service-connected right foot warrants an initial higher rating.  See May 2024, VA Form 10182.

The Veteran's right foot is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284, for other foot injuries.  Under Diagnostic Code 5284, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate other foot injuries.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe other foot injuries.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe other foot injuries.  A note to Diagnostic Code 5284 instructs that with actual loss of use of the foot rate as a maximum 40 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.

The terms "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in the Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  So, the Board looks to the dictionary to give them their common ordinary meaning.  According to MERRIAM WEBSTER, "moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension."  See www.meriam-websters.com/dictionary/moderate. "Severe" means "of a great degree."  Id. The term "moderately severe" is not defined in the dictionary and the Board considers it exists between "moderate" and "severe." More than average and less than severe.

On March 17, 2022, the Veteran attended a VA examination.  At that examination, the examiner found the Veteran had a foot injury of s/p right navicular foot fracture.  The Veteran reported his foot hurts when he runs, stands for long periods of time, or is walking for more than 15 minutes.  It is a sharp pain that shoots to his toes and up to his calf.  He uses 800mg of Motrin to treat it.  Additionally, sometimes his foot swells up.  

The examiner found the Veteran had functional loss of his right foot, due to his use of boots and wrapping of his foot to provide compression.  The examiner found the Veteran had pain with the following: dorsal flexion, inversion of his foot, weight-bearing, and non-weight-bearing.  The examiner found the Veteran's pain contributed to functional loss.  The examiner found the severity of his right foot was moderate.  His foot condition was chronically comprised by weight bearing and requires the use of support and modification devices (the Veteran uses ace wrap or a compression sleeve).  Finally, the examiner found the Veteran's foot impacted his ability to perform types of occupational tasks (his employment as a law enforcement officer).  Specifically, the Veteran reported 

I was trying out for SWAT and I was unable to perform because of my foot.  Could not apply for the special response unit and I tried it but I was not able to withstand the long times on my foot.  There are times when I have to take a break because my foot is hurting.  Also, I had to buy a zipper boot so that I could release pressure in my foot due to pain and swelling.  

See March 2022, C&P Exam.

The Board finds the Veteran's right foot warrants an initial rating of 20 percent.  

The Board finds the March 2022 VA examiner's finding, that the severity of the Veteran's foot is moderate, to be of little probative weight.  This finding is not supported by the record, nor the VA examiner's identification of the Veteran's symptoms during examination.  Specifically, the examiner identified symptoms that the Veteran had functional loss of his right foot, due to pain and swelling, and his functional loss impacted his ability to perform types of occupational tasks (his employment as a law enforcement officer).  The Veteran reported sharp pain, swelling, the use of medication (800mg Motrin), and assistive devices (ace bandage and compression wraps) to treat his symptoms.  

The Board finds the symptoms identified by the March 2022 VA examiner to be highly probative.  These symptoms are consistent with the record, the lay statements of the Veteran, and are more closely associated with moderately severe.  

However, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent.  The Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and functional loss would not result in symptoms more nearly approximating severe other foot injuries.  The Veteran's right foot disability does not inhibit walking to a substantial degree such as to require a walker or wheelchair because putting pressure on the foot is otherwise too painful.  The Board finds that the above evidence strongly weights against a severe disability.  The Veteran's ability to treat with an ace wrap or compression sleeve, over-the-count medications weighs against very painful symptoms.  Finally, the fact that he did not use a cane, crutch, or wheelchair and was able to walk weighs against significant weakness, or a severe foot injury.  

The Board has also considered the other DCs pertaining to the foot.  Other disability ratings may be assigned only if the symptoms for one disability is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptoms of any other disability.  Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-262 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).  In Scott v. Wilkie, the Federal Circuit expressly adopted the Court's holding that disabilities specifically listed in the rating schedule may only be rated under Diagnostic Codes which specifically pertain to them.  Scott v. Wilkie, 920 F.3d 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2019) (citing Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336 (2015)).  The Federal Circuit also expressly adopted the Court's holding that unlisted conditions may be rated by analogy to Diagnostic Codes that may not describe the unlisted disability but addresses disabilities that may be productive of similar symptoms.  Scott, 920 F.3d 1375 (citing Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484, 493 (2016)).

Finally, the Federal Circuit concluded that the Board must also consider assigning separate ratings under analogous DCs, when rating an unlisted service-connected foot disability exhibiting distinct manifestations, even when service connection has also been granted for one of the eight conditions listed in the rating schedule.  Id.  Applying this caselaw, the Board does not find rating under another DC warranted considering the facts of this case.

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the symptoms of the Veteran's right foot more nearly approximate moderately severe.  As such, the Board concludes the criteria for an initial 20 percent rating for right foot were met, therefore the claim is granted.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H.E. Toole, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.