Citation Nr: A25032886
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 211013-191062
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1977 to September 1995. 

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 38 C.F.R. § 19.2.

In July 2021 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2021 rating decision. In August 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2021 rating decision.

This appeal is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2021 HLR rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In October 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and selected the Direct Review Docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding all claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Left Ear Hearing Loss 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss which he alleges is the result of in-service hazardous noise exposure. See November 2021 Statement. While the Board regrets further delay, a remand is required prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim. 

In this case, the August 2021 rating decision made a finding that the Veteran experienced a qualifying event, injury, or disease during service, noting that the Veteran served aboard a submarine, where there was constant noise. The Board is bound by the favorable findings of the AOJ. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Additionally, the Board acknowledges the Veteran was diagnosed with left ear hearing loss as prescribed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. See 2021 VA Examination. Thus, the first two elements of service connection are met. See Shedden, 381 F.3d at 1167.

As to a medical nexus, the Board finds the RO committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it relied on an insufficient VA opinion. Specifically, the 2021 VA medical examiner determined there was no in-service hearing injury reflected in the STRs since there was no "significant threshold shift" in the documented audiograms. However, the examiner did not provide a definition of the term "significant threshold shift" or how it is quantified. Moreover, the examiner did not explain why such shifts reflected in the Veteran's audiograms on July 24, 1991, and August 1, 1995, do not represent a "significant threshold shift." See Hearing Conservation Data Form. Such an opinion using undefined terms cannot be reasonably relied on in an adjudication of the Veteran's claims. Once VA has provided a VA examination, it is required to provide an adequate one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Accordingly, considering the above, the Board finds the RO committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it relied on this opinion. Thus, the claim is remanded to correct this error.

All Remaining Claims

While the Board regrets further delay, a remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors prior to adjudication of the claims. 

In this case, the evidence of record only contains a one-page September 2018 medical record which states, "VistA Imaging - Scanned Document." However, that document is not present in the claims file. Furthermore it is unclear if that document relates to the Veteran's claims and the Board does not have access to VistA Imaging. Additionally, the claims file is devoid of any VA medical records. Considering the above, the Board finds the RO committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it did not acquire this record. Accordingly, a remand is warranted for the RO to obtain those records and associate them with the claims file. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3); Sullivan v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 786 (2016). Thus, the claims are remanded to correct these errors.

The matters are remanded for the following actions:

1. Acquire all outstanding VA treatment records, to include the September 2018 "VistA Imaging - Scanned Document," and associate them with the claims file. 

2. Acquire a VA addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's left ear hearing loss disability. Whether an in-person examination is necessary is left to the examiner's discretion. The entirety of the claims file must be reviewed and a copy of this Remand prior to addressing the following question:

Whether it is approximately at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss disability is related to his military service?

Note 1: The examiner is reminded that in-service hazardous noise exposure is conceded.

Note 2: The clinician is advised to explain the clinical significance, if any, of the Veteran's in-service audiograms, to include if there were any significant threshold shifts in his hearing during service. In doing so, the examiner must state their interpretation of a "significant threshold shift."

(Continued on the next page)

?

Note 3: The examiner is reminded an examination is inadequate where the examiner relies on the absence of evidence in the STRs to provide a negative opinion. The examiner may NOT rely on the absence of a medical record or evidence of medical treatment as the sole rationale for any negative medical nexus opinion. If the examiner finds the lack of documented treatment in service or post-service to be of medical significance given the relative severity, common symptomatology, and usual treatment of the claimed condition(s), the examiner should explain such a finding in the opinion.

 

 

Tracie N. Wesner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Masters, Tyler

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.