Citation Nr: A25032018
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 200702-99069
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as anxiety with depression, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has had symptoms of an acquired psychiatric disorder in and since service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.303, 3.304, 3.310. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Navy from April 2009 to September 2013.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a July 2019 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In July 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182.  

In the July 2, 2020, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2019 RO decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

Regrettably, the Veteran passed away in January 2024. In December 2024, the Appellant was properly substituted. 

If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

This matter is now properly before the Board.

Service Connection

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that an injury or disease resulting in a disability was incurred in the line of duty during active military service or, if an injury or disease pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38?U.S.C. §?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a). 

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?498, 506 (1995). 

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after military discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to the period of military service, establishes that the disease was incurred during the active military service.  38?U.S.C. §?1113(b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(d). 

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.303, 3.310.  In order to prevail on the theory of secondary service connection, there must be evidence of a current disability; evidence of a service-connected disability; and evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability.  Wallin v. West, 11?Vet. App.?509, 512 (1998). 

With a chronic disease shown in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes. If a condition noted during service is not shown to be chronic, then generally, a showing of continuity of symptoms after service is required for service connection. 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(b). 

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Masors v. Derwinski, 2?Vet. App.?181 (1992). Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value. 

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, i.e., "nearly equal". When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.?38?U.S.C. §?5107(b).?This benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is nearly equal but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.?See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Appellant contends that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the Veteran's claims file. As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran did suffer from anxiety while in service. The Board notes that a December 2012 service treatment record indicated that the Veteran complained of anxiety and the Veteran was assessed for generalized anxiety disorder. A May 2013 service treatment record also indicated that the Veteran had generalized anxiety disorder. The Board notes that the Veteran's separation exam indicated that the Veteran was taking Zoloft for work related stress. The Board finds that there is sufficient evidence of record to show that the Veteran was diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder while in service. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2015. The June 2015 examiner noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, and moderate cannabis use disorder. In an October 2018 VA examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported experiencing visual and auditory hallucinations since he was 9 years old. The Board takes note of the examiner's notation, however notes that there is no evidence that the Veteran had a diagnosed psychiatric disorder prior to service. The October 2018 VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported hearing auditory hallucinations two times per week. The examiner noted that the Veteran's condition caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner noted that the Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, impaired judgment, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had symptoms of persistent delusions or hallucinations. 

In February 2019, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The examiner noted the Veteran had a diagnosis of unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder. The examiner noted that the Veteran's condition caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The examiner noted that the Veteran stopped working due to his mental health struggles. The examiner noted that the Veteran's conditions included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting, and persistent delusions or hallucinations. 

In July 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, on the evidence review docket. The Veteran submitted a lay statement in support of his claim in August 2020, within 90 days after filing the VA Form 10182. The Veteran indicated that during service he began suffering anxiety and depression and was prescribed Zoloft. The Veteran indicated that since being discharged from service, he had elevated levels of mental health issues that can be attributed to his time in service. The Veteran indicated that he experienced depression, stress, insomnia, and auditory hallucinations. The Veteran also indicated that he was prescribed Seroquel and Quetiapine Fumarate to treat his currently diagnosed mental health illness. The Veteran also indicated that during the first few months after discharge he felt extremely paranoid and was not fully aware of his mental health problems. The Veteran indicated that he was ashamed of being discharged from service for marijuana use along with still dealing with anxiety and depression. The Veteran further stated that he was overwhelmed and did not disclose what he was dealing with to anyone. The Board finds that the Veteran's lay statement is competent, credible and highly probative. 

There is evidence of record that the Veteran has been diagnosed with different psychiatric disorders during the relevant period on appeal. The Veteran has suffered from anxiety and depression while in service and the Veteran has a current diagnosis of schizophrenia, prior to his passing. The Veteran filed a claim for service connection for anxiety and depression. The Board finds that it is appropriate to expand the scope of the Veteran's claim to encompass all such disorders reasonably raised by the record. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23?Vet. App.?1, 6?(2009). Thus, the Board has expanded the scope of the claim to an acquired psychiatric disorder.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board has considered the evidence of record during the evidentiary window. The Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements regarding his symptoms of an acquired psychiatric disorder in and since service coupled with the in-service diagnosis for anxiety and the diagnosis of schizophrenia after service shows that the Veteran has suffered from various psychiatric disorders in and since service. The Board finds that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder began while in service. There is evidence the Veteran was treated for anxiety and provided psychotropic medication while in service. The Veteran provided lay statements that indicate he has had symptoms of anxiety and depression in and since service. Finally, the Board finds that the Veteran does have a current diagnosis of schizophrenia. The Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements and report of ongoing symptoms in and since service establish a nexus between the Veteran's in service psychiatric disorder diagnosis and his present-day acquired psychiatric disorder diagnosis. 

The Board finds that while there is both positive and negative evidence of record as it relates to the Veteran's acquired psychiatric condition, the Veteran should be afforded the benefit of the doubt. Therefore, the Veteran's claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Counsel, H. Hailu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.