Citation Nr: A25032331
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-457556
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and depression, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has not had a diagnosis of any psychiatric disability at any time during the appeal period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from August 1998 to August 2002.  This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a December 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for right and left knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a mental disorder based on service in a hostile zone.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  He also contends that he has generalized anxiety disorder due to an incident that occurred while in the school of infantry.  See September 2024 Correspondence.  The Veteran's representative asks that the Board apply the benefit of the doubt doctrine and grant the Veteran's claim.  See August 2024 Brief.  However, because the Veteran has not had a diagnosis of any psychiatric disability at any time during the appeal period, the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim at this time. 

A Veteran is entitled to VA disability compensation for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Generally, to establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, referred to as the "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

For PTSD claims, service connection is warranted when there is (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  If a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than the Veteran's service records may corroborate the Veteran's account of the stressor incident.

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant.  Lynch, 21 F.4th, at 780-81.

In evaluating the Veteran's claim for disability benefits, the Board gives due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  Lay testimony is competent to prove that a claimant exhibited certain lay-observable symptoms and the time that those symptoms appeared.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  Lay evidence cannot be determined to be not credible merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 37 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

The AOJ has favorably found that the Veteran (1) was exposed to exhaust fumes, oil, lubricants, industrial solvents, chemical cleaners, and lead during military service based on his military occupational specialty (MOS) of light armored vehicle crewman, which has a high risk of toxic exposure; and (2) the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity based on his MOS.  Thus, for direct service connection, the first Shedden element is at issue.  Because, for the reasons that follow, the first element is not satisfied, the Board need not consider the remaining elements.

Entitlement to service connection is not warranted because the Veteran has not had any psychiatric disability during any part of the appeal period.  Preliminarily, the Board notes that the Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination to determine the nature of his claimed psychiatric disability.  See November 2023 Exam Request.  However, in December 2023, the VA examination was cancelled at the Veteran's request.  See December 2023 Exam Request.  As the Veteran cancelled the examination, the Board finds that the Veteran had notice of the examination.  However, the record does not contain any evidence of good cause prior to the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  Thus, the Board must consider the claim based on the evidence of record.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a),(b).

The evidence of record does not support a current disability.  The Veteran's service treatment records show sound psychiatric health.  In his August 2023 VA Form 21 526EZ, the Veteran did not report any post service psychiatric treatment (reporting treatment for hearing, stomach issues, and traumatic brain injury, without listing a treatment facility or location).  Accordingly, while the Veteran's statement in the August 2023 VA Form 21 526EZ evidences his belief that he has a psychiatric disability, the Veteran does not possess the medical training to be competent to render a psychiatric diagnosis.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  The Veteran did not submit any statements within the evidentiary window alleging that he has been diagnosed with a psychiatric disability.  Thus, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding a psychiatric disability of posttraumatic stress disorder, or any other psychiatric disability throughout the appeal period.  As service connection can only be granted for a current disability, meaning one that existed at any time during the pendency of the claim, service connection is not warranted on a direct basis.  The first element of direct service connection is not satisfied.

In making this determination, the Board also notes that none of the treatment records that were received outside of the evidentiary window were constructively received by VA.  The records concern treatment after the AOJ decision on appeal, and the Veteran did not give pre decisional notice of any psychiatric treatment by VA or otherwise.  Thus, the Board cannot consider treatment records received outside of the relevant evidentiary window.

The Board further acknowledges the contention of the Veteran's representative that the Board should afford the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and grant the claim.  See August 2024 Brief.  However, as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-82 (2021).

The Board notes the Veteran submitted a statement after the AOJ decision on appeal that contains evidence. The Board may not consider any evidence in the September 2024 statement, including any evidence of a diagnosed psychiatric disability.  

In his September 2024 statement, the Veteran asserted that another VA examination is warranted for his psychiatric condition because he missed the scheduled examination based on good cause.  While the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's situation and his reasons for missing the examination, the Board is not legally permitted to remand on this basis.  

Under the Appeals Modernization Act, remand is only available for correction of a pre decisional duty to assist error or any other AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the latter would have a reasonable possibility in substantiating the Veteran's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As the Veteran's statement showing good cause was not of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not commit a pre decisional duty to assist error.  Additionally, neither the Veteran nor his representative have identified an AOJ error in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty, and the Board finds no such error at this time.  Thus, the Board is not permitted to remand the Veteran's claim for an additional examination.  

Furthermore, for the first time, the Veteran identified relevant treatment records in his September 2024 statement.  See September 2024 Correspondence.  The Board is not legally permitted to remand the Veteran's claim in order to obtain such records as the AOJ did not commit a pre decisional duty to assist error in failing to obtain these records, as notice was given after the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  Additionally, there is no argument regarding any AOJ error in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty with respect to these treatment records, and the Board finds no such error.

The Board emphasizes the Veteran's ability to file a supplemental claim based on new and relevant evidence, which will allow for consideration of any evidence in his September 2024 statement, along with any other evidence the Veteran would like VA to consider.

Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  As the evidence of record weighs persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability 

The Veteran contends that the VA examination of his bilateral knees is inadequate and that an additional examination is warranted.  See September 2024 Correspondence.  The Veteran and his representative contend that direct service connection is warranted because the Veteran has a bilateral knee condition that is due to his MOS as a light armored vehicle crewman.  See August 2023 VA Form 21 526EZ; August 2024 Brief.

The Board finds that the December 2023 VA examination does provide enough information to adjudicate the Veteran's claims at this time, but the Board cannot yet adjudicate the claims because the AOJ failed to obtain a medical opinion with sufficient information to decide the claims.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (explaining that the Board shall remand to the AOJ for correction of a pre decisional duty to assist error); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The Board will leave it to the discretion of the VA clinician regarding whether an additional examination in conjunction with the opinion is warranted.

By way of background, during a December 2023 VA examination of the Veteran's bilateral knees, he was diagnosed with bilateral knee strain, with a date of diagnosis indicated as 1999.  The Veteran reported an onset date of bilateral knee issues during service in 1999 while he was in basic training.  He stated that he fell down a flight of concrete stairs and landed on his left knee, causing chronic pain and numbness.  The Veteran explained that since onset, his bilateral knee issues have been "chronic and daily."

In a December 2023 VA medical opinion obtained in conjunction with the VA examination, the examiner was asked whether the Veteran had a bilateral knee diagnosis that was at least as likely as not due to in service knee pain as a light armored vehicle crewman.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

As rationale, the examiner relied upon the "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of knee strain and military service."  The examiner considered a post service injury, event, or illness to be a more likely etiology in light of the lack of chronicity during service or after service.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran's separation examination did not note any medical complaints and that the claims file was "silent" for treatment records for the Veteran's bilateral knees.

This opinion does not provide sufficient information because it relies upon the lack of evidence to support a negative nexus and fails to address the Veteran's lay statements made during the examination.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) (finding that an examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions that he had sustained a back injury in service); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (stating that an examiner's opinion failed to consider whether lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of the Veteran's disability such that his claim could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence); see also Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 272 (2015) (stating that the Board must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation).  The rationale of the examiner's opinion did not consider the Veteran's reported 1999 onset, with chronic and daily issues since 1999.  The failure to address these statements is particularly puzzling in light of the knee diagnoses, indicated as bilateral knee strain from 1999.  On remand, the AOJ will obtain an opinion that considers the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his bilateral knee symptoms and relies on relevant evidence of record to support the opinion.

On remand, the AOJ will readjudicate the claims for service connection for bilateral knee disabilities.  In so doing, the AOJ will consider all relevant evidence of record, including the Veteran's statement in the September 2024 correspondence.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(c).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate VA clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities.  No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the clinician determines otherwise.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be provided to, and reviewed by, the clinician before rendering the opinion.  

The reviewing clinician must opine on:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include in service duties as a light armored vehicle crewman and a 1999 fall down a flight of concrete stairs.

The clinician should provide full explanation of the rationale for each opinion.  In formulating any opinion, the reviewing clinician should also address all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements during the December 2023 VA examination.

The reviewing clinician is not to mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.  The Board reminds the clinician that the absence of in-service evidence of a medical diagnosis is not always fatal to a service connection claim, as the laws and regulations do not require in-service complaints of, or treatment for, a diagnosed condition to establish service connection.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Garcia, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.