Citation Nr: A25032048
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 250222-519383
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record is in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during his active duty military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1966 to January 1968.

In September 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of his claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, most recently addressed in an August 2024 rating decision.  In October 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In January 2025, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of his claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, most recently addressed in the October 2024 rating decision.  In January 2025, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2025 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With regard to his claim for service connection for tinnitus, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

With regard to his claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, however, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for tinnitus as a result of his military service. In a January 2025 statement, the Veteran reported in-service noise exposure as a result of being a field wireman and working closely around howitzer gun batteries and tanks.   

A November 2013 VA treatment record noted the Veteran's report of in-service noise exposure in the form of aircrafts and tanks several times a week.  He also reported constant tinnitus since the 1960s.

An August 2024 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran reported that his tinnitus started many years ago. The examiner ultimately provided a negative opinion, indicating that there was no evidence indicating a relationship between the Veteran's military service and his tinnitus.  The examiner also noted that tinnitus usually occurred with hearing loss, and there was no evidence of a threshold shift in hearing acuity during service.

In addition to the general requirements for service connection, for a veteran who served 90 days or more of active service after December 31, 1946, there is a presumption of service connection for organic diseases of the nervous system, including tinnitus, if the disability manifests to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  For the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word "chronic." Continuity of symptomatology after discharge is required where the condition noted during service is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (the theory of continuity of symptomatology can be used only in cases involving those conditions explicitly recognized as chronic as per 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a)).

With regard to the first element of service connection, the presence of a current disability, the January 2025 rating decision made the favorable finding that the Veteran had tinnitus.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding. As such, the first element of service connection is met for tinnitus.

With regard to the second element of service connection, the January 2025 rating decision made the favorable finding that the Veteran had was exposed to hazardous noise as a result of his duties as a radio teletype operator.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  The Board also notes that the Veteran is competent to report his in-service noise exposure as a field wireman. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2). Moreover, the Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements describing his in-service hazardous noise exposure are credible and consistent with the type and circumstances of his military service and his military occupational specialties (MOSs) as a field wireman and radio teletype operator. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a) (due consideration must be given to the places, types, and circumstances of a veteran's service). Accordingly, the Board finds that his assertions concerning his in-service noise exposure are competent and credible lay evidence of such.

Despite the opinion from the August 2024 VA examination, the November 2013 VA treatment record noted the Veteran's report of tinnitus dating back to the 1960s.  The Board again notes that the Veteran served from February 1966 to January 1968, and there is nothing in the record to suggest that the Veteran's tinnitus predated his military service.  Given that tinnitus is a disability for which onset date is readily observable, his in-service hazardous noise exposure, and his consistent statements regarding the onset of ringing in his ears, the Board will resolve all doubt in the Veteran's favor and find that the evidence at least as likely as not establishes that his tinnitus was incurred in service. Thus, entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

In conclusion, the Veteran's service-connection claim for tinnitus is granted, based on evidence sufficient to establish in-service incurrence.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss as a result of his military service. In a January 2025 statement, the Veteran reported in-service noise exposure as a result of being a field wireman and working closely around howitzer gun batteries and tanks.   

With regard to the second element of service connection, the January 2025 rating decision made the favorable finding that the Veteran had was exposed to hazardous noise as a result of his duties as a radio teletype operator.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  The Board also notes that the Veteran is competent to report his in-service noise exposure as a field wireman. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2). Moreover, the Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements describing his in-service hazardous noise exposure are credible and consistent with the type and circumstances of his military service and his military occupational specialties as a field wireman and radio teletype operator. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a) (due consideration must be given to the places, types, and circumstances of a veteran's service). Accordingly, the Board finds that his assertions concerning his in-service noise exposure are competent and credible lay evidence of such.

In August 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, and he was diagnosed with bilateral hearing loss.  Ultimately, the examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was less likely than not related to his military noise exposure.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's MOS as a radio teletype operator was a low probability for noise exposure, his hearing was normal during service, and there was no evidence of a significant shift in hearing thresholds.  The examiner then cited literature from the Institute of Medicine (IOM), which found that there was no scientific basis to conclude that permanent hearing loss directly attributable to noise exposure will develop long after such noise exposure.

In McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243 (2019), the United Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) found that there are contradictory findings regarding delayed-onset hearing loss in the IOM report, which stated that "[t]here is not sufficient evidence from longitudinal studies in laboratory animals or humans to determine whether permanent noise-induced hearing loss can develop much later in one's lifetime, long after the cessation of that noise exposure" and that "definitive studies to address this issue have not been performed." McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243 (2019).

As such, the Board finds that the August 2024 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate and that an addendum opinion is required to address the contradictory findings in the IOM report.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Return the claims file to the VA examiner who performed the August 2024 VA hearing loss and tinnitus examination, if available, for an addendum opinion regarding etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. If that VA examiner is no longer available or is unable to offer the opinions sought, such should be noted for the record and the claims file provided to another appropriate examiner.

The examiner should review the claims folder and provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current hearing loss disability had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service, to include conceded in-service noise exposure as a radio teletype operator, as well as a field wireman, and working closely around howitzer gun batteries and tanks.

If the examiner relies on the IOM report regarding delayed onset of noise-induced hearing loss, any potentially qualifying or contradictory aspects of the report or other medical texts must be discussed in the opinion. The examiner is reminded that the lack of evidence demonstrating complaint, treatment, or diagnosis of hearing loss in service, while probative, may not serve as the sole basis for a negative opinion. If it is determined there were no significant threshold shifts in the Veteran's hearing acuity during service, the examiner should explain why this finding is relevant to the opinion. Finally, the examiner must address the significance, if any, of the Veteran's post-service noise exposure.

A clearly-stated rationale for any opinion offered should be provided, and must be based on consideration of all pertinent lay and medical evidence. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why this is so.

 

 

Leetra J. Harris

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	James R. Springer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.