Citation Nr: A25032324
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-470103
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 2014 to April 2015.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review Docket.

Prior to submitting the Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim in August 2023, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) most recently addressed in an April 2023 rating decision. In November 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during the service - the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

In addition, service connection for certain chronic diseases may be established on a presumptive basis by showing that the condition manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a); Fountain v. McDonald, 27?Vet. App.?258, 271-72 (2015). Although the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a). 

For the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time. If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for OSA as secondary to major depressive disorder, bilateral lower extremity S1 radiculopathy, bilateral hip strain with limitation of adduction, extension, and flexion, lumbar spine degenerative arthritis, and weight gain. See August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); see Allen v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?439 (1995) (en banc). To establish service connection for a secondary disability, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) the existence of a service-connected disability; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b). 

Obesity is not considered a disease or disability for VA purposes and is not subject to service connection. Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?155 (2018). As obesity is not a disease or injury for purposes of 38 U.S.C. §§1110 and 1131, it may not be service connected on a direct or secondary basis. However, obesity may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be connected on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; see also Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300 (2020). This inquiry extends to causation and aggravation. That is, (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity; if so, (2) whether such obesity or aggravation thereof was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and if so, (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for such obesity or aggravation thereof. If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis. 

As an initial matter, the Board notes that there is no evidence that the Veteran's OSA is directly related to service. The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses of OSA. The Veteran's sole contention throughout the period on appeal is that his OSA is secondary to his service-connected disabilities and weight gain. As such, the Board will not discuss any other theory of entitlement aside from secondary service connection.

The Board is bound by previous favorable findings, and the November 2023 rating decision found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.

According to the Veteran, the pain from his service-connected lumbar condition and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy make it difficult for him to fall or stay asleep. See December 2022 Statement in Support of Claim. In addition, the Veteran noted that his musculoskeletal conditions keep him from exercising. In a subsequent statement dated August 2023, the Veteran wrote that his major depressive disorder results in insomnia, leg kicks during sleep, nighttime sweating, and vivid nightmares. He added that because of his mental health condition, he makes poor food choices and eats high-calorie foods, and he has been less motivated to exercise, which has caused weight gain. Finally, the Veteran asserted that his bilateral hip strain also keeps him from exercising.

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from Z.M., MD, FAASM, FAAN dated November 2022. Dr. Z.M. reviewed the Veteran's medical records, including lay statements of OSA symptomatology and the OSA screening tool. Dr. Z.M. diagnosed the Veteran with OSA and opined that it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity is due to his service-connected lumbar condition and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and that obesity led to, caused, and/or aggravated the Veteran's OSA. Dr. ZM wrote that the Veteran "has a known service-connected condition(s) which can lead to and or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating, which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure," and ultimately weight gain and obesity.

The examiner did not specifically discuss how the Veteran's service-connected lumbar condition and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy led to his obesity, nor did he adequately explain how the Veteran's weight gain caused or aggravated his OSA. Rather, he noted rather generally that the Veteran has certain conditions which can cause certain symptoms that lead to and/or promote weight gain and obesity. Dr. Z.M. does not describe the Veteran's musculoskeletal symptomatology and other relevant factors pertaining to the Veteran's specific case. As such, the Board finds Dr. ZM's opinion inadequate.

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. The examiner noted that the biggest risk factor for development of sleep apnea is obesity and added that the Veteran has a body mass index (BMI) of over 35. The examiner further opined that the Veteran's obesity is "at least likely" the cause of his sleep apnea and not his lumbar conditions. The examiner reasoned that there is no pathophysiological relationship between OSA and the Veteran's lumbar conditions and concluded that it is "less likely as not" that the Veteran's OSA is caused by his lumbar spine degenerative arthritis or his bilateral lower extremity S1 radiculopathy. The examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by any of his service-connected conditions.

As noted above, obesity is not considered a disease or disability for VA purposes and is not subject to service connection. Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?155 (2018). As obesity is not a disease or injury for purposes of 38 U.S.C. §§1110 and 1131, it may not be service connected on a direct or secondary basis. However, obesity may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be connected on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; see also Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300 (2020). Here, the examiner did not discuss whether the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal conditions led to the Veteran developing obesity. Further, the examiner did not consider aggravation as a component of secondary service connection. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (holding that a VA examination is inadequate if it does not rule out the possibility of aggravation); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) (secondary service connection is awarded when a claimant suffers a disability that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury). Accordingly, the Board finds the January 2023 VA examiner's opinion to be inadequate.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in April 2023. The examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner reasoned that "there are no accepted medical evidence based on medical studies that currently link OSA conditions to lumbar spine degenerative arthritis, as the pathophysiology of both conditions do not have intersection and cannot establish correlation." The examiner also provided a negative opinion as to whether the Veteran's OSA is caused by obesity that was caused by the Veteran's lumbar spine condition. The examiner noted that excess weight can cause sleep apnea and that it can worsen symptoms and exacerbate its detrimental health effects. The examiner also added that insufficient sleep may lead to weight gain, making it a vicious cycle. Finally, the examiner noted that the Veteran's lumbar spine condition is caused by wear and tear on a joint over time and that obesity is caused by excess calories are stored in the body as fat. The examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by his lumbar spine degenerative arthritis.

The Board finds the April 2023 examiner's to be inadequate, as it did not provide sufficient rationale to support the opinion that the Veteran's obesity was not caused by his lumbar spine condition. In addition, the opinion did not consider aggravation as a component of secondary service connection.

In July 2023, N.K., MSN, APRN, FNP-C provided a private medical opinion regarding the Veteran's OSA. Nurse N.K. opined that it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight again and obesity are due to and/or related to his service- connected major depressive disorder, bilateral lower extremity S1 radiculopathy, bilateral hip strain with limitation of adduction, flexion, and extension, and lumbar spine degenerative arthritis. Nurse N.K. also opined that it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from the service-connected disabilities listed above, and that it is as least as likely as not that without the Veteran's weight gain and obesity, his OSA would not have occurred.

Nurse N.K. noted that in addition to the Veteran's reports of commonly known symptomology associated with his service-connected disabilities, the Veteran reported that he weighed 270 pounds upon military entrance and now weighs 300 pounds, with a BMI of 39.6. Nurse N.K. added that the Veteran's overall progressive weight gain and current obesity chronologically developed after the mental health stressors and musculoskeletal symptomatology related to his service-connected conditions.

Nurse N.K. wrote in her opinion that the Veteran's progressive weight gain and current obesity chronologically developed after his mental health stressors and musculoskeletal symptomatology; however, she did not discuss how the Veteran's reported stressors and symptoms led to his weight gain. This is particularly important because medical records show a weight of 244 pounds upon enlistment in September 2014, 270 pounds in May 2017, 284 pounds in June 2018, and 289 pounds during a VA examination from December 2021. The Veteran also denied depressive symptoms prior to the December 2021 exam, and during the exam, his depression screen was negative. The Veteran complained of deteriorating mental health in a December 2022 Statement in Support of Claim, and he was not diagnosed with OSA until January 2023, at which time he weighed 290 pounds. This suggests that the Veteran's weight gain/obesity preceded his reported mental health stressors. In light of this, the Board finds Nurse N.K.'s opinion deficient.

The evidence of record does not contain a probative medical nexus opinion that considers secondary service connection based on all of the Veteran's service-connected conditions, with obesity as an intermediate step. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion supported by a complete, sound, and well-reasoned rationale constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring remand under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from a qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed OSA. The claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available and reviewed by the examiner. An in-person examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the clinician.

After a review of the claims file, the examiner should address the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA was caused by or aggravated by his service-connected major depressive disorder, bilateral lower extremity S1 radiculopathy, bilateral hip strain with limitation of adduction, extension, and flexion, and/or lumbar spine degenerative arthritis?

In providing the opinion, the examiner must address whether the Veteran's obesity was an intermediate step between his service-connected major depressive disorder, bilateral lower extremity S1 radiculopathy, bilateral hip strain with limitation of adduction, extension, and flexion, and lumbar spine degenerative arthritis disabilities and his current OSA.

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred or worsened but for the obesity caused by or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

Please note, causation and aggravation are separate concepts and must be addressed independently. 

"Aggravation" covers situations where: 1) there is worsening directly due to a service-connected disability; and/or 2) the claimed disability would have been less severe but for the service-connected disability because the service-connected disability results in the inability to treat the claimed disability.

The clinician should consider the Veteran's contention that his OSA condition is secondary to weight gain due to physical slowdown caused by his service-connected major depressive disorder, bilateral lower extremity S1 radiculopathy, bilateral hip strain with limitation of adduction, extension, and flexion, and lumbar spine degenerative arthritis.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Klu, Evonne S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.