Citation Nr: A25032392
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231204-397504
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for dermatitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for upper gastrointestinal disability, including gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

The claim for service connection for right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

At no time during the claim period has the Veteran had hearing loss disability in either ear.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.385.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1993 to December 1997.  The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is grateful for his service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board by filing a Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) in December 2023 and requesting Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) direct review by the Board.  Based on the Veteran's choice to pursue a direct review of his appeal, the Board will decide the appeal based on the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.  Accordingly, no additionally submitted evidence may be considered. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

The appealed November 2023 rating decision denied appealed claims based on absence of new and relevant evidence to readjudicate the claims.  However, this followed a July 2023 rating decision denying the claims on the merits.  The Veteran  submitted a supplemental claim in July 2023 in response to the July 2023 rating decision, leading to the November 2023 decision for all the appealed claims.  Because the July 2023 decision had not yet become final at the time of the November 2023 rating decision or at the time of the December 2023 NOD, the Board does not find finality as to any of the claims in this case, and hence the Board does not find that new and relevant evidence is required to readjudicate the claims.  The Veteran continually prosecuted his claims under the AMA since the July 2023 decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h); cf., 38 U.S.C. § 5108 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d) (requirements for readjudicating previously finally denied claims).  

While the VA Regional Office (RO) characterized the claimed left and right shoulder disabilities as shoulder strain, characterized the left and right knee disabilities as osteoarthritis, and characterized the left and right ankle disabilities as lateral collateral ligament sprain, treatment and examination records reflect broader or more complex conditions of these parts, and the Board has accordingly characterized the claims simply as claims for service connection for disability of each part (left shoulder disability, right shoulder disability, etcetera).  While the RO characterized the Veteran's claimed upper gastrointestinal disability as gastrointestinal symptoms including nausea/heartburn, this nonspecific description fails to reflect recently diagnosed GERD as underlying disability, and the Board has accordingly characterized the claim as one for upper gastrointestinal disability, including GERD. 

Regrettably, as discussed below, multiple claims must be remanded based on pre-decisional failures of the duty to assist due to failure to obtain an inadequate examination.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss

In general, service connection may be granted for a disability or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To prevail on a direct service connection claim, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a nexus between the in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).

A service connection claim must be accompanied by evidence which establishes that the claimant currently has a disability. Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 144 (1992); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  Simply put, service connection is not warranted in the absence of proof of current disability.  The current disability requirement may be satisfied by the presence of the claimed disability at any time during the claim period. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319,321 (2007) (the requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim [...] even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim").

The Board must determine whether the evidence in the record, constitutes "competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability" under new section 5103A(d)(2)(A). See also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 504 (1995) (where determinative issue involves either medical etiology or medical diagnosis, competent medical evidence is required), aff'd per curiam, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (table).

In making determinations, VA is responsible for ascertaining whether the evidence supports the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. Id.; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 54 (1990).

The threshold for normal hearing is from 0 to 20 decibels (dB) with higher thresholds indicating some degree of hearing loss. Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 157 (1993). For the purposes of applying the laws administered by the VA, impaired hearing will be considered to be a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1,000, 2,000, 3,000, 4,000 hertz is 40 decibels (dB) or greater, or where the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1,000, 2,000, 3,000, or 4,000 hertz are 26 dB or greater, or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

Upon VA hearing loss examination in March 2023, the examiner noted the Veteran's claim that he had bilateral hearing loss related to exposure to hazardous noise in service and related to the combined synergistic effect of all toxic exposure risk activities during service.  The Veteran's MOS was noted as system organization maintenance technician.  The examiner reviewed service records, including audiograms from April 1993, January 1995, February 1996, March 1997, and October 1997 showing no significant threshold shifts in either ear.  A VA audiology report in September 2019 reflected tinnitus but showed hearing within normal limits bilaterally.  A November 2019 DBQ examination was noted to also show tinnitus but hearing within normal limits bilaterally.

On the audiological evaluation in March 2023, pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows:

			HERTZ		

Exam    Date	Ear	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

March	RIGHT	10	10	15	15	15

2023	LEFT	10	10	15	15	15

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 100 percent in the right ear and of 100 percent in the left ear.

The examiner found the pure tone test results valid for rating purposes and found use of the speech recognition scores appropriate for the Veteran.  

The March 2023 examiner opined that it was not at least as likely as not that the Veteran had hearing loss in either ear causally related to toxic exposure risk activities in service based on the Veteran not having a current hearing loss pathology in either ear to support such an opinion.  

The Board notes that the findings and conclusions of the VA examiner are consistent with and supported by prior examination findings of record, including as noted by the examiner, and are supported by sound reasoning as to the consistency of hearing acuity findings reflecting no hearing loss disability in either ear for VA purposes, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.385(b).  

While the Board does not question the Veteran's belief that he has bilateral hearing loss related to service, the Veteran, as a layperson, is without the requisite expertise to identify whether his hearing meets acoustic criteria for hearing loss disability for VA purposes; such questions are beyond lay competence.  The Veteran has not been shown to possess the requisite expertise or knowledge to address these questions. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011).  The Board affords more probative weight to the VA examination reports, rendered by a medical professional based on objective audiological testing. 

With the evidence persuasively against the presence of hearing loss disability meeting 38 C.F.R. §  3.385(b) criteria in either ear at any time during the claim period, the evidence is persuasively against the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, the benefit of doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.102; Lynch, supra.

Notwithstanding the additional prepared Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERA) memoranda as discussed in the Remand, below, an examination addressing questions of a link to TERA under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) for claimed bilateral hearing loss is not necessary due to the absence of current disability. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1119, 1168.

REASONS FOR REMAND

TERA-related development

On August 10, 2022, the PACT Act was enacted. The PACT Act also created a new presumption for service connection for certain conditions based on exposure to burn pits and other toxins (BPOT) and added new examination requirements where TERA are implicated. 38 U.S.C. § 1119.  The PACT Act provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a TERA, then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity. 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  The exception to this requirement is if the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran submitted evidence. Id.  VA has determined that there is insufficient evidence demonstrating a relationship between toxic exposure and conditions alleged to be related to physical trauma, such as blunt force trauma, repetitive use trauma, or penetrating trauma. See Processing Claims, Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022, or the Honoring Our PACT Act of 2022, 87 Fed. Reg. 7854 (December 22, 2022); see also 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b).  Claim musculoskeletal disabilities of the shoulders, knees, and ankles (addressed below) do not require TERA development due to this exception.  

Where a veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a TERA during active military service and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion, unless the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran submitted evidence. 8 U.S.C. §§ 101(38), 1710(e)(1)(C), 1119.   

Additional TERA development must be accomplished notwithstanding the direct review status of the appeal, based on the TERA statutory requirements which are distinct from the AMA.  

Two VA TERA memoranda were prepared in August 2024.  The first TERA Memorandum addressed the DoD Gulf War Veterans Information System (GWVIS) confirming that the Veteran had qualifying service that meets the definition of a Persian Gulf Veteran with verified service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1117 and 1119.  By virtue of the Veteran's status as a Persian Gulf Veteran, he is considered a "toxic-exposed" Veteran.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101(38), 1710(e)(1)(C).

The second August 2024 TERA Memorandum addressed the Veteran's exposures based on his active-duty military occupational specialty (MOS) of System Organization Maintenance Technician, which included exposure to fuel/fumes, hydraulic fluid, and oils.  

Additionally, added to the record in a March 2025 is an Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER), which addresses additional exposures to toxins based on the Veteran's industrial process exposures in service.  Another TERA Memorandum has yet to be prepared based on these exposures, and this must be accomplished, to be followed by additional examinations addressing claimed dermatitis, GI symptoms, and sleep apnea including addressing TERA.  Specific development requirements for these claimed disabilities are addressed below.  

The Veteran's DD 214 reflects that the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was as a system organization maintenance technician.  Service records reflect that some of his duties were within an administrative support unit.  However, as noted above, the March 2025 ILER reflects other duties and exposures.  This is consistent with service personnel records associated with the claims file in September 2014, which document the Veteran's duties as an aircraft power plant technician, including performing maintenance on engine, fuel, and powerplant systems of C-2A aircraft.  

Remand is required for addenda or new examinations addressing the possibility of a link to the combined synergistic effects of all in-service exposures associated with all in-service TERA.  

Additional development requirements specific to claims for service connection for dermatitis, upper gastrointestinal disability, and sleep apnea are addressed below.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for dermatitis is remanded.

Dermatitis is not shown in service treatment or examination records.  

Private treatment records associated with the claims file in March 2023 reflect findings and treatment for dermatitis in 2019 and 2020 including assessed eczematous plaques on the legs.

Upon a July 2023 VA skin examination, the examiner recognized the Veteran's presumed exposure to TERA based on Gulf War service, but failed to recognize TERA exposure related to his MOS.  The examiner provided an opinion that it was not at least as likely as not that the Veteran's dermatitis was causally related to the combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran in service.  This failed to consider all the Veteran's TERA based on the TERA memoranda in August 2024 and the ILER in March 2025.  

The examiner explained that he had reviewed exposure information relevant to the Veteran's Gulf War activities but concluded that the Veteran's dermatitis was not likely related to those combined exposure risk activities because dermatitis was "primarily the result of skin irritations and rashes caused by genetics, an overactive immune system, infections, allergies, irritating substances, and more."  The examiner added, "[t]here is no evidence to show that specific exposure events experiences (sic) by the Veteran during service [related to TERA were] related to the current condition."  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's "outside risk factors far outweigh those of the TERA exposure."  The identified outside risk factors included age, medication, stress, gender, and allergies.

On remand, an addendum examination should be obtained.  The findings of the July 2023 VA examiner should be considered, but the examiner must consider the potential combined synergistic effects of all exposures associated with all TERA as outlined in the VA TERA memoranda, copies of which should be provided to the examiner.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for upper gastrointestinal disability, including GERD, is remanded.

A chronic upper gastrointestinal disability is not shown in service treatment or examination records.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023 to address claimed gastrointestinal symptoms.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was recently assessed to have GERD, and the examiner assessed that this condition resulted in temporary nausea and silent reflux.  The examiner concluded that there was no confirmed diagnosis of a condition of the stomach or duodenum (as contrasted with GERD affecting the esophagus).  The examiner noted a February 2023 primary care physician visit at which the Veteran reported symptoms including abdominal pain, hot flashes, and nausea.  However, the examiner assessed that the evidence did not suggest a diagnosis or treatment regimen for GERD.  On these bases, the examiner opined that it was not at least as likely as not that the Veteran had an upper gastrointestinal condition related to toxic exposures in service.

The Board notes that VA treatment records include an August 2023 treatment documenting a recent endoscopy showing a small hiatal hernia and esophagitis.  This is consistent with the May 2023 examination report notation of GERD confirmed by endoscopy the prior week.  It is therefore puzzling on what basis the May 2023 examiner concluded that a diagnosis of GERD was not supported.  Failure to clarify this was a pre-decisional failure of the duty to assist, necessitating clarification upon remand.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  Upon remand examination, a new examiner should address the 2023 VA upper endoscopy findings and VA treatments for upper gastrointestinal symptoms, and address questions of etiology related to service for any upper gastrointestinal condition, to include GERD, present during the claim period.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Sleep apnea is not shown in service treatment or examination records.  

VA treatment records include a June 2023 treatment noting that a sleep study had been positive for sleep apnea.  The Veteran was issued an APAP/mask.  A September 2023 VA pulmonary consultation noted the Veteran was issued an APAP in June 2023 but had been noncompliant due to intolerance.  The Veteran reported snoring but denied a witnessed apneic period or waking up gasping or choking.  

The July 2023 rating decision recognized a diagnosis of sleep apnea in September 2020.  The decision asserted that there was a VA examination, and that the examiner provided an opinion against a causal link to service.  However, the claims file contains no record of a VA examination addressing claimed sleep apnea.  Accordingly, this constituted a pre-decisional failure of the duty to assist. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  Upon remand examination questions of a link to TERA must also be addressed.  

4. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder disability is remanded.

Upon a May 2023 VA examination (associated with the claims file in June 2023) to address claimed shoulder disabilities, the Veteran reported onset of shoulder symptoms in 2002-2003.  However, he reported noticing symptoms associated with wear and tear over time with required activities in service.  He reported a right shoulder injury in the gym and receiving Motrin for treatment in service.  He reported progression of the shoulder disabilities since onset.  The examiner noted a history of right shoulder rotator cuff repair in 2021.  The Veteran reported current symptoms including achiness in the anterior aspect of the left shoulder and in the entire right shoulder.  Unfortunately, the RO did not obtain a medical opinion addressing the likelihood that claimed shoulder disabilities had onset in service or gradually developed from service, as the Veteran reported.  

Pursuant to McLendon v. Nicholson, an examination to address a question of a possible link to service is required when there is: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence establishing an in-service incurrence; (3) an indication that the current disability may be related to the in-service incurrence; and (4) insufficient evidence to decide the case.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-83 (2006) (holding the threshold for determining whether the evidence indicates the current disability may be related to the in-service event is a low one); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2).   

Here, the current disability findings and the Veteran's statements of symptoms associated with activities in service presented sufficient evidence to warrant an examination and nexus opinion for claimed shoulder disabilities. Id.  It was a pre-decisional failure of the duty to assist not to obtain those opinions, necessitating remand.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  

Private medical records reflect post-service activities including running and power lifting.  These records reflect treatment for a right shoulder injury in 2021 and treatment for a left shoulder injury in 2022.  The examiner upon remand should consider whether post-service activities and injuries reflect intercurrent causes of current shoulder disabilities.  

6. Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

7. The claim for service connection for right knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023 addressing his claimed knee disabilities.  The examiner diagnosed osteoarthritis of the knee joint for both knees.  He also noted that the Veteran had meniscal repair of each knee in 2021.  The examiner also noted a history of MCL/ACL repair in 1990, though he noted that the Veteran reported onset of left knee disability in 1991.  The examiner noted a history of onset of left knee disability in 1991 and onset of right knee disability in 2002.  However, the Veteran reported onset of right knee symptoms in service with wear and tear due to required activities.  The Veteran reported progressively worse symptoms since onset of each knee condition.  The Veteran reported currently having pain over the entire left knee and the anterior right knee.  The examiner addressed current disability in each knee including with current examination findings of disability.  

The May 2023 examiner provided opinions against left and right knee disabilities being causally related to service.  The examiner based these on documentation of left knee injury prior to service and "lack of evidence to support a chronic condition [of the right knee] as a direct result of service."  

A veteran who served after December 31, 1946, is presumed to be in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service, or where clear and unmistakable (obvious and manifest) evidence demonstrates that an injury or disease existed prior thereto and was not aggravated by such service. Only such conditions as are recorded in the examination reports are to be considered as noted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304.

The presumption of soundness attaches only where there has been an induction examination in which the later complained-of disability was not detected. See Bagby v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 225, 227 (1991).  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (b) clarify that the term "noted" denotes "[o]nly such conditions as are recorded in the examination reports" and that "[h]istory of pre-service existence of conditions recorded at the time of examination does not constitute a notation of such conditions." Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238, 245 (1994).

For the left knee, the Veteran's history of left knee injury with MCL/ACL repair prior to service was noted upon service enlistment examination in May 1992, when the examiner identified the Veteran's knee as stable status-post surgery reconstructing the medial collateral ligament and anterior cruciate ligament and inserting screws in March 1991, and subsequent screw removals in December 1991, thus reflecting a stable post-operative knee condition and not a completely sound knee.  Other records associated with the Veteran's service induction also reflect this knee status.  An opinion should have been obtained to address the likelihood of aggravation in service of the pre-service left knee condition.  Failure to obtain this opinion was a pre-decisional failure of the duty to assist for the left knee claim, necessitating remand. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  

For both knees, the examiner's opinion against a causal link to service was not supported by a rationale which adequately considered the Veteran's self-reported history of symptoms.  The examiner is thus considered to have not given due consideration to the Veteran's self-reported history, which is competent lay evidence of symptoms from service.  See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374- 75 (2002).  Absent such consideration, the examination cannot be valid.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (medical opinion must be supported by adequate analysis of relevant evidence).  Failures to remedy these deficiencies were pre-decisional failures of the duty to assist for the bilateral knee claims, necessitating remand.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  

8. Entitlement to service connection for left ankle disability is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle disability is remanded.

Upon a May 2023 VA examination (associated with the claims file in June 2023) to address claimed ankle disabilities, the examiner diagnosed bilateral lateral collateral ligament sprains.  The Veteran provided a history of onset in 1997 when required activities in service resulted in 'wear and tear.'  The Veteran informed that he had received Motrin for treatment.  The Veteran contended that ankle symptoms had been the same since onset, though he reported that his ankles had been evaluated since service with identified tendons and ligaments issues.  He reported self-treating the condition with Tylenol, ice, and rest.  The Veteran informed that currently his condition was present in the entire left ankle and the posterior right ankle, with dull achiness present a couple of times per week, aggravated by wearing certain shoes and alleviated by rest and pain medications.  Upon physical examination, the examiner found pain to be present with active and passive range of motion of each ankle, supporting diagnosed bilateral ankle sprain.  The examiner also recognized reduced range of motion and functioning in each ankle with repetitive use over time due to pain.  The Veteran reported that the conditions of each ankle interfered with activities such as jogging, which he liked to do, and similar activities.  The examiner assessed that the Veteran's ankle conditions affected the Veteran's functioning by limiting running, jumping, prolonged ambulation, prolonged standing, and high impact activities.  

Despite the Veteran's self-reported history of bilateral ankle symptoms since service, a VA examination nexus opinion has not been obtained for either ankle.  The Veteran attributes his ankle conditions with reported onset in service to 'wear and tear' from activities in service.  The current disability findings and the Veteran's statements of ongoing symptoms from service and activities in service causal of those symptoms presented sufficient evidence to warrant an examination and nexus opinion for each ankle.  It was a pre-decisional failure of the duty to assist not to obtain examination nexus opinions, necessitating remand. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81-83; 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c).  

Again, private medical records reflect post-service activities including running and power lifting.  The examiner upon remand should consider whether post-service activities reflect an intercurrent cause of current ankle disabilities.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Prepare a new TERA Memorandum addressing the Veteran's exposure to TERA based on the March 2025 ILER.

2. Thereafter, obtain an addendum to the July 2023 skin examination to address claimed dermatitis.  Inform the examiner that an addendum is necessary because the July 2023 did not consider all TERA reflected in the three subsequently prepared TERA memoranda.  The claims file should be reviewed, and any necessary tests or studies should be obtained, with pertinent findings provided on the examination report.  Provide the examiner copies of the two August 2024 TERA memoranda and the additional TERA Memorandum prepared based on the March 2025 ILER report.  

The examiner must also document and consider the Veteran's own statements regarding his disability since a layperson is competent to address symptoms as experienced and his recollections of past history and treatment.  If the examiner has reason based on other evidence of record or medical knowledge to question the Veteran's self-reported history, the examiner should so state and provide a complete explanation why this is so.

The examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's dermatitis is due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service.  

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures as outlined in the three TERA memoranda. 

The examiner must provide a complete rationale, or explanation supported by facts and medical knowledge, for all opinions expressed.  

3. Schedule a new gastrointestinal examination to be conducted by a qualified examiner other than the one who conducted the May 2023 VA gastrointestinal examinations.  The examiner should be informed that a new examination is necessary because the May 2023 examiner failed to adequately explain why a diagnosis for the Veteran's diagnosed GERD was not supported despite a recent upper endoscopy reflecting a small hiatal hernia and esophagitis.  The examiner should also be informed that the new examination must address questions of a link between service or TERA exposure in service and any upper gastrointestinal disability.  

Provide the examiner copies of the two August 2024 TERA memoranda and the additional TERA Memorandum prepared based on the March 2025 ILER report.  

The claims file should be reviewed, and any necessary tests or studies should be obtained, with pertinent findings provided on the examination report.  

The examiner must also document and consider the Veteran's own statements regarding his disability since a layperson is competent to address symptoms as experienced and his recollections of past history and treatment.  If the examiner has reason based on other evidence of record or medical knowledge to question the Veteran's self-reported history, the examiner should so state and provide a complete explanation why this is so.

The examiner should review VA treatment records including an August 2023 VA treatment documenting a recent endoscopy showing a small hiatal hernia and esophagitis.  The examiner should address whether a diagnosis of GERD is supported, and if not, why not.  

(a.) For any upper gastrointestinal disability present during the claim period, to include any GERD, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability developed in service or is otherwise causally related to service.  In so doing, the examiner must explicitly consider the Veteran's self-reported history of any symptoms and treatment for any upper gastrointestinal disability, including GERD.  

(b.) Also for any upper gastrointestinal disability present during the claim period, to include any GERD, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's disability is due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service.  

In rendering these opinions, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures as outlined in the three TERA memoranda.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale, or explanation supported by facts and medical knowledge, for all opinions expressed.  

4. Schedule an examination to address the nature and etiology related to service of claimed sleep apnea by an examiner qualified to do so.  The examiner should be informed that the examination must also address questions of a link between TERA exposure in service and any sleep apnea. 

Provide the examiner copies of the two August 2024 TERA memoranda and the additional TERA Memorandum prepared based on the March 2025 ILER report.  

The claims file should be reviewed, and any necessary tests or studies should be obtained, with pertinent findings provided on the examination report.  The examiner should note 2023 VA treatments reflecting a sleep study and fitting with an APAP/mask for treatment of sleep apnea.

The examiner must also document and consider the Veteran's own statements regarding his disability since a layperson is competent to address symptoms as experienced and his recollections of past history and treatment.  If the examiner has reason based on other evidence of record or medical knowledge to question the Veteran's self-reported history, the examiner should so state and provide a complete explanation why this is so.

(a.) For any sleep apnea present during the claim period, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability developed in service or is otherwise causally related to service.  In so doing, the examiner must explicitly consider the Veteran's self-reported history of any symptoms and treatment for sleep apnea.  

(b.) Also for any sleep apnea present during the claim period, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's disability is due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service.  

In rendering these opinions, the examiner should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures as outlined in the three TERA memoranda.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale, or explanation supported by facts and medical knowledge, for all opinions expressed.  

5. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination to address the nature and etiology related to service of claimed left and right shoulder disabilities by an examiner qualified to do so.  The examiner should be informed that a new examination is necessary because the prior examination in May 2023 failed to address questions of clausal links to service required to support the Veteran's claims.  

The claims file should be reviewed, and any necessary tests or studies should be obtained, with pertinent findings provided on the examination report.  

The examiner should note that private medical records reflect post-service activities including running and power lifting.  These records reflect treatment for a right shoulder injury in 2021 and treatment for a left shoulder injury in 2022.

The examiner must also document and consider the Veteran's own statements regarding his disability since a layperson is competent to address symptoms as experienced and his recollections of past history and treatment.  If the examiner has reason based on other evidence of record or medical knowledge to question the Veteran's self-reported history, the examiner should so state and provide a complete explanation why this is so.

(a.) Separately for any left shoulder disability and any right shoulder disability present during the claim period, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability developed in service or is otherwise causally related to service.  

In so doing, the examiner must explicitly consider the Veteran's self-reported history of any symptoms and treatment for the respective shoulder disability.  The examiner should also consider the findings of the May 2023 VA examiner.  The examiner must also consider whether post-service activities including running and power lifting and noted post-service shoulder injuries reflect intercurrent causes of the current shoulder disabilities.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale, or explanation supported by facts and medical knowledge, for all opinions expressed.  

6. Schedule an examination to address claimed left and right knee disabilities by an examiner qualified to do so.  The examiner should be informed new opinions are necessary because the May 2023 examiner did not provide a required on the question of aggravation in service for left knee disability, and because the examiner did not adequately consider the Veteran's history of disability for either knee.  

The claims file should be reviewed, and any necessary tests or studies should be obtained, with pertinent findings provided on the examination report.  

The examiner should note that private medical records reflect post-service activities including running and power lifting.  

The examiner must also document and consider the Veteran's own statements regarding his disabilities since a layperson is competent to address symptoms as experienced and his recollections of past history and treatment.  If the examiner has reason based on other evidence of record or medical knowledge to question the Veteran's self-reported history, the examiner should so state and provide a complete explanation why this is so.

The examiner should note the Veteran's pre-service history of football injury to the left knee with pre-service surgical MCL/ACL repair, as noted on examinations associated with service entry.  

(a.)  The examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left knee disability, which existed prior to active military service, increased in severity during such service.

(b.) If so, was the increase in severity due to the natural progress of the disease?

(c.) For any disability of the left knee present during the claim period other than the left knee condition which pre-existed service, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that that other left knee disability developed in service or is otherwise causally related to service.  

In so doing, the examiner must explicitly consider the Veteran's self-reported history of any symptoms and treatment for the left knee disability.  The examiner should also consider the findings of the May 2023 VA examiner.  The examiner must also consider whether post-service activities including running and power lifting reflect intercurrent causes of the current left knee disability.  

(d.) For any right knee disability present during the claim period, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability developed in service or is otherwise causally related to service.  

In so doing, the examiner must explicitly consider the Veteran's self-reported history of any symptoms and treatment for the right knee disability.  The examiner should also consider the findings of the May 2023 VA examiner.  The examiner must also consider whether post-service activities including running and power lifting reflect intercurrent causes of the current right knee disability.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale, or explanation supported by facts and medical knowledge, for all opinions expressed.  

7. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination to address the nature and etiology related to service of claimed left and right ankle disabilities by an examiner qualified to do so.  The examiner should be informed that a new examination is necessary because the prior examination in May 2023 failed to address questions of clausal links to service required to support the Veteran's claims.  

The claims file should be reviewed, and any necessary tests or studies should be obtained, with pertinent findings provided on the examination report.  

The examiner should note that private medical records reflect post-service activities including running and power lifting.  

The examiner must also document and consider the Veteran's own statements regarding his disability since a layperson is competent to address symptoms as experienced and his recollections of past history and treatment.  If the examiner has reason based on other evidence of record or medical knowledge to question the Veteran's self-reported history, the examiner should so state and provide a complete explanation why this is so.

(a.)  Separately for any left ankle disability and any right ankle disability present during the claim period, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability developed in service or is otherwise causally related to service.  

In so doing, the examiner must explicitly consider the Veteran's self-reported history of any symptoms and treatment for the respective ankle disability.  The examiner should also consider the findings of the May 2023 VA examiner.  The examiner must also consider whether post-service activities including running and power lifting reflect intercurrent causes of the current ankle disabilities.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale, or explanation supported by facts and medical knowledge, for all opinions expressed.  

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Schechter

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.