Citation Nr: A25032146
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240531-444719
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from March 1990 to July 1994, including service in the Persian Gulf.

The Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2024 under The Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) review system.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board acknowledges that the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) has not yet elapsed.  However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) is not necessary because the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence to be considered on remand and this remand is not considered a final adjudication of the issue on appeal.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the remand.  Id.

Service Connection for Erectile Dysfunction

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Here, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain a VA medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that his erectile dysfunction is secondary to his service-connected depressive mood disorder, to include as due to the medications he is taking for his depressive mood disorder.  See December 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. 

The Board notes that in an April 2024 VA Exam Request letter, the AOJ requested a VA examination for the Veteran's claim for erectile dysfunction.  In a May 2024 Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation letter, the Veteran's examination was cancelled because the Veteran was unavailable.  There was no other attempt to reset the examination.  The Board notes that in the May 2024 VA rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran failed to report to the May 2024 examination.  However, there is no evidence in the record that the Veteran failed to report to a scheduled examination.  The May 2024 VA letter reflects that the examination was cancelled because the Veteran was unavailable.  Furthermore, the Veteran contends that his examination was cancelled and that it was not rescheduled.  See May 2024 VA Form 10182.   

Given such, the Board finds that the Veteran did not "fail to report" to the examination as the evidence reflects that this examination was cancelled.  Additionally, the Board finds that adequate attempts were not made to schedule the Veteran's examination to satisfy VA's duty to assist.  Thus, the Board finds there is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error in this case.  Consequently, it would be premature to adjudicate the claim pursuant ot the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.  As such, a remand is warranted.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from a qualified medical professional to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction.  If the VA examiner determines that an examination is necessary, an examination should be scheduled.  

Upon review of the evidence, the VA examiner is asked to provide the following opinion:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is (1) "is caused by," "is due to," or "results from"  his service connected disabilities, to include depressive mood disorder and/or medications taken for his service-connected disabilities or (2) underwent any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence, due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to include depressive mood disorder and/or medications taken for his service-connected disabilities

The term "incremental increase in disability" means additional impairment of earning capacity. Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability. Moreover, any "incremental increase in disability" need not be permanent.

Any opinion expressed by the VA examiner must "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

If the examiner determines that he/she cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, he/she should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion. Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 389 (2010) (The Agency of Original Jurisdiction should ensure that any additional evidentiary development suggested by the examiner be undertaken so that a definite opinion can be obtained

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Abdelbary, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.