Citation Nr: A25032791
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240308-422685
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for residuals, fracture of left first metacarpal trapezial joint, left hand and wrist with traumatic arthritis is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from October 1978 to January 1982.  

In February 2024 the Regional Office (RO) confirmed and continued a 20 percent evaluation for the Veteran's left thumb/wrist disability.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) in a March 2024 Notice of Disagreement and selected the Direct Review lane.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after that decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of the disability claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the RO for correction of an error on the part of the RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the RO decision on appeal.  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.

When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  To be considered adequate, a musculoskeletal examination must include an assessment of a veteran's flare-ups, as well as range of motion measurements in weight-bearing, non-weight bearing, and in passive motion.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017); see also Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15 (2016).

Further, the Board acknowledges a recent decision in which the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held applicable diagnostic codes and special regulations pertaining to musculoskeletal disabilities do not explicitly contemplate medication use, and as such, VA must discount the beneficial effects of medication when assigning an evaluation of a musculoskeletal disability.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, slip op. at 10 (Vet. App. March 12, 2025).  In sum, this requires examiners to expressly consider and discount the beneficial effects of medication when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities, to specifically include a discussion of whether a veteran may experience additional functional impairment, to include range of motion loss, without the use of medications.  Without this discussion, the examination is considered inadequate, and a remand is required.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA wrist examination in August 2023.  The examiner failed to provide the Veteran's weight-bearing and non-weight bearing ranges of motion.  Further, the examiner noted the Veteran's history of flare-ups when lifting heavy objects, yet also noted the Veteran does not have flare-ups and did not provide range of motion estimates during the Veteran's flare-ups.  

Further, the examiner noted the Veteran takes Norco medication for his service-connected hip disability, but did not discuss whether the use of that medication affects the Veteran's wrist functionality.  In other words, the examiner did not provide a statement as to whether the Veteran would experience additional functional loss or diminution of his range of motion without the use of Norco. Therefore, the Board finds the examination deficient because the examiner failed to provide information addressing the above-noted critical evaluation criteria. 

Finally, the Board notes the first metacarpal trapezial joint is located at the base of the thumb, which may affect the Veteran's wrist and hand functionality.  Notably, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his hand and fingers in 2001 and February 2018 to evaluate the residuals of his broken thumb, yet was not afforded a hand and fingers examination when he filed for an increased rating in 2023.  The Board finds that a hand and fingers examination is necessary to fully evaluate the potential worsening residual effects of the fracture of his left first metacarpal trapezial joint, with traumatic arthritis.  

The matter is accordingly REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran a VA wrist and hand/finger examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to fully assess the severity of the Veteran's service-connected left thumb and wrist disability.  All pertinent evidence of record should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.

Ensure the examiner provides all information required for rating purposes, to specifically include both active and passive range of motion testing, as well as weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing range of motion assessments.

In addition, the examiner must consider and discuss all procurable and assembled data such as the frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, and the severity of the flare-ups, and then provide an assessment of the functional loss during flares, if possible, in degrees of motion lost.

Finally, the examiner must provide an assessment of the functional loss experienced without the alleviating effects of the Veteran's medications, if possible, in degrees of additional motion lost.  

If the examiner is unable to provide the requested opinions, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

T. REYNOLDS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Bennett

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.