Citation Nr: A25032325
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-457377
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a facial scar as a residual of a head injury with facial lacerations is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shoulder disability is denied.

Entitlement to an initial 30 rating, but no higher, for Crohn's disease is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder is denied.

Entitlement to a TDIU for the period from January 23, 2023, to July 1, 2024, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of a finding that the Veteran's facial scar is etiologically related to service.

2. The evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a low back disability.

3. The evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a bilateral shoulder disability.

4. During the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran's Crohn's disease more nearly approximate moderately severe symptoms characterized by frequent exacerbations; but was not shown to be productive of malnutrition, with the residual health assessed as fair during remissions.

5. During the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran's hemorrhoids have been no more than mild or moderate in degree and have not been productive of large or thrombotic hemorrhoids that are irreducible and have excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent occurrences; persistent bleeding with secondary anemia or with fissures has also not been demonstrated.

6. During the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran's hypertension was manifested by the use of continuous medication, but not by a history of diastolic pressure in excess of 100 or more, systolic pressure predominantly in excess of 160, or diastolic pressure predominantly in excess of 100.

7. During the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment are not demonstrated at any time during this period on appeal.

8. Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran is unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities, particularly his Crohn's disease and PTSD, when considering his education, special training, and employment history from January 23, 2023, to July 1, 2024.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a facial scar have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a low back disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a bilateral shoulder disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for a 30 percent rating, but not higher, for Crohn's disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 7323.

5. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for hemorrhoids have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7336. 

6. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

7. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

8. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU for the period from January 23, 2023, to July 1, 2024 have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.3, 4.16, 4.19.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1965 to July 1965 and from July 1967 to July 1971.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in March 2024 granting entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids assigning a noncompensable rating, a May 2024 rating decision granting entitlement to service connection for hypertension assigning a noncompensable rating as well as entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder rated 70 percent disabling, a later May 2024 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for a back condition and a bilateral shoulder condition, and a June 2024 rating decision granting entitlement to service connection for Crohn's disease rated 10 percent disabling as well as denying entitlement to service connection for residuals of an in service head injury, all by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). This decision was issued pursuant to the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In a timely July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Hearing option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

In November 2024, the Veteran testified before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge at a video conference hearing. A transcript of the hearing is of record.

The Board acknowledges that at the November 2024 hearing, the Veteran further testified regarding entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches. The Veteran has an additional appeal stream pending that includes a claim for service connection for migraine headaches. A separate decision will be issued in the matter.

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that it is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363 (U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).

In the present case, as noted above, the Veteran appeared at a Board hearing and provided testimony in support of his appeal pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. As such, a docket switch is no longer possible. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) ("Requests to modify a Notice of Disagreement will not be granted if the appellant has submitted evidence or testimony as described in 20.302 and 20.303."). Under the circumstances, the Board may proceed with adjudication of the Veteran's appeal without further delay.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  In general, service connection requires: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation; consequently, failure to establish a current disability results in the denial of a claim. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1997). Specifically, a claimant must have a disability in order to be considered for service connection. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

When the evidence is evenly balanced or approximately so with regard to whether service connection is warranted, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). To deny a claim on its merits, the evidence must persuasively weigh against the claim. Id.) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a facial scar as a residual of a head injury with facial lacerations is granted.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a facial scar, that he contends was incurred in or caused by service, specifically asserting that the scar is a residual of a head injury incurred from a car accident during service. 

In the May 2024 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show a qualifying event, injury, or disease that had its onset during service, noting the STRs show treatment for mild brain concussion. The STRs further contain notations of treatment following numerous motor vehicle accidents.

Based on these favorable findings, the Board finds that the current disability element and the in-service event element of service connection have been established. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009). The remaining question is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service car accident.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2024. On examination, a diagnosis of a scar on the forehead, described as a deep indentation just above the left eye, was confirmed.

The VA examiner thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's claims file, including his military and medical history. Following review of the relevant evidence and examination of the Veteran, the May 2024 VA examiner found it is at least as likely as not that the veteran's current facial scar was caused by the injuries sustained during the in-service car accident of record.

Accordingly, in light of the above, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for a facial scar as a residual of a head injury with facial lacerations is warranted, and the Veteran's appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. The previous denial of service connection for back condition is confirmed and continued.

3. The previous denial of service connection for bilateral shoulder conditions is confirmed and continued.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a low back disability and bilateral shoulder disability, which he contends is due to multiple in-service car accidents. See generally November 2024 hearing testimony.

The question before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis for a low back and/or bilateral shoulder disability.

Based on a careful review of all the subjective and clinical evidence, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence weighs against finding service connection for a low back and/or bilateral shoulder disability, as the persuasive evidence weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of either claimed disability.

No underlying disability has been clinically diagnosed during the appeal period or proximate thereto. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

Here, the Board acknowledges VA and private treatment records show that the Veteran has a right shoulder arthralgia disability and back pain. The Veteran was sent to physical therapy to reduce his shoulder and back pain. 

However, the Board finds that the post-service complaints of low back and right shoulder pain does not rise to the level of a disability. Pain that results in a functional impairment in earning capacity can be considered a disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2016); see also Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8, 17 (2020). The relevant evidence of record shows the Veteran was a car salesman and he did not state that his low back or shoulder impacted his daily occupational life or that it stopped him from doing any activities at any time during the period on appeal.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that service connection for a low back and/or bilateral shoulder disability is warranted. In this case, the medical evidence of record does not reflect a current diagnosis of a low back nor a bilateral shoulder disability, and no such diagnosis has been rendered at any time during the pendency of the appeal. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

Congress specifically limits entitlement to service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110. In the absence of proof of current disability there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Thus, in the absence of competent evidence showing that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of left or right lower extremity radiculopathy or a complaint of such by the Veteran, it is unnecessary to address the remaining elements of the claim for service connection. See id.

Finally, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he experienced low back and bilateral shoulder pain during service but, due to his traumatic brain injury, his memory was impaired and thus when he was completing his exit exam his ability to recall past events would be challenging. However, as explained above, a current diagnosis is a threshold requirement for a claim of service connection and as the Board finds the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a low back or bilateral shoulder condition, the issue of whether there was an in-service incurrence need not be addressed.

The Veteran is certainly competent to report his history of low back and shoulder symptoms and any treatment that he may have undergone. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). However, the Veteran has not demonstrated that he has the requisite specialized knowledge to diagnose a low back or shoulder disability. The Veteran has not presented any competent and credible evidence of a current diagnosis of a low back or bilateral shoulder disability, and the available evidence does not support that the Veteran has any persistent symptomatology that would suggest that he has an underlying chronic disability. Accordingly, the Veteran's assertions that he has a current diagnosis for a low back or bilateral shoulder disability have little probative value.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding in favor of the Veteran's service connection claim for a disability of the low back and bilateral shoulder. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the service connection claims must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

The veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). Where, as here, the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the medical evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of the assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance. If the positive and negative evidence is evenly or approximately balanced, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

1. Entitlement to an initial 30 rating, but no higher, for Crohn's disease is granted.

The Veteran contends his service-connected Crohn's disease is more severe than his current rating reflects. 

The Veteran is currently in receipt of an initial 10 percent rating for Crohn's disease from November 8, 2023, the effective date of the grant of service connection, pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7326, which governs Crohn's disease or undifferentiated form of inflammatory bowel disease (DC 7326). 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

The Board notes that during the pendency of this appeal, the rating criteria for Crohn's disease was amended, effective May 19, 2024. 

Prior to May 19, 2024, Crohn's disease was not among the listed conditions in the Rating Schedule. When an unlisted condition is encountered, it is permissible to rate under a closely related disease or injury in which not only the functions affected, but the anatomical localization and symptomatology are closely analogous. 38 C.F.R. § 4.20.

Under DC 7323 for ulcerative colitis, a 30 percent disability rating is warranted for moderately severe symptoms characterized by frequent exacerbations. A 60 percent disability rating is warranted for severe symptoms characterized by numerous attacks per year and malnutrition, with the residual health assessed as fair during remissions. A 100 percent disability rating is warranted for pronounced symptoms characterized by marked malnutrition, anemia, and general debility, or with serious complication such as liver abscess. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

Under DC 7319 for IBS, the maximum 30 percent rating is assigned for severe irritable colon syndrome with diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress. Id.

The Board notes that, under the Rating Schedule, diseases of the digestive system, while differing in the site of pathology, can produce a common disability picture characterized by varying degrees of abdominal distress or pain, anemia, and disturbances in nutrition. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.113. Consequently, as indicated by the instructions under the title "Diseases of the Digestive System," certain coexisting diseases in this area do not lend themselves to distinct and separate disability evaluations without violating the fundamental principle relating to pyramiding as outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.113. As such, disability ratings assigned under diagnostic codes 7301 to 7329 (inclusive), 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348 (inclusive) will not be combined with each other. Instead, a single evaluation will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants elevation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

As noted above, recently, VA amended the criteria for rating the digestive system, effective May 19, 2024. The amended criteria essentially create a new diagnostic code for rating Crohn's disease under DC 7326. See Amended 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 (effective May 19, 2024).

Diagnostic Code 7326 provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for minimal to mild symptomatic inflammatory bowel disease that is managed with oral or topical agents (other than immunosuppressants or other biologic agents); or is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain with three or less daily episodes of diarrhea and no signs of systemic toxicity. A 30 percent rating is warranted for mild to moderate inflammatory bowel disease that is managed with oral and topical agents (other than immunosuppressants or other biologic agents); and is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain with three or less daily episodes of daily episodes of diarrhea and minimal signs of toxicity such as fever, tachycardia, or anemia. A 60 percent rating is warranted for moderate inflammatory bowel disease that is managed on an outpatient basis with immunosuppressants or other biologic agents; and is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain, four to five daily episodes of diarrhea; and intermittent signs of toxicity such as fever, tachycardia, or anemia. A 100 percent rating is warranted for severe inflammatory bowel disease that is unresponsive to treatment; and requires hospitalization at least once per year; and results in either an inability to work or is characterized by recurrent abdominal pain associated with at least two of the following: (1) six or more episodes per day of diarrhea, (2) six or more episodes per day of rectal bleeding, (3) recurrent episodes of rectal incontinence, or (4) recurrent abdominal distention.

Note (1) of Diagnostic Code 7326 indicates that, following colectomy/colostomy with persistent or recurrent symptoms, the condition should be rated either under Diagnostic Code 7326 or Diagnostic Code 7329 (intestine, large, resection of), whichever provides the highest rating. Note (2) advises that VA requires diagnoses under Diagnostic Code 7326 to be confirmed by endoscopy or radiologic studies. Finally, note (3) indicates that inflammation may involve small bowel (ileitis), large bowel (colitis), or inflammation of any component of the gastrointestinal tract from the mouth to the anus.

Here, the Board notes the only period during which the revised diagnostic code may be applied is from May 19, 2024.

If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; Karnas v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 308, 313 (1991), overruled in part, Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). As the Veteran's claim was received prior to the effective date of the regulation changes, the Board must consider the Veteran's Crohn's disease under both the old and the revised rating criteria and must apply the old rating criteria if the result is more favorable to the Veteran. Id.

Turning to the evidence of record, in January 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA intestinal conditions examination to assess the current severity of his Crohn's disease. On examination, the Veteran reported that he feels his condition has worsened since it was first diagnosed, and he treats it with continuous oral medication and monitors the condition by attending an annual colonoscopy but denied a history of surgical treatment.

The Veteran endorsed symptoms of diarrhea occurring almost daily and needing to go to the bathroom after each meal as well as daily abdominal distension with colicky pain and flatulence.

He further reported more or less constant episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress, more or less constant abdominal distress.

He did not endorse weight loss attributable to the condition, more malnutrition or other serious complications, such as tumors or neoplasms. There were no other pertinent physical findings noted on examination. The functional impact of the Veteran's Crohn's disease was described as recurrent cramping with colicky pain of the lower abdomen that persists for several days with bloody stools, explosive stools, and occasional incontinence that requires close proximity to the bathroom, especially after meals, and caused him losing approximately a week of worktime in the last 12 months of his employment as a car salesman prior to retirement.  

Later that year, in May 2024, the Veteran attended an additional VA intestinal conditions examination. On examination, a diagnosis of Crohn's disease was confirmed. The Veteran described having diarrhea about 25 percent of the time, about one or two times daily, since he began to treat the condition with continuous oral medication other than immunosuppressants or other biologic agents. 

He endorsed experiencing recurrent abdominal pain, daily diarrhea 3 or less episodes, and recurrent abdominal distention. He denied blood in his stool at the time of examination.

The VA examiner reviewed a February 2022 colonoscopy that was characterized as stable.

Regarding functional impact, the VA examiner observed the Veteran to be limited at times due to irregular bowels with diarrhea, bowel distention, and abdominal pain that impacts work and day-to-day life as he has to stop to take breaks in between to use the bathroom and has to change up his work schedule to his bowel habits.

A review of the Veteran's treatment records throughout the relevant period revealed a January 2024 VA treatment record, a history of Crohn's disease with severe diarrhea that is currently in remission and asymptomatic since 2000. In March 2024, the Veteran reported two episodes of rectal bleeding with bowel movements in the preceding week with bowel movement. 

As reflected above, the treatment reports from the relevant evidence of record demonstrate that the Veteran had abdominal pain, cramping, flatulence, frequent diarrhea, and episodes fecal incontinence, requiring frequent trips to the restroom. 

Based on the evidence summarized above, the Board finds that throughout the appeal period the Veteran's Crohn's disease has manifested in moderately severe symptoms with frequent exacerbations, which more nearly approximates that contemplated by a 30 percent rating under DC 7323. 

Specifically, the Board finds that the Veteran's range of symptoms, frequency of symptoms despite medication, prolonged flare-ups, and resulting functional loss is "moderately severe" because he has to take various medications multiple times per day, as well as avoid activities or places that exacerbate his symptoms or do not allow him quick access to a bathroom. Further, the Veteran is competent to discuss the frequency, severity, and functional effects of any lay-observable symptoms associated with this condition, which allows for a more longitudinal picture of symptoms than the snapshots from the VA examiners.

However, a higher rating is not warranted as the Veteran has not been shown to be malnourished with health only fair during periods of remission at any time during the appellate period. Neither the January 2024 nor the May 2024 VA examiners, nor the Veteran's physicians, to include his treating gastroenterologist, indicate that the Veteran was ever malnourished. Further, the Veteran has not asserted, and the evidence does not suggest, that he was malnourished nor that he had health only fair during remissions or that he experienced anemia or other serious complications. Thus, the evidence supports a grant of the higher 30 percent rating; however, it is persuasively against a finding that a disability rating higher than 30 percent at any time during the appellate period is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7323.

The Board further notes that a 30 percent rating is the maximum allowable schedular rating for IBS under Diagnostic Code 7319. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  Therefore, a higher rating under that diagnostic code is not for consideration.

Beginning May 19, 2024, the pre-amended criteria are more favorable to the Veteran. In this regard, although the Veteran's Crohn's disease was managed with oral and topical agents (other than immunosuppressants or other biologic agents); and was characterized by recurrent abdominal pain with three or less daily episodes of daily episodes of diarrhea, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran's Crohn's was productive of minimal signs of toxicity such as fever, tachycardia, or anemia as outlined in the criteria for a higher 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7326. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

All potentially applicable diagnostic codes have been considered. See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 593 (1991). Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 36970 (2017).

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of assigning an initial 30 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's Crohn's disease throughout the relevant period. In making this finding, the Board has resolved all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7323; 38 U.S.C. §5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§3.102, 4.3; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for his service-connected hemorrhoids, which he generally contends are more severe than his current rating reflects. 

The Veteran's resection of hemorrhoids is currently rated noncompensable, or zero percent, disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7336.

Under Diagnostic Code 7336, mild or moderate external or internal hemorrhoids are assigned a noncompensable rating. A 10 percent rating is assigned for irreducible large or thrombotic external or internal hemorrhoids with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences. A maximum 20 percent rating is assigned for external or internal hemorrhoids with persistent bleeding and with secondary anemia, or with fissures.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating for his hemorrhoids in November 2023; therefore, the following analysis considers the relevant evidence of record up to one year prior to the date of claim.

Turning to the relevant evidence on appeal, during the Veteran's November 2024 hearing, the Veteran testified that he is not currently experiencing issues with hemorrhoids after taking some medication. He stated the condition "comes and goes."

In January 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA rectum and anus conditions examination to assess the current severity of his service-connected hemorrhoids. On examination, the Veteran reported he was not currently experiencing hemorrhoids, but he experiences occasional flare ups depending on the amount of bowel movements that cause burning pain and occasional bleeding. The Veteran refused a rectal examination, as he denied current hemorrhoids. He did not note any current treatment for the condition. No functional impact was observed. 

The Veteran underwent an additional VA rectum and anus conditions examination in June 2024. On examination, the Veteran reported oral and topical treatment for his hemorrhoids, but no functional impact was observed. He endorsed current symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea. The Veteran again refused an examination of the rectal/anal area, denying external hemorrhoids and any issues with rectum externally at the time of examination.

Treatment records during the period on appeal note that the Veteran is service connected for hemorrhoids. However, other than those notations the treatment records associated with the file do not contain any additional assessments of its severity.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a higher rating is not warranted. In this regard, the Veteran's hemorrhoids more nearly approximated mild or moderate symptoms. He did not have large or thrombotic, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences or persistent bleeding with secondary anemia or fissures. Accordingly, a rating in excess of zero percent is not warranted for the Veteran's hemorrhoids. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7336.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements as to experiencing many episodes of occasional pain and bleeding that he attributed to his hemorrhoids. Although the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his observable symptoms, he does not have the medical knowledge or training to provide an opinion as to whether these symptoms are due to his hemorrhoids or another medical condition. He has not been shown to possess the requisite training or credentials needed to render a competent opinion as to the severity of his resection of hemorrhoids. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an increased rating for hemorrhoids is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding in favor of the Veteran's increased rating claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), is therefore not for application as to these claims. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension

The Veteran seeks an increased initial rating for his service-connected hypertension, which he generally contends are more severe than his current rating reflects. 

The Veteran's hypertension was assigned an initial noncompensable rating from January 23, 2023, forward, the effective date of the grant of service connection, under Diagnostic Code 7101. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under Diagnostic Code 7101, a 10 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, systolic pressure predominantly 160 or more, or for a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more which requires continuous medication for control. A 20 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 110 or more or systolic pressure predominantly 200 or more. A 40 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 120 or more. A 60 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 130 or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

Hypertension must be confirmed by readings taken two or more times on at least three different days. Id., Note 1. The term hypertension means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm or greater. Id. Where, as here, the Diagnostic Code contemplates the effect of the medication, the disability is to be rated as the symptoms are with the medication. McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267 (2016). Where a Diagnostic Code does not provide a noncompensable rating, a noncompensable rating shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable rating are not met. 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Turning to the relevant evidence, the Veteran was provided with a VA examination for his hypertension in July 2023. The examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment plan for hypertension included taking continuous medication. It was also noted that the Veteran did not have a history of diastolic blood pressure elevation to predominantly 100 or more. The three blood pressure readings taken during the examination were as follows: 173/92, 154/85, and 155/85. The examiner characterized the functional impact of the Veteran's hypertension as difficulty with concentrating at work due to lightheadedness and headaches.

In his November 2024 hearing, the Veteran testified to consistently taking medication for his high blood pressure experiencing constant dizziness.

VA treatment records throughout the appeal period contain numerous blood pressure readings. The Veteran's systolic pressure was consistently below 160 and diastolic pressure was below 100. In September 2023, the Veteran's blood pressure reading was 127/71. In January 2024, the Veteran's blood pressure reading was 145/70, and on repeat reading during the same visit, the Veteran's blood pressure was 143/73. In March 2024, the Veteran's blood pressure reading was 118/68. In April 2024, the Veteran's blood pressure reading was 125/82. In May 2024, the Veteran's blood pressure reading was 134/75.

There is no evidence that the July 2023 examiner was not competent and credible. Further, the examiner's assessments of the severity of the Veteran's hypertension were supported by the examiners' own objective findings and extensive citations to in-service and post-service treatment records. As such, the Board finds that the examination reports are entitled to significant probative weight as to the severity of the Veteran's disability during the period on appeal. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

Based on the foregoing, the evidence is against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for hypertension. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's hypertension did not manifest in diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more or systolic pressure predominantly 160 or more, or a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more. Predominant is defined as "for the most part" or "mainly." MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 978 (11 ed. 2003). In this case, the Veteran's VA examination and treatment records show the Veteran's systolic or diastolic pressures did not predominantly rise to the level contemplated by a compensable rating for hypertension during the period on appeal. Id.; see 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, DC 7101.

While the evidence of record does show that the Veteran requires continuous medication for his blood pressure, as there is no evidence of a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, the Veteran's disability picture does not more nearly approximate the level of severity contemplated by a compensable rating for hypertension. As such, a compensable rating for hypertension is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, DC 7101.

The Veteran has only been diagnosed with hypertension, which is specifically covered by Diagnostic Code 7101. As such, it would be inappropriate to rate his disability by analogy to any other Diagnostic Codes. Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 33637 (2015) (reiterating that when a disability is specifically listed in the rating schedule it may not be rated by analogy). Thus, consideration of any alternative Diagnostic Codes is not warranted in this case.

Accordingly, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's hypertension is not warranted for the period on appeal. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application and the Veteran's claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

4. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder

The Veteran seeks an increased initial rating for his service-connected PTSD, which he generally contends are more severe than his current rating reflects. 

The Veteran's PTSD is assigned an initial 70 percent from January 23, 2023, the effective date of the grant of service connection, under Diagnostic Code 9411, for PTSD. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. PTSD is rated using the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).

Under Diagnostic Code 9411, which is governed by a General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and/or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

According to the applicable rating criteria, when evaluating a mental disorder, the frequency, severity, duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission must be considered. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126; see Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based upon all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely upon the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id. When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. Id.

The "such symptoms as" language means "for example," and does not represent an exhaustive list of symptoms that must be found before granting the rating of that category. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). The list of examples provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating. Id. However, this fact does not make the provided list of symptoms irrelevant. See Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 11617 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The Veteran must still demonstrate either the particular symptoms associated with the rating sought, or other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Id. at 117.

VA must engage in a holistic analysis that assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the psychiatric disability; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Based on a careful review of all the subjective and clinical evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder does not warrant a higher 70 percent evaluation under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at any time during the period on appeal. In other words, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is not characterized by total occupational and social impairment.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, in February 2024, the Veteran underwent an interview and psychiatric evaluation with a private psychologist, Q.A.S., PhD. On evaluation, socially, the Veteran reported that he is married and but the two have not been intimate in over fifteen years. He continued that he has two adult children with whom he has a limited relationship.

Regarding occupational history, the Veteran reported that after separation from service, he worked in sales for a number of years but had to leave work due to his Crohn's disease.

The Veteran reported significant issues with his mood and that he lives a very constricted lifestyle. He continued that all he wants to do is sleep all the time, has a poor appetite, and he feels too numb to cry. He endorsed high levels of inappropriate guilt. He reported that he typically sleeps from 6:00 PM to 4:00 AM, and frequently has nightmares about service. He stated his only coping skill is to take long walks.

He endorsed symptoms of anxiety, recurrent unwanted memories, frequent nightmares, high levels of stress, avoidance of specific triggers such as driving, anhedonia, difficulty concentrating and trouble falling and staying asleep, thus he and his wife sleep in separate rooms.

On mental status examination, the private psychologist found the Veteran oriented in all spheres, with speech within normal limits for rate, rhythm, and prosody, though he often rambled in his narratives. He presented with an anxious and sad demeanor. Neither psychosis nor thought disorder signs or symptoms were seen during this evaluation. The Veteran denied any history of auditory or visual hallucinations. His thought processes were clear and linear, though distractable throughout. His short- and long-term memory were observed to be tact. His insight was found to be fair, judgement limited, and his impulsivity is high.  He acknowledged a history of suicidal and homicidal ideation in the past. 

The private psychologist observed the Veteran's interpersonal functioning is poor, noting him to be irritable and reactive, and often finds himself getting into fights with others. The Veteran reported that due to his short temper, he has been thrown out of several VFWs and all of his relationships have been disrupted. 

He continued that the Veteran exhibits marked occupational and social impairment across most domains of life due to his symptoms of continuous anxiety and panic, marked impairment in his moods, thoughts and motivation, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment records, which do not contain any additional psychiatric treatment during the period on appeal.

At a hearing before the undersigned VLJ in November 2024, the Veteran reported that his wife had recently asked him for a divorce, however he was unsure if they were going to go forward with separation. He testified in regard to disliking being around people and crowds as they make him very nervous. However, he did note that he enjoys attending church, however, he prefers to sit alone in the back of services. He continued that he perceives everything as a confrontation. Regarding his social life, he goes to the American Legion for bingo on Wednesdays and Fridays. He endorsed experiencing anxiety, forgetfulness, trouble going to sleep, and focusing but stated he has no trouble eating, showering or washing his clothes.

After review, when considering all pertinent evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have not shown to result in total social and occupational impairment during the appeal period. Indeed, the Veteran has been able to maintain close relationships (i.e. his children and his wife). See February 2024 private psychological assessment.

After review, when considering all pertinent evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have not shown to result in total social and occupational impairment during the appeal period. Indeed, the Veteran has been able to maintain social relationships (i.e. his wife and children as well as attending church and weekly bingo). See February 2024 private psychological assessment, November 2024 hearing testimony.

Further, none of the above evidence reflects that the Veteran's PTSD has caused gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; gross inappropriate behavior; or persistent danger of hurting self or others. Although the Veteran consistently endorsed inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of personal hygiene, the Board notes that VA examiners and treatment providers consistently found him to be adequately groomed both on examination and during routine appointments. As such, the record does not show total occupational and social impairment as required for the 100 percent schedular rating.

The Veteran is competent to report on factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing difficulty sleeping with nightmares, resistance to socializing, and trouble remembering things from both the short and long terms. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994). The Board also must rely on the medical evidence of record to assign the appropriate disability rating.

The Board does not dispute that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder causes him significant distress and impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. However, the Veteran is compensated for this impairment with a 70 percent disability rating. The Board must assign a rating based on a cumulative review of the medical and lay evidence of record, which, in this case, does not show a disability picture that more nearly approximates total occupational and social impairment. No other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration to those listed under the 100 percent criteria have been demonstrated.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a rating in excess of 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against it. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

5. Entitlement to a TDIU 

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. A finding of total disability is appropriate "when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation." See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340(a)(1), 4.15.

A TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total and it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of either (1) a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or (2) two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

If a sufficient rating is present, then it must be at least as likely as not that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of that disease. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). The central inquiry is, "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). The issue is not whether the Veteran can find employment generally, but whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. at 363.

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" has been interpreted to consist of two components: one economic and one noneconomic. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 7274 (2019). The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. at 73.

With respect to the noneconomic component, when determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, consideration should be given to the following: (1) the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; (2) whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities required; and, (3) whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue. Id. at 7374.

The Board notes that the ultimate question of whether a Veteran is capable of substantially gainful employment is not a medical one; that determination is for the adjudicator. Geib v. Shinseki, 773 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Thus, the conclusions of VA examiners are not dispositive. However, the observations of the examiners regarding functional impairment due to service-connected disability go to the question of physical or mental limitations that may impact the Veteran's ability to obtain and maintain employment.

The Veteran's claim for a TDIU was raised during the pendency of his appeal of increased rating claim for his service-connected Crohn's disease pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). In Rice, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that a TDIU rating is part of an increased rating claim when such issue is raised by the record. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Therefore, the issue of a TDIU is raised by the record, is part and parcel of the increased rating claim, and is properly before the Board. Id. Thus, the TDIU is part of the current appeal.

In this case, the Veteran's combined rating was at least 70 percent with PTSD being rated 70 percent from January 23, 2023. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran met the schedular criteria for assignment of a TDIU under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) as of January 23, 2023.

The question before the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude him from engaging in substantially gainful employment consistent with his educational and occupational background.

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded him from obtaining or maintaining a substantially gainful occupation.

In private medical records and in his hearing testimony in November 2024, the Veteran contended that he has been unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment since he last worked in 2002. In his statement, the Veteran described Crohn's disease as the disability that primarily impacted his ability to work.

The record reflects that the Veteran has not worked since 2002. The record further reflects that the Veteran obtained his GED during service with no additional specialized training. Prior to his retirement, he worked as a car salesman.

On examination in January 2024, the VA examiner described the functional impact of the Veteran's Crohn's disease as recurrent cramping with colicky pain of the lower abdomen that persists for several days with bloody stools, explosive stools, and occasional incontinence that requires close proximity to the bathroom, especially after meals, and caused him losing approximately a week of worktime in the last 12 months of his employment as a car salesman prior to retirement.  

Furthermore, in February 2024, a private psychologist found that due to his service-connected PTSD, the Veteran exhibited marked occupational and social impairment across most domains of life due to his symptoms of continuous anxiety and panic, marked impairment in his moods, thoughts and motivation, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

On examination later that year in May 2024, the examiner observed that due to his Crohn's disease, the Veteran to be limited at times due to irregular bowels with diarrhea, bowel distention, and abdominal pain that impacts work and day-to-day life as he has to stop to take breaks in between to use the bathroom and has to change up his work schedule to his bowel habits.

Furthermore, in February 2024, a private psychologist found that due to his service-connected PTSD, the Veteran exhibited marked occupational and social impairment across most domains of life due to his symptoms of continuous anxiety and panic, marked impairment in his moods, thoughts and motivation, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

In January 2025, a private vocational expert, K.M. M.Ed., assessed whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, considered collectively, prevented him from securing and maintaining substantially gainful employment. The private professional reviewed the Veteran's claims file, including his service and post-service medical records and information explaining his educational background and past work history, interviewed the Veteran and conducted a transferable skills analysis. They then prepared a comprehensive, well-reasoned report, concluding that, with a high degree of certainty, the Veteran has been unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation since at least January 23, 2023, due to his service-connected disabilities, particularly Crohn's disease and PTSD.

Based on the Veteran's employment history and the functional limitations described above, the Board finds that he was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation. In this regard, the subjective report of the Veteran and the objective findings in the VA examination show that the Veteran's service-connected Crohn's disease and PTSD significantly impacts his ability to function in an occupational setting. Further, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected Crohn's disease and PTSD limits his ability to perform tasks critical to his previous work.

Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence for and against the claim is in approximate balance. Accordingly, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, and entitlement to a TDIU is warranted for the period from January 23, 2023, to July 1, 2024. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

From July 1, 2024, to the present, the Veteran is in receipt of a 100 percent combined evaluation. 

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rosenthal, Ariana

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.