Citation Nr: A25032134
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453810
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1986 to January 1990. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for a TBI. In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, in which he elected the Direct review docket.

The Board notes that the Veteran listed a June 2023 rating decision as the decision he wished to appeal. Since this decision was issued more than a year before the Veteran filed a VA form 10182, it is not appealable. However, the Veteran clearly indicated that he wished to appeal the denial of the claim for service connection for TBI. Thus, the Board will accept the June 2024 rating decision as the rating decision on appeal and proceed with the claim.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a TBI, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As this case is being decided under VA's modernized appeal system, pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (known as the AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. The relevant favorable finding identified in the June 2024 decision was that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service because treatment records from November 1986 show the Veteran was in a motor vehicle accident and a suture was applied to a head laceration. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

TBI

The Veteran contends that he had a TBI in service when he was in a motor vehicle accident. He reported continuing symptoms of insomnia, irritability, mood swings, depression, and reduction in cognitive reasoning. He stated that these symptoms caused him to end his service with the Air Force. 

As stated in the AOJ's favorable findings, the Veteran was in a motor vehicle accident in 1986 and sustained a head laceration. 

In a December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with a TBI, and the examiner listed the date of diagnosis as November 1986. 

The Veteran first attended a VA examination specifically for his TBI in August 2022. The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with a TBI. The Veteran reported memory problems and agitation, stating he must adhere to a strict routine to avoid problems. Overall, the examiner found it was less likely than not that the Veteran had a TBI which was incurred in or caused by his in-service motor vehicle accident. The examiner reasoned that since the Veteran showed no signs of concussion or brain injury at the time of the accident and he had not complained of any such symptoms at any other medical appointments, he must not have had a TBI. 

The Board finds this medical opinion inadequate because a lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an "absolute bar" to the service connection claim and cannot be used as a rationale in explaining why the current disability is not related to service. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Additionally, the examiner failed to give a fully reasoned medical explanation for the Veteran's current symptoms or explain why they could not have been caused by a 1986 TBI. Therefore, this opinion is given little probative value. 

In a May 2023 personal statement, the Veteran stated that at the time of the crash, he did not receive detailed medical attention, and an MRI was not performed. In VA treatment records from 1991, the Veteran reported the same information, thus corroborating his statement. In the May 2023 statement, the Veteran also reported consistent symptoms of insomnia, irritability, mood swings, depression, and reduction in cognitive reasoning, noting that these symptoms began after the 1986 accident and "persist to this day." He stated that these symptoms made it difficult to remain in the Air Force and caused him to leave service. He also stated that his symptoms made it difficult to complete his college degree after leaving service. 

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a private nexus opinion from a nurse practitioner who worked at the Veteran's neurologist's office. It is unclear if this nurse ever examined the Veteran. She stated that she did not have access to the Veteran's full medical records, but that if his 1986 motor vehicle accident did indeed occur, she believed it was more likely than not that the accident caused his TBI and his present symptoms. Unfortunately, the Board finds this opinion inadequate for the purposes of deciding this claim. It is unclear if the nurse ever examined the Veteran, and she stated herself that she did not have access to any of the Veteran's other medical or service-related documents. Therefore, this opinion is based on speculation and should be given little probative value. 

The Veteran attended a second VA examination in December 2023. Here, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a TBI and noted the Veteran's January 2023 MRI scan. The Veteran reported that at the time of the 1986 accident, he felt "dizzy and disoriented." He also reported current symptoms of difficulty with short term memory, forgetfulness, difficulty with word finding, anger, disorientation, and headaches. Overall, the examiner found it was as likely as not that the Veteran's TBI was incurred in or caused by his in-service motor vehicle accident. The examiner reasoned that while the Veteran's service treatment records do not specifically state he sustained a TBI at the time of the 1986 accident, the Veteran developed a lesion on his head which led to a worsening of his symptoms.

In May 2024, this examiner was asked to provide an addendum opinion for clarification regarding whether the Veteran's head lesion was a result of the laceration that occurred on active duty and subsequently led to the development of a diagnosis of cognitive impairment and TBI. In response, the examiner stated that based on the Veteran's reports of dizziness and disorientation at the time of the accident and his statement that he was not given a full medical assessment at the time of the accident, the Veteran likely sustained a TBI from the 1986 accident. However, the examiner extended his opinion, stating that this was likely a "mild TBI" and therefore was not the cause of the Veteran's current symptoms. Thus, "the Veteran does not have any deficits or residuals of the TBI that he sustained during his service in 1986."

The Board also finds this medical opinion inadequate. The examiner expressed two conflicting conclusions and failed to resolve them. While the first was a positive opinion, it did not answer the question of nexus between the Veteran's TBI and his service, but rather, stated that his in-service lesion caused his current symptoms. The second opinion did not give a fully formed medical rationale for the conclusion. Additionally, in making the statement "the [V]eteran does not have any deficits or residuals of the TBI that he sustained during his service in 1986", the examiner also ignored the Veteran's May 2023 personal statement as well as statements made during his exam that noted his dizziness and disorientation at the time of the accident and his persistent symptoms. For these reasons, this opinion is also inadequate to decide the claim, and a new opinion must be obtained. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination, with an appropriate physician who has not previously provided an opinion in this matter, to address the nature and etiology of any current TBI residual symptoms. If feasible, the examination may be held via telehealth and an opinion can be provided based on other medical evidence of record. The examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's entire claims file and must specify in the report that the claims file has been reviewed. The examiner should then address:

(a.) Does the Veteran have any current TBI residuals? What are these residuals?

(b.) For all possible residual symptoms found, is it as likely as not that they were caused by a head injury in service? Please discuss the Veteran's assertions that he incurred a head injury when he was in a 1986 motor vehicle accident and that after the accident, he felt dizzy and disoriented. 

Please also discuss the Veteran's reports of symptoms from 1986 to present as well as his report of leaving the Air Force and having difficulty completing his degree due to his symptoms. 

Please discuss any service treatment records or personnel records that support these assertions, or, if the Veteran is not found to be credible, the evidence that supports this finding.

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner must consider and discuss any conflicting medical evidence or opinions of record.

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered. If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Black

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.