Citation Nr: A25032200
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-430215
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 1975 to March 1979.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In November 2023, the Veteran filed a Request for a Higher Level Review of the November 2023 rating decision.  In a March 2024 Higher Level Review rating decision, the RO continued the denial of the claim.  In April 2024, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), selecting Direct Review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  Thus, the Board will review evidence as of the date of the November 2023 rating decision.  

Entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his claimed for Parkinson's disease is due to service, including as due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) of military police.  

A review of the record reflects that the Veteran served in Okinawa City, Japan, where his MOS was military police.  

The service medical record of evidence reflects the June 1975 report of medical history for enlistment notes the Veteran's report of good health.  The accompanying June 1975 report of medical examination for enlistment is unremarkable.  A June 1977 service treatment record (STR) notes the Veteran's report of pain of the right hand, 1st and 2nd metacarpals with an assessment of soft tissue injury.  A January 1978 notes the Veteran's complaint of sore throat, nasal congestion, feverish and headaches.  A July 1978 STR notes the Veteran's complaint of cold sweats, headaches and nausea; he was assessed with tonsillitis and viral syndrome.  Another July 1978 STR notes the Veteran's complaint of neck pain and stiffness after striking the back of his neck against a metal bar behind a driver's seat.  The March 1979 report of medical examination for separation is unremarkable.  

An October 2016 post service private treatment record notes the Veteran's assessment of Parkinson's disease.  

In a statement submitted to private nurse practitioner A.E. in October 2023, the Veteran was quoted by A.E. to have said 

I've found myself reliving the things I witnessed in the military through nightmares.  Sometimes, these memories come up on their own, but sometimes things trigger them.  Most of the time, I get triggered by the sight of weapons and violence, in general, or the sound of weapons, fireworks, and loud noises, in general.  Even my body reacts when I have distressing memories.  I'll start to sweat, panic, feel my heart race, and become restless.  

Continuing review of the record reflects that preliminary development for presumptive service connection as to whether the Veteran was exposed to a toxic risk activity in service yielded no concession.  However, an opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the condition, including a direct service connection opinion with discussion of the STRs of record has not been obtained.  

The record reflects that an opinion on the matter is not of record.  

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, remand is required only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  As part of its duty to assist, VA is required to make reasonable efforts to assist a Veteran in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  The assistance provided shall include providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d).  

The Board finds that such is the case with the current appeal.  Specifically, opinions on the matter based on the record of evidence have not been obtained.  The Veteran's lay statement regarding the etiology of the condition, as being related to his MOS of military police officer, and the medical evidence of record was sufficient to require examination and/ or opinion.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Yet, a direct service connection opinion was not obtained regarding the nature and etiology of the condition prior to the adjudication of the November 2023 claim.  

Additionally, the Veteran is service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), effective September 26, 2023, which succeeds the date of the instant claim.  Nonetheless, the Board finds that while not explicitly raised by the Veteran, a secondary service connection theory of entitlement has been raised, as the Veteran has said that his body reacts when he has distressing memories and he becomes restless.  The Board notes that VA is obligated to develop and adjudicate claims for secondary service connection that are reasonably raised during the processing of a properly initiated claim as to the primary service-connected disability's evaluation level.  Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 103.  As the ordinary meaning of 'complications' in 38 CF.R. § 3.155(d)(2) encompasses disabilities caused or aggravated by treatment for a service-connected disability, the regulation imposes a duty on the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) to consider claims for secondary service connection if they are raised during the course of adjudicating a complete claim concerning a related, primary disability.  However, a secondary service connection opinion was not obtained prior to adjudication of the November 2023 rating decision.  

The pre-decisional duty to assist error requires remand for correction.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d).  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to an appropriately qualified VA clinician and request the clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed Parkinson's disease.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  The opinion must include a notation that this record review took place.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  

After the record review, the reviewing clinician is asked to respond to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's Parkinson's disease is related to the Veteran's active-duty service?  In so doing, the examiner asked to directly address the Veteran's service, including the service treatment records (STRs) and the lay evidence of record.  

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's claimed Parkinson's disease was caused OR aggravated by his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)?  

A complete rationale for all opinions provided is required.  

Signature on the next page 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.