Citation Nr: A25032745
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-461215
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to recognition of the Appellant as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) benefits is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran and the Appellant were ceremonially married in March 2023 which is more than 15 years after the Veteran's separation from service in December 1970.

2.  No children were born of the marriage between the Veteran and the Appellant.

3.  The Veteran died in February 2024.

4.  Prior to the ceremonial marriage between the Veteran and the Appellant, the record does not show that they attempted to enter into a common law marriage without knowledge that the state of Florida does not recognize such marriages.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for recognition of the Appellant as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 103, 1102, 1304, 1310, 1311, 1541; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (j), 3.50, 3.52, 3.53, 3.204, 3.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active U.S. Army service from September 1967 to December 1970, including in combat in the Republic of Vietnam from September 1968 to April 1970.  He died in February 2024.  

The rating decision letter on appeal was issued in May 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on November 18, 2024, before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge.  Therefore, the Board only may consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal as well as any evidence submitted by the Appellant or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, then the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

The Appellant appointed her current service representative to represent her before VA by filing a completed VA Form 21-22 at the AOJ in September 2024.  This representative appeared before the Board at the November 18, 2024, hearing.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claim listed above, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, then VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

This appeal is advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107 and 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c).

Neither the Appellant nor her representative has raised any other issues nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 370 (2017).

The Board is not persuaded that the evidence supports granting the Appellant's claim of entitlement to recognition as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits.  She and her service representative concede that she and the Veteran were married for less than the regulatory requirement of 1 year prior to his death in order to recognize her as his surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits.  Nevertheless, the Appellant and her service representative essentially contend that it would be inequitable not to recognize her as the Veteran's surviving spouse because she and the Veteran were in a relationship prior to their ceremonial marriage and because she cared for the Veteran as his health declined prior to his death.  Having reviewed the record evidence, the Board finds that the Appellant has not met the criteria for recognition as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits.  

It is undisputed that the Veteran and the Appellant were married at the time of his death in March 2024.  The Appellant submitted a marriage certificate confirming that the two wed in a March 2023 ceremony held in the state of Florida.  Marriage to the Veteran at the time of the Veteran's death is a threshold requirement for the payment of VA death benefits (including DIC benefits) to a surviving spouse.  It is not the only requirement, however.

The Board notes initially that the Appellant has the burden to establish her status as claimant.  Sandoval v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 7, 9 (1994).  The governing regulations define a surviving spouse as a person who was the spouse of the Veteran at the time of the Veteran's death and who: (1) lived with the Veteran continuously since the time of the parties' marriage to the date of the Veteran's death, unless there was a separation which was due to the misconduct of, or procured by, the Veteran without the fault of the spouse; and (2) has not remarried and has not held himself or herself out to the public as the spouse with whom he or she was then cohabiting, except as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.55 (pertaining to certain terminations of subsequent marriages).  38 C.F.R. § 3.50(b).  With respect to the DIC benefits sought by the Appellant in this appeal, VA imposes an additional requirement regarding the timing of the marriage to the Veteran.  For marriages which occurred after the Veteran's period of service, as in this appeal, DIC benefits are payable to a surviving spouse in the following circumstances: (1) when the marriage occurred within 15 years after the termination of the period in service in which the injury or disease causing the Veteran's death was incurred or aggravated; (2) when the marriage occurred more than 1 year before the Veteran's death; or (3) for any length of marriage when a child was born of the marriage or born to the couple prior to the marriage.  38 C.F.R. § 3.54(c) (emphasis added).  

For purposes of VA benefits, marriage means a marriage valid under the law of the place where the parties resided at the time of the marriage or the law of the place where the parties resided when the right to benefits accrued.  38 C.F.R. § 103(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(j).  As relevant to this appeal, marriage is established by a copy or abstract of the public record of marriage or a copy of the church record of marriage containing sufficient data to identify the parties, the date and place of marriage, and the number of prior marriages if shown on the official record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.205(a).

Here, it is undisputed that the Veteran's marriage to the Appellant in March 2023 occurred more than 15 years after his separation from service in December 1970.  The Appellant does not contend - and the evidence does not show - that she and the Veteran had a child before or during their 11 month marriage.  The Appellant also does not contend that she and the Veteran entered into a common law marriage at any time prior to their ceremonial marriage in March 2023.  She reported consistently that she and the Veteran began their relationship in September 2022 and, although he proposed marriage in approximately December 2022, his significant and worsening health problems precluded their ceremonial marriage until March 2023.  She testified at the November 2024 Board hearing that she and the Veteran were together for 2 years prior to his death.  She next testified that, although she and the Veteran lived together prior to their ceremonial marriage in March 2023, she maintained a separate household from him and did not sell her home until after their ceremonial marriage in March 2023.  She also testified that she only moved in with the Veteran after their ceremonial marriage in March 2023.  See Board hearing transcript dated November 18, 2024, at pp. 9 10.  The Veteran and the Appellant lived in the state of Florida at all times relevant to this appeal.  The Board notes that Florida does not recognize common law marriage.  Thus, the Veteran and the Appellant did not have a legally valid marriage of sufficient length for DIC benefits purposes.  

The Board's determination that the Veteran and the Appellant did not have a legally valid marriage of sufficient length (more than 1 year) for DIC benefits purposes does not end the inquiry.  VA regulations allow for a marriage to be deemed valid when the claimant's marriage to the Veteran was invalid by reason of a legal impediment if: (1) the marriage occurred one year or more before the Veteran's death or for any period if a child was born to the couple; (2) if the claimant entered into the marriage without knowledge of the impediment; (3) if the claimant cohabited with the Veteran continuously from the date of marriage to the date of the Veteran's death; and (4) if no claim has been filed by a legal surviving spouse who has been found entitled to gratuitous death benefits.  38 C.F.R. § 3.52.  Relevant caselaw makes clear that lack of knowledge that common-law marriage was not recognized as valid by the state of residence is just such a legal impediment contemplated by 38 C.F.R. § 3.52.  Lamour v. Peake, 544 F.3d 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2008).  If the claimant seeking recognition as a surviving spouse and the Veteran in question entered into a marriage in a state prohibiting common-law marriage without knowledge of that prohibition, such a marriage may be deemed valid in certain circumstances.  The Board emphasizes that the determination of a claimant's knowledge as to a legal impediment is evaluated by VA based on the Appellant's state of mind at the time that the invalid marriage was contracted.  Dedicatoria v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 441 (1995).

The Appellant again does not contend that she and the Veteran attempted to enter into a common law marriage prior to their March 2023 ceremonial marriage under Florida state law.  It is not clear from a review of the record evidence when they began cohabitating prior to their ceremonial marriage.  As noted above, the Appellant testified both that she began living with the Veteran prior to their ceremonial marriage in March 2023 and also maintained a separate household from the Veteran and did not sell her home until after their ceremonial marriage in March 2023.  See Board hearing transcript dated November 18, 2024, at pp. 9 10.  Having reviewed the record evidence, the Board finds that the Appellant and the Veteran were not married under common law prior to March 2023 and did not believe that they were entering into a legally valid common law marriage prior to their March 2023 ceremonial marriage.

The Board does not doubt that the Appellant and the Veteran were in a loving, committed relationship prior to their ceremonial marriage in March 2023, as shown in the numerous statements received in support of her claim.  The Board also is sympathetic to the Appellant's firm belief that she is entitled to recognition as the Veteran's surviving spouse based on their long-term committed relationship.  The Board further appreciates the care which the Appellant provided to the Veteran before and during their marriage as his health declined prior to his death, as also shown in the numerous statements received in support of her claim.  Nevertheless, the evidence clearly shows that the Appellant neither intended to enter into a common-law marriage to the Veteran nor that she was unaware that Florida prohibited that type of union.  In other words, the evidence precludes the Board from deeming any such attempted common-law marriage as valid.  Having reviewed the record evidence, the Board finds that the only valid or deemed valid marriage of record between the Veteran and the Appellant lasted for 11 months and was of insufficient length to recognize her as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits.  

The Appellant's argument in support of her claim rests squarely on an exhortation to VA that it should grant her claim because it would be inequitable to do otherwise.  Unfortunately, although sympathetic to the Appellant, the Board is bound by the law and regulations and has no authority to grant benefits on an equitable basis.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 503, 7104; Harvey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 416, 425 (1994).  The Court has held that "no equities, no matter how compelling, can create a right to payment out of the United States Treasury which has not been provided for by Congress."  Smith (Edward F.) v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1992).  And the record evidence does not support granting the Appellant's claim for recognition as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits.  The evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  In summary, the Board finds that the criteria for recognition of the Appellant as the Veteran's surviving spouse for the purpose of entitlement to DIC benefits have not been met.  The appeal is denied.

 

 

David Robertson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael T. Osborne, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.