Citation Nr: A25032777
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-444715
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for right shoulder pain is remanded.

Service connection for left knee pain is remanded.

Service connection for right knee pain is remanded.

Service connection for lower back pain is remanded.

Service connection for teeth grinding is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force National Guard from January 2019 to May 2019, May 14, 2020 to May 29, 2020, February 2021 to June 2021, January 2022 to March 2022, and May 2022 to June 2022. He served in the National Guard from January 2019 to October 2023. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, or agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) in May 2024, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1). Under the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the rating decision was promulgated.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the Veteran's claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for right shoulder pain 

2. Service connection for left knee pain 

3. Service connection for right knee pain 

4. Service connection for lower back pain  

5. Service connection for teeth grinding

It appears that there may be service records that have not been associated with the claims file. Moreover, there appear to be periods of active duty, active duty for training (ACDUTRA), and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA) that are insufficiently documented. On remand, the AOJ must specifically obtain all service personnel records and verify and provide the dates and types of military service.

The March 2024 Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellations noted that the back and knee examinations were cancelled. The requests memorialized, "EMS Reason: Cancelled at Veteran/Servicemember's request." See March 28, 2024 Exam Requests. The record does not provide any further details regarding the cancelled examinations.

The Board finds that the failure to afford the Veteran appropriate examinations, or the lack of documentation as to whether all means to conduct the VA examinations have been exhausted, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. On remand, the AOJ should make attempts to schedule the appropriate medical examinations. Any attempts to schedule an examination must be fully documented in the file for the duty to assist to be fulfilled.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain through official sources any of the Veteran's service personnel records and service treatment records that are not currently associated with the claims file. If after attempts have been made to obtain those records, those records are unavailable and it is determined that further attempts would be futile, such should be noted in a memorandum of unavailability that is placed in the claims file and the Veteran and his representative, if any, should be so notified.

2. Verify all periods of active service, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA that the Veteran may have had from January 2019 to the present. The AOJ should document the specific start and end dates of any period of service, as well as the type of service the Veteran engaged in during that period of service. Any results should be documented in a memorandum and associated with the claims file.

3. Schedule the Veteran for examinations pertaining to the claimed back and knee examination.

The entire claims file must be made available to the designated examiner. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

The examiner should clearly identify whether the Veteran has any back and knee disabilities. Then, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability (1) had their onset in or is otherwise related to service, to include back pain began with hiking with 35 to 50 pounds on the back while wildland firefighting during service; (2) the left knee disability had their onset in or is otherwise related to service, to include an in-service strain/sprain as a result of being hit with a shield; and, (3) the right knee disability was caused by or aggravated (increased in severity) by nonservice connected back disability.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment, and that his reports must be considered.

(Continued on next page.)

?

A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the clinician(s) cannot provide a requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and the clinician(s) must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation. The clinician(s) must indicate whether there was any further need for information or testing necessary to make a determination. Additionally, the clinician(s) must indicate whether any opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of knowledge in the medical community at large and not those of the particular clinician.

 

 

Paulette Vance Burton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.L.N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.