Citation Nr: A25032966
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434091
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cancer of the esophagus and stomach, to include malignant neoplasm of esophagus with esophagectomy involving the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction with invasion into the adventitial soft tissue, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for cancer of the lymph nodes, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for lung cancer, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's cancer of the esophagus and stomach is not etiologically related to active service and did not have its onset during service. 

2. The Veteran's cancer of the lymph nodes is not etiologically related to active service and did not have its onset during service.

3. The Veteran's lung cancer is not etiologically related to active service and did not have its onset during service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for cancer of the esophagus and stomach, to include malignant neoplasm of esophagus with esophagectomy involving the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction with invasion into the adventitial soft tissue, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

2. The criteria for service connection for cancer of the lymph nodes, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for service connection for lung cancer, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1972 to August 1976 with service at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2023 rating decision.  In October 2023 the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued an HLR decision which identified a duty to assist error. The AOJ conducted additional development and issued a special review rating decision in March 2024.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the April 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Service Connection Criteria

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R.            § 3.303(a). Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may also be granted on a presumptive basis for certain chronic diseases, listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). Presumptive service connection for such diseases may be considered on three bases: chronicity during service, continuity of symptomatology since service, and manifestations to a degree of 10 percent disabling or more within one year of the veteran's separation from service. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307(a)(3); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Continuity of symptomatology may be shown by demonstrating (1) that a condition was 'noted' during service or any applicable presumptive period; (2) evidence of post-service continuity of the same symptomatology; and (3) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of a nexus between the present disability and the post-service symptomatology. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007).

Current law also provides an additional means to establish presumptive service connection as applicable to Camp Lejeune Contaminated Water related claims, even though there is no record of such disease during service. Presumptive service connection is available if such specified condition manifests to a compensable degree at any time after service in a veteran who had no fewer than 30 days (consecutive or nonconsecutive) of service at the United States Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune and/or Marine Corps Air Station New River in North Carolina during the period beginning on August 1, 1953 and ending on December 31, 1987, provided that the rebuttable presumption provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(d) are also satisfied. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 (a)(7), 3.309(f).

The Veteran's record confirms his service at Camp Lejeune for more than 30 days during the required period. However, the Veteran's claimed conditions (cancer of the esophagus and stomach, cancer of the lymph nodes, and lung cancer) are not included in the list of specific diseases where the presumptions provided by 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f) apply. Therefore, the provisions of presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f) are not applicable to the Veteran's appeals.

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record. To evaluating lay evidence, to include a veteran's statements about his health conditions, competent evidence is "limited to that which the witness has actually observed and is within the realm of his personal knowledge." See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer); (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature. Id. see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009). 

The Board must determine, as a question of fact, both the weight and credibility of the evidence. Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in a record and every item does not have the same probative value. The Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of all material evidence submitted by and on behalf of a claimant, account for the evidence that it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995); Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36 (1994); Abernathy v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 461 (1992); Simon v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 621 (1992); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 164 (1991). The veteran's credibility affects the weight to be given to his testimony and lay statements, and it is the Board's responsibility to determine the appropriate weight. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Although the Board is obligated to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no obligation to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence of record. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence). Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as it relates to the Veteran's claims.

1.  Entitlement to service connection for cancer of the esophagus and stomach, to include malignant neoplasm of esophagus with esophagectomy involving the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction with invasion into the adventitial soft tissue, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is denied.

The Veteran seeks service connection for cancer of the esophagus and stomach as etiologically related to service. The Veteran contends that his esophageal and stomach cancer is due to exposure to contaminated water while stationed at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. See July 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ). The Veteran's military personnel records confirm that the Veteran had service at Camp Lejeune for greater than 30 days between 1972 and 1976. 

A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with esophageal adenocarcinoma status post esophagectomy in January 2023. Additional favorable findings established at least 30 days of service at Camp Lejeune between 1972 and 1976, found that the Veteran had been exposed to contaminated water during military service and that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, and conceded participation in a toxic exposure risk activity. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 

The March 2024 rating decision also found that the Veteran's claimed disability, namely esophageal cancer, is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service if diagnosed to a compensable degree within a year after discharge from service under the criteria listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). The Board is not bound by this finding because it is factually inaccurate. Esophageal cancer is not listed as a chronic disease which may be presumptively service connected under the provisions in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), but rather is listed as a chronic disease for which service connection may be available to radiation-exposed Veterans under the provisions of  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d). Thus, the Board will overturn the AOJ's favorable finding that the Veteran's esophageal cancer may be presumptively service connected under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).

The Veteran's service treatment records include a complaint of a gassy feeling in the stomach associated with complaints of ocular pain, headache, and nausea without stomach pain. The Veteran was diagnosed with ocular strain and prescribed medication for indigestion.  The records also include one report of treatment for effects of alcohol consumption and one report of dry cough associated with flu syndrome. See October 1973,  April 1974, May 1974 service treatment records. The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any other complaints of, symptoms of, treatment for, or diagnosis of any gastrointestinal condition or symptoms including gastrointestinal reflux disease. As noted above, the Veteran contends that his esophageal and stomach cancer was caused by exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

Post-service treatment records show a diagnosis of, and treatment for, cancer of the esophagus and stomach. See, e.g., November 2022 through January 2023 private treatment records. A January 2023 private treatment record lists primary adenocarcinoma of lower third of the esophagus as an active problem.

Turning to the question of whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's service and his cancer of the esophagus and stomach, the Board notes that the record contains several etiology opinions which must be considered and weighed. See Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993). When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other. See Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998), citing Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995). The Board will consider each opinion below.

The September 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran was diagnosed with esophageal adenocarcinoma in November 2022 and that no other esophageal, stomach, or gastrointestinal diagnosis was found. Responsive to the Veteran's contention that exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune caused his cancer of the esophagus and stomach, the VA examiner provided a medical opinion for toxic exposure risk activities. The examiner noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. In the rationale supporting this conclusion, the examiner noted that the Veteran's June 2023 pathology report showed that the Veteran's adenocarcinoma arose in a background of a condition known as Barrett's esophagus and explained that Barrett's esophagus is a precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma which results from long term exposure to stomach acid/gastroesophageal reflux disease. The examiner also explained that medical literature search did not show conclusive evidence of direct causal relationship between contaminated water exposure at Camp Lejeune and development of esophageal adenocarcinoma. In his discussion of the pathology note regarding Barrett's esophagus, the December 2023 examiner did not address secondary service connection. The Board finds that secondary service connection is not raised by the record because there is no evidence of complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of Barrett's esophagus prior to the June 2023 private pathology report or of gastroesophageal reflux disease at any time. 

The Veteran was provided a VA medical opinion for toxic exposure risk activities for esophageal adenocarcinoma in December 2023. The December 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's cancer of the esophagus and stomach was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water. The examiner thoroughly explained the medical mechanism of esophageal adenocarcinoma and esophagectomy and found that there was no substantial medical literature to support that any toxic exposure can lead to esophageal carcinoma status post-esophagectomy. 

A February 2024 examiner found that the claimed condition was less likely that not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water. The examiner noted the Veteran's report of vomiting and dysphagia in 2022 and the July 2023 diagnosis of malignant neoplasm of lower third of esophagus, reviewed the Veteran's complete medical history for signs and symptoms of esophageal cancer including difficulty swallowing, unexplained weight loss, chest pain, pressure or burning, worsening indigestion or heartburn, and coughing or hoarseness, and found no evidence of such symptoms prior to the Veteran seeking treatment for difficulty swallowing in 2022 except the  Veteran's October 1973 report of indigestion in service. The examiner specifically addressed this report and found that the Veteran's subsequent record did not provide objective evidence of chronicity or continuity of care, symptoms, diagnoses, complaints of, or encounters for the claimed condition while in service or after service. The examiner opined that the claimed esophageal adenocarcinoma was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. The February 2024 examiner, like previous examiners, noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water, conducted a detailed review of the Veteran's medical history, and evaluated and weighed the evidence of the Veteran's personal risk factors against the medical literature in reaching this conclusion.  

The Board finds the September 2023, December 2023, and February 2024 VA opinions adequate to decide the Veteran's claim. Each examination has clear conclusions and supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (U.S. 2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Each opinion addresses the Veteran's contention that exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune caused his cancer of the stomach and esophagus. Notably, each VA examiner addressed other common and known risk factors, considered the Veteran's personal history and risk factors, and evaluated medical literature when concluding that the Veteran's cancer of the esophagus and stomach was less likely than not related to his military service. These opinions are therefore afforded great probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions and sincere belief that his cancer of the stomach and esophagus is etiologically related to his active service, to include as due to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. The Board notes that lay witnesses are competent to provide testimony or statements relating to symptoms or facts of events that the lay witness observed and is within the realm of his or her personal knowledge, but not competent to establish that which would require specialized knowledge or training, such as medical expertise. Layno v. Brown, supra. Lay evidence may also be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. The Board must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010).

In the instant case, the Board finds that the question regarding the potential relationship between the Veteran's cancer of the esophagus and stomach and any instance of his service to be complex in nature. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). While the Veteran is competent to describe his current symptoms, the Board accords his statements regarding the etiology of such claimed disorder little probative value as he is not competent to opine on such a complex medical question. Where the determinative issue is one of medical causation, only those with specialized medical knowledge, training, or experience are competent to provide evidence on the issue. See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137 (1994). In this case, the question of causation involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and requires the administration and interpretation of diagnostic testing, and there is no suggestion in the evidence of record that the Veteran has had any medical training. Hence, the Board finds that he is not competent to provide a medical opinion to support the claim based on his assertions alone. As such, the question of etiology in this case may not be competently addressed by lay evidence, and the opinions of the Veteran are nonprobative evidence.

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for cancer of the esophagus and stomach (malignant neoplasm of esophagus with esophagectomy involving the distal esophagus and gastroesophageal junction with invasion into the adventitial soft tissue), to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is not warranted. The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

2. Entitlement to service connection for cancer of the lymph nodes, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is denied.

The Veteran seeks service connection for cancer of the lymph nodes as etiologically related to service. The Veteran contends that his lymph node cancer is due to exposure to contaminated water while stationed at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with metastatic adenocarcinoma from the esophagus in the gastro-hepatic lymph nodes in December 2022. Additional favorable findings established at least 30 days of service at Camp Lejeune between 1972 and 1976, found that the Veteran had been exposed to contaminated water during military service, found that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, and conceded participation in a in a toxic exposure risk activity. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 

The March 2024 rating decision also found that the Veteran's claimed disability, namely cancer of the lymph nodes, is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service if diagnosed to a compensable degree within a year after discharge from service under the criteria listed in 38 C.F.R.               § 3.309(a). The Board is not bound by this finding because it is factually inaccurate. Cancer of the lymph nodes is not listed as a chronic disease which may be presumptively service connected under the provisions in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), Thus, the Board will overturn the AOJ's favorable finding that the Veteran's esophageal cancer may be presumptively service connected under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints of, symptoms of, treatment for, or diagnosis of  any hematologic or lymphatic conditions. As noted above, the Veteran contends that his cancer of the lymph nodes was caused by exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

Post-service treatment records show a diagnosis of, and treatment for malignant neoplasm metastatic to lymph nodes of multiple sites. See, e.g., February 2023 through July 2023 private medical records.

The Veteran was provided with a VA examination and medical nexus opinion for hematologic and lymphatic conditions in December 2023. The Board finds this opinion adequate to decide the claim. The examiner found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with esophageal cancer with metastasis to multiple sites including abdomen. No other lymphatic or hematologic condition was diagnosed. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness because the Veteran's service treatment records were negative for diagnoses of cancer, the Veteran's noted diagnosis was esophageal cancer with metastasis to multiple sites including abdomen, esophageal cancer is not a presumptive condition associated with exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, and the Veteran's medical records did not support that cancer of the lymph nodes was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by active service. This opinion has a clear conclusion and supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation sufficient for the Board to decide the claim and is afforded probative weight. Barr v. Nicholson, supra; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. This opinion is being afforded probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record. 

With respect to the Veteran's contention that his cancer of the lymph nodes was caused by exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, the Board notes that the Veteran was not provided a medical opinion for toxic exposure under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1168. However, such an opinion is not required here. 

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), in most cases where a disability is alleged to be due to toxic exposure, VA must obtain a medical examination and nexus opinion in service connection claims when there is (1) evidence of a disability; (2) evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during active military service; but (3) insufficient evidence to grant service connection for the disability. When an examination is provided, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic risk exposure activities involving the Veteran. The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the Veteran's claimed disability and the toxic exposure risk activity. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). If a VA examination for the claimed disability has already been obtained, but it did not consider participation in a toxic exposure risk activity, it is not sufficient to meet the requirements under 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). 

However, the Secretary has provided an exception to this examination requirement for disabilities with an etiology not associated with toxic exposure. This exception applies to claims where the evidence of record indicates that the claimed condition is clearly related to an etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure (to include a post-service event). See VBA Letter 20-24-06, Exception to Tera Examination and Medical Requirement (June 12, 2024). In the February 2024 VA medical opinion for the Veteran's cancer of the esophagus and stomach discussed above, the examiner noted that the medical evidence showed metastasis of the Veteran's esophageal cancer to the Veteran's lymph nodes. The Veteran's private medical records showed reports of multiple metastatic lymph nodes associated with the Veteran's esophageal condition and an active problem of malignant neoplasm of the lower third of the esophagus with malignant neoplasm metastatic to lymph nodes of multiple sites. See, e.g., December 2022 Positron Emission Technology (PET) results; February 2023 through July 2023 private medical records. Here, the medical evidence of record clearly indicated that the Veteran's claimed cancer of the lymph nodes metastasized from the Veteran's cancer of the esophagus, and the medical evidence of record also showed that the Veteran's cancer of the esophagus is a post-service event that is neither due to service nor associated with toxic exposure. Therefore, as the Veteran's cancer of the lymph nodes clearly has an etiology not associated with toxic exposure, a toxic risk exposure examination is not required.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions and sincere belief that his cancer of the lymph nodes is etiologically related to his active service, to include as due to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. The Board notes that lay witnesses are competent to provide testimony or statements relating to symptoms or facts that the lay witness observed and are within the realm of his or her personal knowledge but are not competent to establish that which would require specialized knowledge or training, such as medical expertise. Layno v. Brown, supra. Lay evidence may also be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. The Board must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to. See Waters v. Shinseki, supra.

In the instant case, the Board finds that the question regarding the potential relationship between the Veteran's cancer of the lymph nodes and any instance of his service to be complex in nature. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra. While the Veteran is competent to describe his current symptoms, the Board accords his statements regarding the etiology of such claimed disorder little probative value as he is not competent to opine on such a complex medical question. Where the determinative issue is one of medical causation, only those with specialized medical knowledge, training, or experience are competent to provide evidence on the issue. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In this case, the question of causation involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and requires the administration and interpretation of diagnostic testing, and there is no suggestion in the evidence of record that the Veteran has had any medical training. Hence, the Board finds that he is not competent to provide a medical opinion to support the claim based on his assertions alone. As such, the question of etiology of the Veteran's cancer of the lymph nodes may not be competently addressed by lay evidence, and the opinions of the Veteran are nonprobative evidence.

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for cancer of the lymph nodes, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is not warranted. The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

3. Entitlement to service connection for lung cancer, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is denied.

The Veteran seeks service connection for lung cancer as etiologically related to service. The Veteran contends that his lung cancer is due to exposure to contaminated water while stationed at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

A March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the lung in February 2023. Additional favorable findings established at least 30 days of service at Camp Lejeune between 1972 and 1976, found that the Veteran had been exposed to contaminated water during military service, found that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, and conceded participation in a toxic exposure risk activity. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 

The March 2024 rating decision also found that the Veteran's claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service if diagnosed to a compensable degree within a year after discharge from service under the criteria listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). With respect to this latter finding, the Board notes the September 2023 VA examination which, in addition to confirming the Veteran's diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of lung, noted that the Veteran's diagnosis included an active malignant pulmonary tumor or neoplasm. As malignant tumor is listed among the chronic diseases which may be presumptively service connected under the provisions in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  

The Veteran's service treatment records included one report of treatment for dry cough associated with flu syndrome. See May 1974 service treatment records. Post-service treatment records show a diagnosis of, and treatment for, adenocarcinoma of the lung. See April 2023 through July 2023 private treatment records.

A September 2023 VA examination noted that the Veteran has been diagnosed with an active pulmonary malignant tumor or neoplasm. As a malignant tumor is a presumptive condition listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309, the Board has first considered whether service connection for a malignant tumor is warranted on a presumptive basis, to include based on continuity of symptomatology. In this regard, the clinical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran manifested such disease to a compensable degree within the year following his discharge from active duty service. The Veteran was discharged in 1976, and post-service treatment records did not reflect any complaints of, symptoms of, or treatment for pulmonary neoplasm until the 2020s. Therefore, the Board finds that the claimed condition did not manifest within the year following discharge from service, and presumptive service connection for malignant tumor, to include based on continuity of symptomatology, is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Turning to the question of whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's service and his lung cancer on a direct basis, the Board notes that the record contains several etiology opinions which must be considered and weighed. See Hayes v. Brown, supra. When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other. See Evans v. West, supra, citing Owens v. Brown, supra. The Board will consider each opinion below.

A September 2023 VA respiratory examination noted that the Veteran reported a history of smoking beginning at age 14 and ending at age 62. The VA examiner found that the Veteran was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the lung in 2023. No other respiratory diagnosis was found. Responsive to the Veteran's contention that exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune caused his lung cancer, the VA examiner provided a medical opinion for toxic exposure risk activities. The examiner noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner reviewed medical literature, the Veteran's private oncology records, test results, operative results, service treatment records, and the Veteran's relevant medical history. The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's conceded exposure to the specific contaminants perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene. In reaching the conclusion that the Veteran's lung cancer was not due to toxic exposure in-service, the examiner weighed the Veteran's history of smoking against the medical literature associated with the development of adenocarcinoma of the lungs.  The examiner explained that medical literature established that smoking is the greatest risk factor in the development of adenocarcinoma of the lung and also explained that the medical literature was inconclusive regarding the relationship between contaminants, including benzene and vinyl chloride, and the development of lung adenocarcinoma.  The examiner found that that there was no current conclusive evidence to support a causal relationship between exposure to benzene, vinyl Chloride, TCE, PCE, and development of lung adenocarcinoma.

A December 2023 VA examiner opined that the veteran's lung cancer was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. In reaching this conclusion, the examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of lung cancer in 2023 and thoroughly explained the medical mechanism of lung cancer. The examiner noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water and reviewed the Veteran's September 2023 VA examination which documented the history of smoking. The December 2023 examiner found that smoking tobacco products was the greatest risk factor in developing lung cancer. The examiner acknowledged that exposure to PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene had been associated with the development certain types of cancer but found that a direct link between exposure to these contaminants at Camp Lejeune and the development of lung cancer specifically was not well-established and found that there was no substantial medical literature to support that such exposure can lead to the development of lung cancer. 

A February 2024 VA examiner found that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner, like previous examiners, noted the Veteran's confirmed service at Camp Lejeune and the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical history and evaluated and weighed the evidence of the Veteran's personal risk factors against the medical literature in reaching this conclusion. The examiner found the Veteran's personal history of smoking outweighed the risk factors of military service, and that the published medical literature and did not demonstrate a causal relationship between exposure to the toxins at Camp Lejeune and the development of lung cancer.

Taken together, the Board finds the September 2023, December 2023, and February 2024 opinions adequate to decide the Veteran's claim. Each opinion directly addresses the Veteran's contention that exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune caused his lung cancer and included consideration of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities where required by law or raised by the evidence of record. 38 U.S.C. § 1168. Each opinion provided clear conclusions and supporting data as well as a reasoned medical explanation connecting the conclusions to the medical evidence. Barr v. Nicholson, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. Together, the opinions address all theories of service connection asserted by the Veteran or raised by the evidence of record. Notably, in assessing the etiology of each of the Veteran's claimed cancers, VA examiners noted the Veteran's specific exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, other common and known risk factors, personal history and risk factors, and medical literature when concluding that the Veteran's lung cancer was less likely than not related to his exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. These opinions are therefore afforded probative weight. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions and sincere belief that his lung cancer is etiologically related to his active service, to include as due to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. The Board notes that lay witnesses are competent to provide testimony or statements relating to symptoms or facts of events that the lay witness observed and is within the realm of his or her personal knowledge but are not competent to establish that which would require specialized knowledge or training, such as medical expertise. Layno v. Brown, supra. Lay evidence may also be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra. The Board must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to. See Waters v. Shinseki, supra.

In the instant case, the Board finds that the question regarding the potential relationship between the Veteran's cancers and any instance of his service to be complex in nature. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra. Specifically, while the Veteran is competent to describe his current symptoms, the Board accords his statements regarding the etiology of such claimed disorder little probative value as he is not competent to opine on such a complex medical question. Specifically, where the determinative issue is one of medical causation, only those with specialized medical knowledge, training, or experience are competent to provide evidence on the issue. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In this regard, the question of causation involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and requires the administration and interpretation of diagnostic testing. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has had any medical training. Hence, the Board finds that he is not competent to provide a medical opinion to support the claim based on his assertions alone. As such, the question of etiology in this case may not be competently addressed by lay evidence, and the opinions of the Veteran are nonprobative evidence.

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection lung cancer, to include as due to exposure to the contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, is not warranted. The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Cusker, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.