Citation Nr: A25032075
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-463162
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a peripheral vestibular condition (claimed as dizziness and vertigo) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1993 to August 2004 and December 2011 to July 2013.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  Notification of the February 2024 rating decision was sent to the Veteran in March 2024.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for headaches and a peripheral vestibular condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

When determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Therefore, the Veteran's claim of service connection for vertigo has been recharacterized as a peripheral vestibular condition.

1. Entitlement to service connection for headaches

2. Entitlement to service connection for a peripheral vestibular condition (claimed as dizziness and vertigo)

As a preliminary matter, remand is required to provide the Veteran with notice of a right to a hearing before VA issues a notice of a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (d)(1).  VA Form 21-526EZ was amended in November 2022.  The form now informs the claimant of the right to a hearing during the claims process, to include a pre-decisional hearing if the Veteran requests one.  Although the Veteran filed his claim for service connection in August 2023, after the amended VA Form 21-526EZ was promulgated, the Veteran filed his August 2023 claim for service connection on the September 2019 version of the form.  VA accepted the Veteran's claim for service connection on the old version of the form but did not inform the Veteran of his right to a hearing during the claims process.  Therefore, remand is required for the AOJ to provide adequate notice to the Veteran of his right to a hearing under 38 C.F.R. § 3.106 (b)(1), (d)(1).

The Veteran contends that he was exposed to loud noises during his military career which now cause headaches and dizziness, impacting his ability to concentrate and to do his job efficiently.  August 2023 VA 21-526EZ.

The Veteran underwent a VA ear conditions examination in January 2024.  He noted that his hearing loss began in 1995, and his tinnitus began in 2000.  The Veteran reported dizziness associated with tinnitus.  He reported that his current symptoms are hearing loss, tinnitus, and dizziness.  The VA examiner found that the Veteran has no current ear or peripheral vestibular condition and has never been diagnosed with an ear or peripheral vestibular condition.  The examiner did find that the Veteran has hearing impairment with vertigo which occurs more than once weekly and lasts for less than one hour.  The examiner also found that the Veteran has tinnitus that occurs more than once weekly and lasts for more than 24 hours.  The examiner noted that there is "no vertigo present, not been diagnosed in the past."

The Veteran is service connected for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.

The Veteran underwent a VA headaches examination in January 2024.  At that examination, the Veteran reported that his headache symptoms began in 2018, and he has been treating them with over-the-counter medications.  The VA examiner found that the Veteran has no current headache condition and has never been diagnosed with a headache condition.  The examiner found that the Veteran experiences headache pain on both sides of the head which lasts for less than one day.  The examiner noted that the Veteran "has not been diagnosed, didn't seek medical evaluation."

VA must provide an examination that is adequate for VA compensation purposes.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

The Board finds that the January 2024 ear conditions examination is inadequate for VA compensation purposes.  The VA examination is internally inconsistent.  The Veteran is competent to report his symptoms of dizziness.  While the VA examiner found that there is no diagnosed peripheral vestibular condition, the VA examiner also found that the Veteran has hearing loss with vertigo.  In deciding that no diagnosed condition is present, the VA examiner seems to have relied on a lack of treatment records to reach that conclusion rather than his own medical expertise.  The absence of contemporaneous records does not preclude granting service connection for a claimed disability. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). In addition, the examiner did not address the theory of secondary service connection even though the Veteran raised this contention in his lay statements. The examination is inadequate. The failure to obtain an adequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, remand is warranted.

Additionally, the Board finds that the January 2024 headaches examination is inadequate for VA compensation purposes.  The VA examination is internally inconsistent.  The Veteran is competent to report his headache symptoms.  While the VA examiner found that there is no diagnosed headache condition, the VA examiner also found that the Veteran has headache pain on both sides of his head that lasts for less than one day.  In deciding that no diagnosed condition is present, the VA examiner seems to have relied on a lack of treatment records to reach that conclusion.  As noted above, the absence of contemporaneous records does not preclude granting service connection for a claimed disability. Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337. The failure to obtain an adequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, remand is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran and his representative notice of a right to a hearing pursuant to 38 CFR §§ 3.103 (b)(1) and (d)(1).

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination, preferably with a clinician who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion.  The report must reflect that the claims file was reviewed. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Identify all currently diagnosed headache conditions since the date of claim in August 2023.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed headache condition began during service or is related to his active service?

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed headache condition is caused by the service-connected hearing loss or tinnitus?

(d.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed headache condition is aggravated (any worsening) by the service-connected hearing loss or tinnitus?

For aggravation it is enough to show that the headache condition would have been less severe but-for the service-connected hearing loss and/or tinnitus, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.

The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's contention that his hearing loss and tinnitus have caused his headaches [August 2023 VA 21-526EZ].

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination, preferably with a clinician who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion.  The report must reflect that the claims file was reviewed. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Identify all currently diagnosed peripheral vestibular conditions since the date of claim in August 2023.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed peripheral vestibular condition began during service or is related to his active service?

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed peripheral vestibular condition is caused by the service-connected hearing loss or tinnitus?

(d.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed peripheral vestibular condition is aggravated (any worsening) by the service-connected hearing loss or tinnitus?

For aggravation it is enough to show that the non-service connected condition would have been less severe but-for the service-connected hearing loss and/or tinnitus, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.

The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's contention that his hearing loss and tinnitus have caused his dizziness and vertigo. [August 2023 VA 21-526EZ].

The examiner is reminded that a lack of documented treatment in or after service is not, alone, a sufficient basis for a negative nexus opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s). If the requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should explain why.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Bush, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.