Citation Nr: A25032829
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-460949
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2011 to September 2011 and from July 2014 to July 2015.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In Clemons v. Shinseki, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim; symptoms described; and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). In light of the Court's decision in Clemons, the Board has re-characterized the Veteran's claim as one for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. This will provide the most potentially favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the Court's holding in Clemons.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.

The Veteran contends that his psychiatric disability results from a helicopter incident the Veteran was involved in during service. See March 2024 VA Form 21-0781. In further support of his claim the Veteran has provided statements from himself, his wife, and a fellow service member. The Veteran and the service member detail the incident, and the Veteran's wife provided a statement indicating a change in the Veteran's behavior after the helicopter incident. See March 2024 Buddy Statements.

The Veteran has attended approximately eight VA mental health counselling appointments with the Burlington City VA facility. In the VA treatment notes, the counselors document a PTSD diagnosis, and also a possible depressive disorder, and moderate anxiety disorder. See January 2024 treatment notes.

In July 2024 the Veteran underwent a VA examination to determine the nature and extent of any PTSD disorder. The July 2024 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran did not meet the DSM-5 criteria for a PTSD diagnosis missing specifically criteria C, D, F, G, H, and I. Further the July 2024 VA examiner provided an addendum opinion which addressed the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis in VA treatment records. The July 2024 VA examiner again concluded that as of the July 2024 examination the Veteran did not meet the criteria for PTSD, but that the examiner could not speak to previous diagnoses. See July 2024 addendum VA opinion.

Upon review of the Veteran's VA treatment records, however, the Board notes several inconsistencies between the July 2024 VA examination, and the Veteran's VA treatment notes. For example, the July 2024 VA examiner never addressed the Veteran's depression and anxiety diagnoses in the January 2024 treatment note. Further PTSD criterion C is avoidance of stimuli associated with traumatic events, which the VA examiner noted the Veteran did not meet this criterion. However, the Veteran's wife's statement in March 2023 indicates the Veteran did not even disclose the in-service stressor to his wife for a four-year period after returning from duty. Yet another example is criterion D which are negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event. One example in the criterion is feelings of detachment or estrangement from others. The Veteran's wife details in her March 2024 statement that the Veteran upon returning from active duty in 2015 routinely spent time in his shed, away from his family, which was a substantial change in the Veteran's behavior prior to his July 2014 enlistment. Further, the Veteran's VA treatment records are replete with instances of the Veteran describing a detachment from others or feelings of being cut-off from others.

Given the inconsistencies between the evidence of record and the conclusions of the July 2024 VA examiner, the Board finds that the July 2024 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate for adjudicatory purposes. At best, the VA examiner failed to address evidence in the record which indicated the Veteran may have a PTSD diagnosis, and at worst the VA examiner's conclusions are based on inaccurate factual premises and therefore must be discounted. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (stating that "the Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion."); see also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).

Most importantly, the failure of the AOJ to secure an adequate VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error which must be corrected before the Board issues a decision on the Veteran's claim. 

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a psychiatric examination to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  If the Veteran is diagnosed with PTSD, the examiner must explain how the diagnostic criteria are met and opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to a verified in-service stressor.  The examiner must explicitly address the Veteran's 2023-2024 VA mental health treatment records and the March 2023 Veteran's wife lay statements when providing an opinion on whether the Veteran meets the PTSD DSM-5 criteria.

If any other acquired psychiatric disorders are diagnosed, the examiner must opine whether each diagnosed disorder is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include the January 2015 helicopter accident the Veteran was involved in.  

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions above.

Provide a rationale to support the opinions.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. M. Gallino, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.