Citation Nr: A25032952
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231109-391804
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right hand disability, based on limitation of motion of the thumb, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2006 to October 2006.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  In November 2023, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Under the Direct Review docket, the Board reviews the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision appealed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

Under Direct Review, evidence submitted after the date of notification of the rating decision is not reviewable by the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

On March 16, 2022, the Veteran filed an increased rating claim on VA Form 526 EZ, Fully Developed Claim, for the issues related to the instant appeal.  A VA Form 526-EZ does not maintain continuous pursuit of the prior claim.  Therefore, the period on appeal begins March 16, 2022, or up to one year prior to that date if it was factually ascertainable that an increase occurred.  If a claimant would like to continuously pursue a rating assigned in a prior decision, within a year of issuance of that decision the claimant should file a VA Form 21-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, VA Form 21-0995, Supplemental Claim, or VA Form 10182, Board Appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Evidence was added to the claims file after the rating decision on appeal, during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed for Board review under the Direct docket option.  The Board cannot consider that evidence in this decision. However, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify that evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim considering the new evidence, in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.300.  Any evidence relating to the increased rating claims for the right shoulder and right hand disabilities will be considered on remand.

The Board has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1.  Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

2.  Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right hand sprain, based on limitation of motion of the thumb, is remanded.

The Veteran is currently assigned a 30 percent rating for right shoulder dislocations, status post superior labral anteroposterior (SLAP) surgery (major), as of July 11, 2008, pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5299-5202; a 30 percent rating is assigned as of July 9, 2021, pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5201; and a 20 percent rating is assigned from September 22, 2021, pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5201-5202.

The Veteran is currently assigned a 10 percent rating for right hand strain, with limitation of motion of the thumb, associated with right shoulder multiple dislocations, status post superior labral anteroposterior (SLAP) surgery (major), as of August 19, 2021, pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5228.

VA examinations must include joint testing for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.  Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016); 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

The Veteran attended numerous VA examinations for the service-connected right shoulder and right hand disabilities during the period under review.

At a July 2021 VA shoulder examination, the Veteran reported that symptoms had worsened and described right shoulder pain with decreased range of motion with numbness and tingling in the right arm since a 2019 shoulder surgery.  The examiner included range of motion testing expressed in degrees for active motion and passive motion and indicated there was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and weight-bearing that caused loss of range of motion and function.  However, the examiner did not include range of motion testing expressed in degrees for weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing for the disabilities, and did not express in degrees at what point in range of motion testing the Veteran's pain began.  

At a September 2021 VA shoulder examination, the Veteran reported symptoms had worsened and described stabbing pain, numbness, and weakness in the right shoulder with weakness in the right hand.  The examiner indicated that right shoulder range of motion testing was contradicted due to severe pain and testing was not performed.  The examination indicated that left shoulder range of motion testing for the opposite left shoulder undamaged joint could be performed, although the report was incomplete.  

At a September 2021 VA hand and fingers examination, the examiner diagnosed right hand strain.  The Veteran reported symptoms had worsened and described symptoms of weakness, numbness, tingling, and pain.  The examiner included range of motion testing expressed in degrees for active motion and passive motion and indicated there was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and weight-bearing.  Although the examiner noted pain on motion, the report indicated there was not painful motion of any finger.  The examiner did not include range of motion testing expressed in degrees for weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and did not express in degrees at what point in range of motion testing the Veteran's pain began.  The report was incomplete and did not include all testing for the opposite left hand undamaged joint. 

In a November 2021 addendum to the September 2021 hand and fingers examination, the examiner clarified that painful motion was noted in the right thumb and little finger.

At an April 2022 VA shoulder examination, the Veteran reported that symptoms had worsened and described symptoms that included limited range of motion, pain, and popping with an inability to lift anything with the right arm.  The Veteran also described increased pain in the right shoulder and right hand.  The examiner included range of motion testing expressed in degrees for active motion and passive motion and indicated there was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and weight-bearing that caused loss of range of motion and function.  The examiner did not include range of motion testing expressed in degrees for weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and did not express in degrees at what point in range of motion testing the Veteran's pain began.  The examiner indicated that the left shoulder was considered to be a damaged joint and range of motion testing was not performed.  The examination report was incomplete. 

At an April 2022 hand and fingers examination, the examiner did not provide a current diagnosis.  The report was incomplete and did not include testing for the opposite left hand undamaged joint.

At a May 2023 VA shoulder examination, the Veteran reported that symptoms had worsened and described symptoms of constant right shoulder pain that primarily originated from the anterior right shoulder area and shoulder blade with additional symptoms of shooting pain down the right arm and through the ulnar groove area into the fourth and fifth fingers.  The Veteran reported that the pain worsened with motion and extended use that prevented the ability to drive a stick shift car, caused difficulty with overhead work, and difficulty lifting heavy loads.  The Veteran reported that the left shoulder was "okay" and that he had to rely on the left shoulder.  The examiner included range of motion testing expressed in degrees for active motion and passive motion and indicated there was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and weight-bearing loss of function.  The examiner did not include range of motion testing expressed in degrees for weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and did not express in degrees at what point in range of motion testing the Veteran's pain began.  The examiner indicated that the undamaged left shoulder joint was tested, although portions of the testing were incomplete for both the right and left shoulders. 

At a May 2023 hand and fingers examination, the examiner did not provide a current diagnosis.  The Veteran reported symptoms had worsened and described numbness and tingling that radiated down the right upper extremity primarily in the ulnar nerve distribution with reduced grip strength that occasionally affected all fingers.  The examiner indicated that the left hand was a damaged opposite joint, and range of motion testing was not performed.  The examination report was incomplete.

At a September 2023 peripheral nerve examination, the examiner indicated that examination was not being performed for neuropathy, or any peripheral nerve issue and the examination was for only for hand strain.  The examiner did not diagnose hand strain but diagnosed right hand sensorimotor neuropathy.  The Veteran reported symptoms that had worsened and described right hand strain, weakness, and pain, in addition to decreased range of motion of the thumb.  

The Board finds that all of the VA shoulder, hand, finger, and nerve examinations listed above are incomplete for rating purposes.  More specifically, VA examinations dated July 2021, September 2021, April 2022, May 2023, and September 2023 are incomplete.  The VA shoulder and hand and finger examinations must include joint testing for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint, which was not fully completed by the examiners.  The examination reports did not fully complete range of motion testing and the reports did not provide sufficient information for the Board to adjudicate the claim.  The examination reports included inconsistencies when compared to the medical and lay evidence, to include self-contained inconsistencies.  The examiners did not reconcile the findings with the other VA examinations of record and did not adequately address the Veteran's symptomatology related to the service-connected right shoulder and right hand disabilities, to include inconsistencies related to current diagnoses.  Further, in the September 2023 peripheral nerve examination report, the examiner indicated the examination was being performed only for service-connected hand strain and the Veteran was not being examined for neuropathy or any peripheral nerve issue.  However, the examiner evaluated and diagnosed a peripheral nerve condition and did not provide a hand and finger examination that included the necessary information for rating the service-connected right hand disability under the rating criteria.  Due to the incomplete reports and inconsistencies in current diagnoses, it remains unclear to the Board which current diagnoses and related symptomatology the Veteran had during the period under review and further clarification is required.  The Board does not have sufficient information to adjudicate the claims for increased ratings.  On remand, complete and adequate VA examinations must be obtained that fully address the severity, manifestations, and symptomatology related to the service-connected right shoulder and right hand disabilities for the period under review, to include a retrospective opinion that fully addresses the relevant evidence of record and functional limitation during the period under review.

Additionally, the Board finds that complete and adequate VA examinations are necessary to ascertain include whether there is functional ankylosis.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

The Board notes that VA has a statutory duty to assist the Veteran that includes the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous examination, so that the rating of the disability will be a fully informed one.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991); Snuffer v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 400 (1997).  Assistance by VA includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on a claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  When the medical evidence is inadequate or incomplete VA must supplement the record by seeking an advisory opinion or ordering another medical examination.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 213 (1992).

The Board notes that those facts were before the AOJ at the time of the October 2023 rating decision on appeal.

The Board finds that remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Adequate medical examinations and opinions are necessary to assist the Board in making an informed decision on the claims for increased ratings.  The reliance on incomplete reports and inadequate medical opinions constitutes pre-decisional duty to assist errors that must be corrected on remand.

On remand, the AOJ must obtain complete and adequate VA examinations for the service-connected right shoulder and right hand disabilities to include retrospective opinions that fully address the relevant evidence of record and functional limitation during the period under review.

It is the Veteran's responsibility to report for any scheduled examination and to cooperate in the development of the claim.  The consequences for failure to report for a VA examination, if needed, without good cause, may include denial of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

Accordingly, the issues must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors to obtain complete medical examinations and adequate opinions for rating purposes.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for VA shoulder, hand, and neurological examinations with a medical doctor, if possible, with a specialty in orthopedics, who has not previously examined the Veteran in conjunction with this claim, regarding the severity and manifestations of service-connected right shoulder and right hand disabilities, in addition to obtaining a retrospective opinion for the period under review.  Ensure the examination scheduling notice is sent to the Veteran and representative.  Associate the examination scheduling notice with the claims file.  Any indicated diagnostic tests and studies must be accomplished.  The examiner must review the claims file, to include this Board Remand, and should note that review in the report.  The examiner should:

(a.)  Confirm that the examiner is a medical doctor, if possible, with a specialty in orthopedics, who has not previously examined the Veteran in conjunction with this claim.

(b.)  Diagnose any right shoulder and right hand disabilities, to include service-connected right shoulder dislocations, status post superior labral anteroposterior (SLAP) surgery (major) and right hand strain based on limitation of motion of the thumb, and provide a full description of the disabilities.  Report all signs and symptoms necessary for rating the disabilities under the rating criteria.  The examination must include range of motion testing for active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing expressed in terms of degrees.  The examiner must opine whether a diagnosis of right hand sensorimotor neuropathy is warranted.  If so, the examiner should state what nerve is affected and the severity of any incomplete paralysis of that nerve.

(c.)  Describe any functional limitation due to pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, pain with use, incoordination, or on flare up, expressed in terms of the degree of additional range of motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination.  All orthopedic and neurological impairment should be identified.

(d.)  Opine whether any pain associated with each disability significantly limits functional ability during flare-ups or during periods of repeated use, noting the degree of additional range of motion loss due to pain on use or during flare-ups.

(e.)  The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.

(f.)  Determine whether the right shoulder or right hand, to include the right digits, have ankylosis, or symptoms that amount to the functional equivalent of ankylosis, that include functional loss consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.  The examiner must consider and address the Veteran's complaints of immobility and whether it results in functional loss.

(g.)  The examiner must address the Veteran's complaints of neurological symptoms of radiating pain that extends from the right shoulder to the right hand and fingers and opine whether it is as likely as not that the symptomatology is either caused or aggravated by the service-connected right shoulder or right hand disabilities or whether it is a separate and distinct disability.  If a separate and distinct disability is diagnosed, the examiner must address whether that symptomatology can be clearly delineated from the symptoms of the Veteran's currently service-connected right shoulder and right hand disabilities.

(h.) The examiner should provide full range of motion findings for the left shoulder and left hand, and should state whether those ranges of motion are of an undamaged joint.

(i.)  In an additional retrospective opinion, the examiner should be fully responsive to each request stated above to provide the Board with an analysis of the retrospective limitation for the disability during the period under review.  The examiner should provide dates for any change in disability noted during the period under review. 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Malec, Jennifer L., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.