Citation Nr: A25032501
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-465811
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The competent and probative medical evidence of record regarding whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to an in-service noise exposure is in approximate balance.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1998 to June 2006.

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus most recently addressed in a October 2022 rating decision. In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Specifically, the Board has considered evidence received prior to the August 22, 2023 rating decision. Any evidence submitted after August 22, 2023 is ineligible for review. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that following the Veteran's August 2024 appeal to the Board and after the claim had been docketed (in September 2024), the Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim (received in September 2024). The AOJ adjudicated this claim in a January 2025 rating decision. As the claim had already been appealed to the Board and was within the Board's jurisdiction, the AOJ's January 2025 rating decision constituted a spurious decision that is not relevant to the Board's review. 

?

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Veteran contends that he was exposed to varying levels of ear noise trauma to include flight line noises. He also stated that in basic training, he was required to use weaponry, such as rifles. He stated that "it was not always effective to wear hearing protection routinely or correctly due to poor fitting of the hearing protection devices and having to communicate with others." He contends that his tinnitus is the result of this in-service noise exposure. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The AOJ made the following favorable findings in the rating decision on appeal: The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service. Service treatment records show probable for hazardous noise exposure. The Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability; specifically, the VA audio examination dated April 22, 2022, showed evidence of recurrent tinnitus.

The remaining question for the Board then, is whether the Veteran's tinnitus onset during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service noise exposure. The Board concludes that the competent and probative medical evidence regarding whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to an in-service noise exposure is in approximate balance. 

Service treatment records fail to reflect any findings attributed to tinnitus or to exposure to excessive noise trauma.  

There are no post service records that reflect that the Veteran ever sought treatment for, or complained of, tinnitus.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2022. His hearing was normal in both ears (no hearing loss disability). He reported the onset of hearing difficulty, specifically tinnitus, in 2014. He reported that he noticed the onset while working for the Federal Government. He stated that he served in the Air Force and that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was Communication Computer Systems Operations during the Gulf War. The Veteran stated that he was subject to aircraft noise. He denied any pre-service occupational noise exposure; but admitted to some occupational noise exposure after service while working around server rooms and data centers. He denied all recreational/social noise exposure. 

The examiner noted that the Veteran's reported MOS has a low probability for noise exposure. The examiner, an audiologist, opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is not associated with hearing loss because there is no diagnosis of clinical hearing loss. The examiner also opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure. He explained that the onset of tinnitus is reported by the Veteran to be post-separation (and there is no report of tinnitus in service treatment records, at separation or in the medical records until the time of the claim) and explained that the current literature does not support late onset noise-induced tinnitus.

The examiner further noted that after taking into consideration the Veteran's medical history, clinical findings, onset and duration of tinnitus, he was unable to determine the etiology of tinnitus without resorting to mere speculation.  

The Veteran submitted a favorable June 2023 private medical opinion from a clinician (not an audiologist).   The clinician opined that the Veteran's current auditory condition to include left ear tinnitus is at least as likely as not due to and/or related to military acoustic trauma during active duty military service.

The clinician noted that personnel records confirm the Veteran's MOS as 3COXI Information Technology. The clinician noted that this MOS shows a low probability of acoustic trauma but asserted that acoustic trauma should be conceded based on the Veteran's credible lay statement regarding frequent and recurrent noise exposures while undergoing general military training.  The clinician also stated that the Veteran had a formal diagnosis of left ear tinnitus at his April 2022 VA examination, which was conceded in the October 2022 rating decision. The examiner stated that the Veteran's enlistment examination is not available for review; but there is no documentation of prior complaints of tinnitus, and there is no history of ear pathology, hearing loss, or tinnitus known upon his entrance into the military.

The June 2023 clinician cited numerous studies in support of her favorable opinion.  She summarized the medical literature as supporting the theory that tinnitus can develop without typical hearing loss, based upon the pathophysiological mechanisms and processes that occur directly from prior acoustic trauma, due to cochlear deterioration and damage. She further explained, in pertinent part, that the medical literature supported that an audiogram could be normal for months or years following acoustic trauma, and then years later, tinnitus related to the acoustic trauma could develop, due to cochlear deterioration and damage that is undetectable by audiogram. 

The Board has reviewed the competing nexus opinions and finds that the probative weight which should be assessed to each is in approximate balance, warranting reasonable of doubt in favor of the Veteran. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

The Court has held that the Board must determine how much weight is to be attached to each medical opinion of record. See Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993). Greater weight may be placed on one medical professional's opinion over another, depending on factors such as reasoning employed by the medical professionals and whether or not, and the extent to which, they reviewed prior clinical records and other evidence.  Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36 (1994).  Some factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the physician's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. 444, 448-9 (2000).  In some cases, the physician's special qualifications or expertise in the relevant medical specialty or lack thereof may be a factor.  In every case, however, the Board must support its conclusion with an adequate statement of its reasoning of why it found one medical opinion more persuasive than the other.

In determining the probative value to be assigned to a medical opinion, the Board must consider three factors.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). The initial inquiry in determining probative value is to assess whether a medical expert was fully informed of the pertinent factual premises (i.e., medical history) of the case. A review of the claims file is not required, since a medical professional can also become aware of the relevant medical history by having treated a Veteran for a long period of time or through a factually accurate medical history reported by a Veteran. Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 303-04.  

In this case, the VA examiner reviewed the records, and it is clear from reading the opinion that she was familiar with the factual premises of the case. On the other hand, the private clinician's opinion contains several minor misstatements of the record. For instance, the clinician stated that personnel records confirm that the Veteran's MOS was 3COXI Information Technology, when in fact it was listed as 3C051 - Communication - Computer Systems Operations Journeyman. The clinician also stated that the Veteran had a 'formal diagnosis of left ear tinnitus at his April 2022 VA examination, which was conceded in the October 2022 rating decision.' The Board notes, however, that the April 2022 VA examination report bilateral tinnitus. Likewise, the October 2022 rating decision conceded a diagnosis of tinnitus (not limited to the left ear). The June 2023 clinician also stated that the Veteran's enlistment examination was not available for review. In fact, a review of the claims file includes the Veteran's enlistment examiantion.  

The second inquiry involves consideration of whether the medical expert provided a fully articulated opinion. See Id. A medical opinion that is equivocal in nature or expressed in speculative language does not provide the degree of certainty required for medical nexus evidence.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The Board finds that both the VA examiner and the private clinician rendered fully articulated opinions. 

The third and final factor in determining the probative value of an opinion involves consideration of whether the opinion is supported by a reasoned analysis. In this regard, the Board finds that neither opinion is more probative than the other. 

The VA examiner noted both that the Veteran's MOS had a low probability of noise exposure, and that the Veteran's tinnitus did not have an onset date until 2014 (8 years after discharge from service). These facts, along with the Veteran's report of some post-service noise exposure were the basis for the rationale. 

While the June 2023 clinician did not address the significance of the Veteran's reported post-service noise exposure, she did address why the eight-year gap between discharge from service and the onset of symptoms was not dispositive.  In this respect, she discussed the relevant studies and medical literature and indicated that it showed tinnitus related to acoustic trauma could develop years later due to cochlear deterioration and damage that is undetectable by audiogram. In essence, her review of the literature supports late onset noise-induced tinnitus.

As both clinicians provided reasonably cogent rationale for their opinions, the Board finds no reason to favor one over the other. Further, to the extent that the private clinician did not address the Veteran's post-service occupational noise exposure, the Board notes that the Veteran did not report especially loud noise from working around server rooms and data centers, and he denied all recreational/social noise exposure. 

Moreover, the AOJ rendered a favorable finding in the rating decision on appeal that service treatment records show 'probable' hazardous noise exposure. The examiner, however, characterized the Veteran's service as a having a 'low probability' of noise exposure which conflicts with the favorable finding. The Board notes that some of the Veteran's lay statements regarding the extent of in-service noise exposure appears to be contradicted by some of the service treatment records. For instance, the Veteran completed four Health History Questionnaires (in June 2000, May 2001, September 2003, and October 2004) and each time he denied having any jobs or hobbies involving exposure to loud noises.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.140 (c), however, the Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.  

The Veteran argued, in an August 2024 Brief, that lay evidence and recollections of medical problems, even decades after the fact, can stand as competent and credible evidence of the onset of symptoms, even without contemporaneous medical evidence. The Board notes that the Veteran's competently and credibly stated (at his April 2022 VA examination) that the onset of symptoms was 2014, when he was working for the Federal Government. He never provided any lay statements that he experienced tinnitus during service.  

Notwithstanding this fact, the Veteran has a current tinnitus disability and in-service noise exposure. The competent medical evidence regarding nexus is in approximate balance; and therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine applies in this case.  Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for tinnitus is granted.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Prem, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.