Citation Nr: A25032353
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241011-486135
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to December 22, 2021, is dismissed without prejudice.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a neck condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for ankylosing spondylitis/back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot/lower extremity neurological condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The benefit sought on appeal has been previously adjudicated, there remains no case or controversy as to the issue of entitlement to an effective date prior to December 22, 2021, for entitlement to TDIU, as this is a duplicate appeal and is addressed in a separate appeal under a different docket number.

2. The persuasive weight of the evidence indicates the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis for a chronic fatigue condition.

3. The persuasive weight of the evidence indicates the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis for a neck condition.

4. The persuasive weight of the evidence indicates the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis for a left upper extremity radiculopathy condition.

5. The persuasive weight of the evidence indicates the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis for a right upper extremity radiculopathy condition.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for entitlement to TDIU prior to December 22, 2021, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.104.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a neck condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the Army from June 1969 to February 1971.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions. The February 2024 rating decision granted TDIU from December 22, 2021, and this appeal is being dismissed as discussed below. The remaining issues are on appeal from the July 2024 rating decision. 

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an August 2023 rating decision, which denied service connection for ankylosing spondylitis, chronic fatigue, left lower radiculopathy, left upper radiculopathy, skin cancer, a neck condition, right foot paraplegia, right lower radiculopathy, and right upper radiculopathy. In July 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 2023 decision. 

In the October 11, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 6, 2024, and a transcript is of record.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, ankylosing spondylitis/back condition, and a right foot/ lower extremity neurological condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Additionally, the Board notes the skin cancer claim was characterized as melanoma skin cancer. However, as the Veteran testified to multiple types of skin cancer, the claim has been recharacterized more broadly to encompass any skin cancer diagnosis of record. 

Dismissal of Claim

1. Entitlement to TDIU prior to December 22, 2021.

Current regulations prohibit concurrent election of review of a VA decision under different appeal lanes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran appealed the effective date for the grant of TDIU in a February 2024 rating decision, which granted TDIU effective December 22, 2021. However, the issue of TDIU was already on appeal under a separate legacy docket. Thus, the instant appeal for TDIU is invalid. 

Moreover, entitlement to TDIU prior to December 22, 2021, was fully addressed under the legacy system appeal, and entitlement to TDIU prior to December 22, 2021, was granted in a January 2025 decision, and an effective date was assigned in a January 2025 rating decision. Given that the Veteran's appeal for entitlement to TDIU prior to December 22, 2021, is invalid, and has been fully adjudicated by the Board, there is no case and controversy remaining in this particular appeal.

Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to TDIU prior to December 22, 2021, is dismissed without prejudice. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Generally, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service (nexus). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 505 (1995).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

2. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a neck condition.

4. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy.

The Veteran seeks service connection for chronic fatigue, and for upper extremity radiculopathy which has been characterized as a neck condition. He contends he suffered symptoms from these conditions in service that have continued since. 

After review of the evidence of record, the Board finds service connection is not warranted. 

Specifically, the persuasive weight of the evidence indicates the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis for a chronic fatigue, upper extremity radiculopathy, or a neck condition, as it is not clinically shown and, in the absence of such a disability, there is no basis for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F. 3d 1328, 1332 (1997). Evidence must show that the Veteran currently has a diagnosed condition for which benefits are being claimed. A prior diagnosis can be relevant evidence to determine if current disability exists, and a claimant satisfies the current disability threshold when the disability exists at any point during the pendency of the claim, even if it resolves prior to adjudication. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007); see also Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013). Because the evidence does not establish that the Veteran has current diagnosis for a chronic fatigue, upper extremity radiculopathy, or neck condition during or recent to the filing of the claim, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to service connection.

Initially, the Board observes the Veteran testified at his December 2024 hearing that he had not been diagnosed with a neck condition, and rather described symptoms he related to a back disorder that radiated to his shoulders. As the back condition is remanded for further development, to the extent that he experiences symptoms related to a back condition, these symptoms should be contemplated in a rating for his back should service connection for that condition be granted. 

These issues were first identified in a September 2020 claim. Medical treatment records do not contain a diagnosis for a fatigue condition, a neck condition, or for radiculopathy to the upper extremities. Notably, an April 2014 record noted no chronic fatigue, no radicular pain, and no history of neck pain. While a July 2020 record described previous neck pain, no neck pain was noted at that visit, and it was also noted there were no feelings of fatigue and all areas of the upper extremities were described as normal. While radiculopathy to the right lower extremity is noted in multiple records, there is no indication of any upper extremity radiculopathy. February 2021 and July 2022 records noted that neck flexion and extension did not produce radicular symptoms, and neck pain was denied. While complaints of fatigue appear occasionally in treatment records, these are associated with illness or cardiac stress testing. Notably, recent fatigue is denied in December 2021, May 2022, and July 2022 records. Additionally, an August 2023 VA examination did not diagnose chronic fatigue syndrome, nor were any alternate diagnoses provided. Moreover, while the examiner opined a fatigue condition was an entirely separate entity from the Veteran's major depressive disorder, symptoms of fatigue are certainly contemplated in the Veteran's 70 percent rating for major depressive disorder given chronic sleep impairment was indicated as an associated symptom.

The Board recognizes that service connection is still possible in the absence of a diagnosis when certain factors, such as pain, are shown that limit functional ability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018) ("pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability"). The medical evidence of record does not demonstrate any consistent, significant limitation of function due to symptoms of fatigue, to the neck, or in the upper extremities. Indeed, there are no significant complaints to treatment providers of limiting symptoms for fatigue or to the upper extremities. There are no complaints to treatment providers that demonstrate any activities that cannot be accomplished due to symptoms of pain, numbness, or fatigue, and no indications of limitations in the use of the upper extremities at the shoulders, elbows, or hands. While reports of neck pain do appear in the record, there are also consistent reports denying neck pain which does not support any significant limitation from this symptom. Thus, the Board does not observe that the Veteran's complaints rise to the level that impact functioning on a daily basis such to qualify as a disability. 

Therefore, no diagnosis is demonstrated during or recent to the filing of the claim and the primary criterion for service connection is not met. Accordingly, service connection is not warranted, and the claims must be denied. 

In coming to this conclusion, the Board has considered the Veteran's statements that he has suffered from feeling of tiredness or fatigue, and radiating symptoms to his shoulders. Nevertheless, while he is competent to provide testimony regarding observable symptomatology such as fatigue or pain, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Notably, the August 2023 examiner did not find that the reports of subjective fatigue symptoms met the criteria for a fatigue condition, and treating physicians do not identify limitations or diagnosis for a condition related to the neck or upper extremities. Therefore, the unsubstantiated statements regarding the Veteran's disability are found to lack competency.

Additionally, the Board acknowledges that VA examinations were not obtained for a neck or upper extremity condition. However, given the lack of any indication of a current disability and the absence of evidence for any significant symptoms, the duty to assist did not require such development. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Here, the evidence simply does not suggest the presence of a neck or upper extremity disability.

Accordingly, service connection for chronic fatigue, left upper extremity radiculopathy, right upper extremity radiculopathy, and a neck condition is not warranted, and the claims must be denied. As the Board finds the evidence to be persuasively against these claims, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer.

2. Entitlement to service connection for ankylosing spondylitis/back condition.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot/lower extremity neurological condition.

The Veteran seeks service connection for skin cancer, a back condition, and a right lower extremity condition. He contends these conditions are directly related to his service or related to toxic exposure during his service in Vietnam. Additionally, he contends his lower extremity condition is related to his back condition.

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Specifically, a VA examination or opinion was not obtained to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's skin cancer. However, exposure to herbicides has been conceded based on his service in Vietnam, and a June 2023 private opinion reasonably raised that these conditions could be related to this exposure. Additionally, while an August 2023 VA examination was obtained for the back condition, the examiner did not opine on whether or not the Veteran's skin cancer could be related to toxic exposure. Of particular note, treatment records and statements from the Veteran indicate he may have two distinct back conditions, one musculoskeletal in nature which resulted in a surgical intervention and ankylosing spondylitis which treatment records suggest is autoimmune in origin. The opinion does not differentiate or provide any context in this regard. Additionally, there is no diagnosis indicated for a right lower extremity condition despite medical records which indicate one, and no opinion on the etiology of this condition. As such, the opinion is inadequate for VA purposes. Where VA provides the veteran with an examination, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

VA's duty to assist requires it to provide an examination and/or medical opinion when the evidence suggests a present disability, an in-service incident, illness or injury, and an indication that the two may be related but there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Further, the indication that the first two criteria "may be associated" is a "low threshold standard." Id. at 83. Additionally, pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act (PACT Act), VA's duty to assist requires it provide an examination and medical opinion when there is evidence of a disability, evidence that a claimant engaged in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection of that disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). A TERA is any activity that requires a corresponding entry in an exposure tracking record system; or that the Secretary determines qualifies for purposes of this subsection when taking into account what is reasonably prudent to protect the health of Veterans. 38 U.S.C. § 1710(e)(4)(C).

Given the evidence indicates the Veteran is presumed to be exposed to herbicides, and there is evidence the Veteran's condition could be related to this in-service toxic exposure, and the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection as there is no adequate opinion of record that discusses whether his skin cancer or back condition is related to service, to include as due to toxic exposure. Thus, the failure to provide an examination or opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected on remand. Additionally, the Veteran's claim for a right lower extremity condition is reasonably construed to be either directly related to service or secondary to his back condition. Thus, this claim must also be remanded as inextricably intertwined with the primary service connection claim.

While the Board acknowledges the Veteran submitted a June 2023 private nexus statement, the opinion is not adequate for VA purposes, as the rationale is speculative or insufficient, respectively. Thus, the opinion alone does not provide the Board with sufficient information to decide the claim. 

Therefore, the Board must remand this matter to obtain adequate opinions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Invite the Veteran to submit additional evidence or argument in favor of service connection for skin cancer, ankylosing spondylitis/back condition, and/or a right foot/lower extremity neurological condition.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his skin cancer, back conditions, and right lower extremity condition. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Based on complete review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Identify, by diagnosis, all skin cancer, back, and right lower extremity conditions present during the period on review.

(b.) For each diagnosed condition, provide an opinion on whether it at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not greater) that the condition is related to active-duty service, to include as due to herbicide exposure?

In forming their opinion, it would be helpful if the examiner addressed the June 2023 private opinion the Veteran has submitted in support of his claim.  

A complete rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Patterson, Associate Counsel