Citation Nr: A25032595
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453588
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 15, 2020, for a total disability based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.  

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 15, 2020, for the grant of eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) based on permanent and total disability status is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities have prevented her from securing and following a substantially gainful occupation since May 15, 2020.

2. The criteria for basic eligibility for DEA based on permanent and total disability status are met as of May 15, 2020.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of May 15, 2020, for the award of TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 4.16.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of May 15, 2020, for the grant of eligibility to DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3501, 3510, 5113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807 (a), 21.3021.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from June 1994 to June 1998.

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an October 2022 supplemental claim decision.  In June 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior October 2022 decision.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 15, 2020, for a TDIU is granted.  

The June 2023 rating decision granted the Veteran a TDIU effective November 1, 2021, which is the date VA received her formal TDIU application.  

The Veteran asserts she is entitled to an earlier effective date of May 15, 2020, the date VA received her claim for an increased rating for her service-connected lower back pain.  She asserts that she last worked in a substantially gainful capacity in May 2019; that her claim for a TDIU was part and parcel of her claim for an increased rating for her lower back pain under Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 454 (2009); and that she has continuously pursued her claim. 

For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that an effective date of May 15, 2020, and not earlier, is warranted.  Although the AOJ properly awarded a TDIU based on the medical evidence of record, the effective date assigned is inconsistent with Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

While a claim for a TDIU can be filed by submitting a VA Form 21-8940, a claim for a TDIU may also be inferred in an increased rating claim.  See Rice, 22 Vet. App. at 454.  When evidence of unemployability is submitted in the course of a claim for a higher rating for one or more service-connected disabilities, or disagreement over an initial rating, and there is evidence of unemployability pertaining to the service-connected disability or disabilities at issue, a claim for TDIU will be considered part and parcel of the increased rating claim.  See id. 

Procedurally, the Veteran submitted a claim for an increased rating for back pain on May 15, 2020.  An August 2020 rating decision decreased the assigned rating for lumbosacral strain (claimed as lower back) from 20 to 10 percent, effective August 7, 2020, and continued the 10 percent ratings for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  In January 2021, the Veteran requested a higher-level review.  In March 2021, the AOJ issued a higher-level review rating decision continuing the 10 percent rating for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain.

In October 2021, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for her lower back disability.  In November 2021, she submitted a VA Form 21-8940 asserting she became too disabled to work on May 20, 2019 due to her service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder and lower back disability.  

In a February 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to a TDIU and increased the assigned rating for the lower back disability from 10 to 40 percent.  In a March 2022 rating decision, the AOJ continued the 40 percent rating for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain effective from November 1, 2021.  

In July 2022, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for a TDIU and for the assigned evaluation and effective date for her lower back disability.  In an October 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to a TDIU and proposed decreasing the assigned rating for the Veteran's lower back disability.  In a February 2023 rating decision, the AOJ decreased the assigned rating for the lower back disability to 10 percent effective from May 1, 2023.

Following a March 2023 request for a higher-level review, the AOJ issued the June 2023 rating decision on appeal restoring the 40 percent rating for the lower back disability effective from November 1, 2021; and granting entitlement to a TDIU and eligibility for DEA based on permanent and total disability status, effective November 1, 2021.

Based on procedural history above, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for a TDIU dates back to her May 2020 claim for an increased rating for her lower back disability.  Evidence of unemployability was submitted in the course of her claim for an increased rating for her lower back disability and there is evidence of unemployability pertaining to that disability.  See November 2021 VA Form 21-8940.   As such, her claim for a TDIU will be considered part and parcel of the May 15, 2020, increased rating claim.  See Rice, 22 Vet. App. at 454.

For appeals governed by the modernized appeals system, 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h) controls the assignment of effective dates.  Under that provision, the effective date will be the date VA received a Veteran's initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later, if a Veteran continuously pursues an issue by timely filing in succession any of the available review options as specified in § 3.2500(c) within one year of the issuance of the decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h).  Regarding the date of entitlement, the term "date entitlement arose" is not defined in the current statue or regulation.  However, the Court has interpreted it as the date when the claimant met the requirements for the benefits sought.  This is determined on a "facts found" basis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a); see also McGrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000).  

As the Veteran's claim for TDIU under Rice was received on May 15, 2020, the Board may consider whether it was factually ascertainable that her service-connected disabilities rendered her unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation as of that date.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

The appeal period before the Board begins May 15, 2019, one year before VA received the Veteran's May 15, 2020, increased rating claim.  Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 980 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. §4.16 (a).  To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  Id. 

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id.  The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment.  Id.  Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity).  Id.

For the period under review, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are:  posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) rated 50 percent from July 16, 2019, and 70 percent from November 1, 2021; lumbosacral strain rated 20 percent from July 16, 2019, 10 percent from August 7, 2020, and 40 percent from November 1, 2021; radiculopathy of the right lower extremity rated 10 percent from July 16, 2019, and 20 percent from November 1, 2021; radiculopathy of the left lower extremity rated 10 percent from July 16, 2019, and 20 percent from November 1, 2021; left hip strain, limitation of extension, rated 10 percent from January 4, 2021; left hip strain, limitation of abduction, rated 10 percent from January 4, 2021; and left hip strain, limitation of flexion, rated noncompensable from January 4, 2021. 

Based on the forgoing, the Veteran has at least one disability rated at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more from July 16, 2019.  Accordingly, the Board may consider the claim for a TDIU on a schedular basis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's DD214 reflects a military occupational specialty of imagery ground station operator.

An August 2019 VA PTSD examination report indicates diagnoses of chronic PTSD and mild cannabis use disorder.  The examiner opined that all of the Veteran's symptoms were attributable to her PTSD and that the only symptoms and behaviors related to cannabis use were smoking behaviors.  The Veteran reported she was an intelligence analyst in service and had past work experience as a car salesperson and chef.  She reported she cannot work consistently, has been fired from two jobs, and was not presently working.  The Veteran reported her fiancée ended their relationship because the Veteran wasn't handling herself very well.  She reported she "can't hold it together" and has tried a number of different treatments for her PTSD, to include CPT (cognitive processing therapy), prolonged treatment exposure, and in vivo.  She reported chronic pain, sleeping and anger management issues, and smoking marijuana daily to manage her anxiety and chronic pain.  The VA examiner indicated symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  On observation, the VA examiner indicated the Veteran was guarded and apprehensive but answered all questions; mood was dysphoric; and affect was sad and tearful, as she cried during most of the evaluation.  The examiner indicated the Veteran's judgment and insight were good; speech was logical and coherent; and there were no unusual thought processes or content.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's level of occupation and social impairment with regard to her PTSD was best summarized by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

An August 2019 VA back conditions examination report indicates diagnoses of lumbosacral strain and a mild bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  The Veteran reported using a back brace and having functional impairment due to pain with bending, squatting, sitting, and heavy lifting.  The VA examiner noted pain on examination with forward flexion, extension, right and left lateral flexion, and right and left lateral rotation.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was unable to perform repetitive use testing due to severe pain; that pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time; and that pain with sitting was an additional factor contributing to the Veteran's disability.  Regarding the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathy, the examiner indicated intermittent pain that was severe on the right and moderate on the left; paresthesias and/or dysesthesias that was moderate on the right and mild on the left; and numbness that was severe on the right and mild on the left.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's back conditions impacted her ability to work due to difficulty with prolonged sitting, bending, squatting and heavy lifting.  The examiner remarked that there was objective evidence of pain when the back is used in non-weight bearing.

An August 2020 VA back conditions examination report shows the Veteran reported her condition had progressed/worsened and her current symptom was constant lower level of pain with flares and intermittent spasms.  She stated that "flares will put me down for 7 days"; that her legs seem weak and give out if she sits too long; and that she has come close to falling.  She reported she does not walk much, and does not squat, bend, or run.  The VA examiner noted pain on examination with forward flexion, extension, and right and left lateral flexion.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing without additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions; that pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time; and that pain and fatigue significantly limited functional ability with flare ups.  Regarding the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathy, the examiner indicated intermittent pain that was mild on both sides; mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias only on the left side; and no numbness.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's back conditions impacted her ability to work due to an inability to bend over to lift anything, difficulty standing for prolonged periods, and difficulty with repeated heavy lifting.  The examiner noted that an October 2016 MRI showed lumbar spine diffuse disc bulge, with abutment of descending left L4 nerve root.

A June 2021 VA hip and thigh conditions examination report indicates a diagnosis of left hip strain.  The Veteran reported she injured her left hip as a result of a motor vehicle accident in service and that her current symptom was throbbing hip pain, alternating with dull constant pain.  She reported treating her condition with Gabapentin, Methocarbamol, Tylenol and Motrin.  She reported daily moderate flare-ups, lasting one to twelve hours, that are precipitated by prolonged walking, standing, and sitting.  The VA examiner indicated the Veteran was unable to perform range of motion testing due to severe pain and high risk for falling, and that procured evidence suggested pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance and incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time or with flare-ups.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's left hip condition impacted her ability to work due to difficulty with prolonged standing, walking and sitting.  

In a November 2021 VA Form 21-8940 the Veteran reported last working on May 20, 2019, at a restaurant called Boswells Wings.  She reported she has two years of college education and has not had any other education or training before or since becoming too disabled to work.  She reported she has had moments of uncontrollable outbursts with employees and customers, and that her ability to bend has deteriorated such that she is unable to perform job work tasks.

A November 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's level of occupation and social impairment with regard to her PTSD was best summarized by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

A November 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's back conditions would prevent her from lifting heavy objects, standing, sitting or walking for extended periods.

The record includes a June 2022 assessment (received July 2022) by private vocational consultant, O.S.  Based upon a review of the Veteran's claims file and an April 2022 telephone interview, O.S. opines that it is more likely than not that the Veteran has been unable to secure and follow any substantially gainful employment based on the limitations resulting from her service-connected PTSD, back condition, and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy conditions from May 2020 to the present.  As a rationale, O.S. states that since May 2020, the Veteran has been unable to complete the physical requirements of "sedentary" employment (as defined by the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (D.O.T.) due to her limitations in sitting, standing, and walking because of her service-connected low back and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy conditions.  In brief, D.O.T. defines sedentary work as work that involves exerting up to 10 pounds of force occasionally (up to 1/3 of the time) and/or a negligible amount of force frequently (from 1/3 to 2/3 of the time) to lift, carry, push, pull, or otherwise move objectives, including the human body; work that involves sitting most of the time; and work that requires walking and standing only occasionally and all other sedentary criteria are met.  O.S. opines that the Veteran's inability to perform prolonged sitting without pain precludes her from sitting at least two-thirds of the workday, and that her inability to perform prolonged standing or walking precludes her from standing and walking up to one-third of the workday.  O.S. concludes that the Veteran's inability to meet the requirements of even sedentary work, as defined by D.O.T., precludes her from meeting the physical demands of any competitive employment.

Further, O.S. opines that the Veteran's service-connected conditions have more likely than not precluded her from meeting the basic requirements of all substantial gainful employment, at all physical demand levels, since at least May 2020.  As a rationale, O.S. states that the Veteran cannot meet the basic requirement of sustained focus and attention for at least two hours at a time throughout the workday because her need to frequently reposition due to back and lower extremity pain would distract her, and her PTSD interferes with focus and concentration.  O.S. also states that workers cannot take unscheduled breaks or leave the workstation, except at designated break times, and that the Veteran would have difficulty meeting this requirement because of her need to frequently reposition and her psychological symptoms.  O.S. states that workers cannot engage in outbursts or arguments on the job, and that the Veteran would be unable to fulfill this expectation based her reported history of verbal arguments at work due to PTSD symptoms that led to her being fired from multiple positions and on multiple occasions.  O.S. states that workers must maintain a regular schedule, free from absences or tardiness, and that the Veteran would be prevented from meeting this requirement due to her debilitating back pain and bilateral lower extremity conditions.  O.S. states that workers must consistently produce a certain, minimal amount of work while on the job, and that the Veteran would be prevented from meeting this requirement because of her need for frequent, unscheduled breaks and difficulty concentrating.

After consideration of the evidence of record and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that a TDIU is warranted from May 15, 2020, the date VA received her claim for an increased rating for her service-connected lower back pain.  

The economic component for a TDIU was met as of May 2019.  In a November 2021 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran reported last working on May 20, 2019.

Regarding the non-economic component, the treatment records, VA examination reports, lay statements, and private vocational assessment summarized above indicate that the Veteran's service-connected physical disabilities result in physical limitations due to back pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.  The August 2019 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's back conditions impacted her ability to work due to difficulty with prolonged sitting, bending, squatting and heavy lifting.  Per the August 2019 VA PTSD examination, the Veteran has symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Further, the private vocational consultant, O.S., opined that since May 2020, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and back conditions preclude her from meeting the physical demands of any competitive employment.  

The Board finds that while none of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone appear to preclude substantially gainful employment from May 15, 2020, the combined effect of her service-connected disabilities has had a significant impact such that it is reasonable to conclude she was not able to follow substantially gainful employment consistent with her education and past work experience as a car salesperson and chef.   In this regard, the Board finds the June 2022 vocational expert's opinion is entitled to significant probative weight.  The private opinion is based on a telephonic interview with the Veteran and a review of the Veteran's medical history and other relevant VA documents and is supported by a sufficient rationale.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's claim for an earlier effective date of May 15, 2020, but not earlier, for a TDIU is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

2. Basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance based on permanent and total disability status is established from November 1, 2021.

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for DEA benefits.

For the purposes of DEA benefits, basic eligibility exists if a veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, and if she has a permanent and total service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 3501; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3021(p).  There are other avenues through which basic eligibility may be granted; however, they involve factors not applicable here, e.g., the death of a veteran or if a veteran is currently on active duty.  Id. 

Permanence of total disability will be taken to exist when such impairment is reasonably certain to continue throughout the life of the disabled person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.340 (b).  Diseases and injuries of long-standing that are actually totally incapacitating will be regarded as permanently and totally disabling on the probability that permanent improvement under treatment is remote.  Id.  The age of the disabled person may be considered in determining permanence.  Id.  Once permanence is established, a veteran need not undergo further VA examination in order to retain her rating for the permanent disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.327 (b)(2)(iii).

The Veteran was awarded eligibility to DEA in the June 2023 Rating Decision, effective November 1, 2021, based upon the AOJ's finding that the Veteran was entitled to TDIU because she was permanently unable, as of that date, to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to her service-connected disabilities.

Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), effective dates relating to awards under Chapter 35 shall, to the extent feasible, correspond to effective dates relating to awards of disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 5113.

As explained above, the Board has found that the appropriate effective date for the Veteran's TDIU is May 15, 2020.  Since the effective date for DEA benefits in this case is directly related to a finding that the Veteran had a total disability that was permanent in nature by virtue of her TDIU rating, the Board finds that an effective date of May 115, 2020, for Chapter 35 benefits is warranted.  Accordingly, an effective date of May 15, 2020, and not earlier, is granted for DEA benefits. 

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.