Citation Nr: A25032929
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-458926
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for migraines is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service with the United States Air Force from May 2006 to July 2012.  This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a compensable rating for his service-connected migraines because his headaches are more severe than the current rating contemplates.  The Veteran's migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §4.124a, Code 8100.  

To ensure that VA has met its duty to assist, the Board finds that remand is necessary.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. 

VA treatment records note that the Veteran has a non-VA primary care provider.  No private treatment records have been associated with the claims file, and there is no record of any attempt to obtain any private treatment records.

The Veteran was afforded a July 2023 VA headaches examination with a records review and telephone interview.  The VA examiner documented that the Veteran reported experiencing about five headaches per week that he treats with Tylenol.  The Veteran further reported that he has had to leave work in the past due to his headaches and that he has to lay down at times.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches typically last less than one day and manifest as pain on both sides of the head that worsens with physical activity and includes sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, and lightheadedness.  The VA examiner then confirmed that the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks, opining that the frequency, on average, of prostrating attacks over the last several months was less frequent than once in two months.  The VA examiner further opined that the Veteran's migraine condition impacts the Veteran's ability to work depending on the timing and severity of the headaches, which may make the Veteran unable to fully function to full capacity for prolonged periods.  However, the examiner did not provide any further explanation of the timing and severity of the headaches or their impact on his economic adaptability, which is necessary for a rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8100.  Therefore, the VA examination is inadequate for adjudication.  The examiner's opinion regarding the frequency of the Veteran's prostrating attacks is conclusory and in apparent conflict with the documented symptoms reported by the Veteran and the examiner's opinion regarding functional impact of the migraines.

Therefore, remand is required for additional development.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and request properly executed releases for his non-VA primary care physician and any private care providers who have treated him for his headaches.

Upon receipt of such, VA must take appropriate action to contact the identified providers and request complete treatment records.  The Veteran should be informed that in the alternative he may obtain and submit the records himself.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA headaches (including migraine headaches) examination to assess the current severity of his headaches.  The examiner should fully describe the frequency, severity, and duration of headaches; and indicate whether headaches are productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The claims folder must be reviewed in conjunction with the examination, and the examiner should provide a full and complete rationale for all opinions.

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Welsh, Brigid C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.