Citation Nr: A25032550
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-438502
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a hiatal hernia, to include gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1972 to August 1992.  The current appeal arises out of his March 2023 claim.  In a July 2023 rating decision, the regional office denied service connection.  Thereafter, he submitted a November 2023 request for higher-level review of the July 2023 rating decision.  The regional office in a November 2023 rating decision found that there was a failure of the duty to assist and elected to readjudicate the claim.  After further development, the regional office issued an April 2024 rating decision continuing the denial.

Most recently, the Veteran submitted a May 2024 notice of disagreement on VA Form 10182 and selected direct review of the evidence.  As such, the Board's review is restricted to that evidence that was of record at the time of the most recent April 2024 rating decision.   

The Board is aware that less than one year has elapsed since the appealed rating decision was issued, and the Veteran has a right to switch Board appeal dockets during that one-year period. However, the Board views the Veteran's submissions as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, and has found this to be an implicit waiver of the right to change appeal dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 537 Vet. App. 305 (2024). 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a hiatal hernia, to include GERD, which he contends is secondary to his service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  In support thereof, the claims file was evaluated by a VA examiner in December 2023, who issued a medical opinion report wherein she concluded that it was less likely than not that the claimed disability is secondary to PTSD.  In support thereof, the examiner referenced medical literature suggesting that it fails to demonstrate a causal relationship between PTSD and hiatal hernias.  Additionally, the examiner discussed the typical causes for the development of hiatal hernias and noted that the Veteran has many of these risk factors which may alternatively have contributed to the development of the condition.  

The Board cannot rely on this opinion because the examiner neglected to address the aggravation prong of the secondary service connection analysis.  As a reminder, secondary service connection is permitted based on aggravation, such that compensation is payable for the degree of aggravation of a nonservice-connected disability caused by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  Here, the examiner did not discuss the likelihood that the hiatal hernia was worsened in severity by the PTSD.  

Accordingly, a remand is necessary in order to correct a failure of the duty to assist in affording the Veteran a deficient examination in support of his claim.  On remand, the regional office must secure an addendum opinion addressing the likely etiology of the claimed hiatal hernia condition, with specific consideration of whether the condition is aggravated by the service-connected PTSD.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a qualified medical professional for an opinion as to the likely etiology of the claimed hiatal hernia with GERD.  The entire claims file must be made available to the individual designated to examine the Veteran, and the opinion report should include discussion of his documented medical history and assertions relating to his diagnosis of and treatment for the condition.

The chosen examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran has a hiatal hernia, to include GERD, that is aggravated by the service-connected PTSD.  If the opinion is that the PTSD aggravates the hiatal hernia condition, the examiner should specify, so far as possible, the degree of disability resulting from such aggravation.

The Board notes that causation and aggravation are independent concepts and should have separate findings and rationales.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).  The examiner is reminded that there is NO requirement of "permanent aggravation"; rather, the question is whether there was aggravation in general. 

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered in full.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher M. Collins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.