Citation Nr: A25032757
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-451728
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee degenerative arthritis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1980 to December 1980. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for right knee disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee degenerative arthritis is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

This is a remand to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

(a)	The Veteran is seeking entitlement to service connection for right knee disability. During her January 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that her knee pain first began in military service when she began to experience leg pain and was placed on crutches and the injury got better. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee disability was not related to military service because there was a "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus." However, service treatment records show that in March 1980 the Veteran reported right knee discomfort and was given crutches for five days. The examiner did not address this evidence. As such, the VA examination is inadequate, and remand is warranted for an addendum opinion. 

(b)	Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW. 

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's right knee disability. 

The clinician is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right knee disability is related to military service to include the Veteran's right knee pain in service in March 1980 which required her to be on crutches for five days during service. Why or why not?

In rendering an opinion, the examiner must consider all evidence of record including service treatment records showing a right knee injury in service in March 1980 and subsequent post service treatment records which shows knee pain as well as February 2011 VA treatment records which show degenerative joint disease of the right knee. 

The examiner is informed by the Board that chronicity is not required to find a nexus to service or for service connection to be granted.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

All opinions must be supported by adequate rationale. 

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

3. Provide the Veteran and the representative notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

4. Readjudicate. 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Wimbish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.