Citation Nr: A25032984
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240118-408827
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023, is granted.

2. Entitlement to a rating of 40 percent, and no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023, is granted.

3. Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023, is granted.

4. Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023, is granted.

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) with degenerative disc disease is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the period under review, the appellant's right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve has been manifested by, at worst, moderate incomplete paralysis.

2. Throughout the period under review, the appellant's left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve has been manifested by, at worst, moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

3. Throughout the period under review, the appellant's right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve has been manifested by, at worst, moderate incomplete paralysis.

4. Throughout the period under review, the appellant's left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve has been manifested by, at worst, moderate incomplete paralysis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

2. The criteria for a rating of 40 percent, and no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

3. The criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8526.

4. The criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8526.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Army from August 2000 to February 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

A January 2023 rating decision, in pertinent part, awarded service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective April 9, 2022, left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective November 4, 2022, and right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective November 4, 2022.  A rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve was denied.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on January 27, 2023.  

A June 2023 rating decision, in pertinent part, increased the ratings for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and right and left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerves to 20 percent, effective January 19, 2023, the date of receipt of the Veteran's intent to file.  Ratings in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and in excess of 40 percent for IVDS with degenerative disc disease were denied.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on June 12, 2023.

A July 2023 rating decision, in pertinent part, denied service connection for right and left hip conditions and right and left knee strains.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on July 14, 2023.

A January 2024 rating decision, in pertinent part, confirmed and continued the previous denials of service connection for right and left hip strains and right and left knee strains.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on January 18, 2024.  This rating decision was issued following the development conducted to correct duty to assist errors identified in an August 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision.

Received on January 18, 2024, was a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), upon which the appellant identified the January 2023, June 2023, July 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions, the issues discussed above, and elected the Direct Review docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective AOJ decisions on appeal pertaining to the identified issues.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the IVDS with degenerative disc disease increased rating claim and the service connection claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the appellant filed a VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, received on June 29, 2023, pertaining to, inter alia, the aforementioned January 2023 and June 2023 rating decisions as they pertained to bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves.

A July 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision, in pertinent part, awarded service connection for loss of use of the feet due to bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves and assigned an initial 100 percent rating, effective January 19, 2023.  Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on loss of use of both lower extremities below the knee, specially adapted housing, and an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment was granted, effective January 19, 2023.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on July 21, 2023.

The 20 percent ratings for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves were discontinued effective January 19, 2023, as the 100 percent rating for loss of use of the feet had replaced such ratings, and to avoid pyramiding.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  The Board has thus recharacterized the issues on the cover page of this decision in accordance with this subsequent legal finding.  The issues remain in appellate status for the period prior to January 19, 2023, as the maximum schedular rating was not assigned for the entire period on appeal.  See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993).

The appellant filed a VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, received on July 13, 2023, pertaining to the July 2023 denial of service connection for bilateral knee and hip disabilities.  Duty to assist errors were identified during the August 2023 Higher-Level Review of the July 2023 rating decision pertaining to bilateral hip and knee disabilities.  Following additional development, the aforementioned January 2024 rating decision was issued.

The Board notes that, although the appellant requested Higher-Level Review of the January 2023, June 2023, and July 2023 rating decisions, such Higher-Level Reviews were completed by the time he filed his January 2024 VA Form 10182 pertaining to such rating decisions.  Thus, there is no concurrent election.

In Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1, 25-26 (2023), the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that VA's prohibition against concurrent election does not prevent a claimant from selecting "a second administrative review option with respect to a decision on the claim, so long as the 1-year period from that decision has not run and the second administrative review option does not run concurrently with the first administrative review option."  The Court's holding in Terry, however, was expressly predicated on finding that multiple review requests were "not pending concurrently" as such would be prohibited under 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A).  Id. at 3.  As such, the Court's holding in Terry makes clear that only one review option can be pursued at a time for any given issue or issues, due to the prohibition against concurrent election.  Id. at 6.

On his January 18, 2024, VA Form 10182, the appellant also expressed disagreement with the August 2023 rating decision, which stated that duty to assist errors had been identified during higher-level review for right and left hip conditions and right and left knee strains.  However, the August 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision did not contain any actual decisions which could be appealed.  Rather, it provided notification to the appellant that additional development was needed before the bilateral hip and knee disability service connection claims could be decided.  Following that development, the January 2024 rating decision was issued.  In any event, the issues of service connection for bilateral hip and knee disabilities are properly before the Board from the timely appeal of the July 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations should be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if that disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).

Where a claimant appeals the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an [initial] rating on appeal was erroneous. . . ."  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, "staged" ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found.  Id.

Where a claimant appeals the denial of a claim of an increased disability rating for a disability for which service connection was in effect before he filed the claim for increase, the present level of disability is the primary concern, and past medical reports should not be given precedence over current medical findings.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 57-58 (1994).  Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy, and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms which would warrant different ratings, different, or "staged," ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-510 (2007).

The appellant's service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves is rated under Diagnostic Codes (DCs) 8520 and 8526.

Under DC 8520, a maximum schedular rating of 80 percent is awarded for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  With complete paralysis, the foot dangles and drops, there is no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost.  When there is incomplete paralysis, a 60 percent rating is in order for severe disability with marked muscular atrophy.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis warrants a 40 percent evaluation, and moderate incomplete paralysis warrants a 20 percent rating.  Finally, mild incomplete paralysis warrants a 10 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

Under DC 8526, for incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild paralysis, 20 percent for moderate paralysis, and 30 percent for severe incomplete paralysis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the quadriceps extensor muscles.  Id., DC 8526.

Section 4.124a provides a schedule of ratings for diseases of the peripheral nerves. There are five nerve branches in the lower extremities.  Each branch has its separate and distinct functions. The sciatic branch includes the sciatic nerve, external popliteal nerve (common peroneal), musculocutaneous (superficial peroneal), anterior tibial nerve (deep peroneal), internal popliteal (tibial), and posterior tibial nerves.  The femoral branch includes the anterior crural (femoral) and the internal saphenous nerves.  The obturator, external cutaneous thigh, and illio-inguinal nerve branches only include one nerve each.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not?defined?in the Rating Schedule.  Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?4.123, 4.124. 

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the?mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor.? 38?C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to?38?C.F.R. § 4.124a?establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin,?28?Vet. App.?376?(2017). 

Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe."  Spellers v. Wilkie,?30?Vet. App.?211, 219?(2018) ("DC?8520?does not?define?'mild,' 'moderate,' 'moderately severe,' or 'severe,' or generally associate those terms with specific symptoms").  Although the Board has at times attempted to?define?these terms using dictionary definitions, those definitions are problematic because they "do little to explain the Board's understanding of these terms and do not 'disclos[e] that benchmark it employed to reach [its] conclusion.'" Casey v. McDonough, No. 21-7569,?2023 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 98, *5?(Jan. 24, 2023) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (quoting Johnson v. Wilkie,?30?Vet. App.?245, 255?(2018)) (discussing the Board's attempt to?define?the terms slight,?mild, moderate, and severe in DC 8515).  See also Bethea v. Derwinski,?2?Vet. App.?252, 254?(1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  With regard to DC?8520, although?38?C.F.R. §?4.120, 4.123, and 4.124 are "helpful in framing the analysis, [they] are not alone sufficient to explain the Board's decision absent an articulated connection to specific evidence."  LeMon v. McDonough, No. 21-3949,?2022 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1998, (Dec. 16, 2022) (mem dec) (Toth, J.).  As explained in LeMon, these regulations leave gaps in?defining?the relevant terms that are filled by VA's Adjudication Manual, M21-1: 

The Board "is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases." Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018).  Relevant to this case are M21-1 provisions regarding evaluations of paralysis of the sciatic and femoral nerves.  The M21-1 describes mild incomplete paralysis as a disability "limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a smaller area."  Part V, sbpt. iii, ch. 12, sec. A.2.c.  And moderate incomplete paralysis, per the M21-1, should be "reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment," where the sensory involvement covers "a larger area in the nerve distribution."  Id.  M21-1 examples of a moderate disability include "motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate."  Id.  And the M21-1 provides that a moderately severe evaluation (that is, a 40 percent rating) is available when there is "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability."  Id.  Atrophy may, but need not, be present for a moderately severe rating.  "Severe" in general, is expected to include motor and/or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability.  Trophic changes may be seen with severe longstanding neuropathy.  Even though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.  For the sciatic nerve, marked muscular atrophy is expected in cases of severe incomplete paralysis.  

As concluded by the Court in LeMon, given the relevance of these provisions to rating disabilities of the peripheral nerves, "the Board's failure to mention the M21-1's relevant guidance in this area constitutes clear error."  LeMon, at 7-8.  See also Bethea,?2 Vet. App. at 254.  The Board has therefore reviewed the M21-1 definitions and finds them instructive in the instant case. 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

3. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

4. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that (1) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023; (2) a rating of 40 percent, and no higher, is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023; (3) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023; and (4) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

The appellant is rated under DC 8520 for radiculopathy of the right and left sciatic nerves and under DC 8526 for radiculopathy of the right and left femoral nerves prior to January 19, 2023.  Effective January 19, 2023, these ratings were discontinued and replaced with a single 100 percent rating under DC 5110 for loss of use of the feet due to radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves of the bilateral lower extremities.  As the appellant is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating beginning January 19, 2023, the issues on appeal are limited to the ratings prior to January 19, 2023.

In a statement signed and dated April 10, 2022, a copy of which was received on January 24, 2023, the appellant stated that he had been provided a walker in the past year due to pain in the thighs and buttocks.  Nonetheless, he claimed that he kept falling despite the walker.  He can barely walk down a hall without falling down.  He endorsed left foot drop and pain in the buttocks, thigh, and groin.  He denied right foot drop but endorsed weakness.  He contended that he had lost the use of the lower half of his body.

February 2022 clinical notes from Orthopaedic Associates state that straight leg raise was positive bilaterally.  Strength and tone were normal bilaterally, as was sensation to light touch.  Deep tendon reflexes were symmetric bilaterally.

April 2022 clinical notes from Orthopaedic Associates reveal that the appellant endorsed burning pain, numbness and tingling, and subjective left lower extremity weakness.  Examination, however, showed that there was no atrophy.  Strength was 4/5 on the left side and 5/5 on the right.  Deep tendon reflexes were 2/4.  Straight leg raise was negative.

On the appellant's April 9, 2022, VA Form 21-526EZ, he reported that he experienced a burning pain in the right thigh, accompanied by weakness, which affected his mobility.

The appellant was noted to have failed to appear for an examination scheduled on April 26, 2022, at a contractor's facility.  

On a July 2022 VA Form 20-0996, the appellant contended that he experienced weakness and paralysis of the left lower extremity.

During the September 2022 Higher-Level Review Informal Conference, the appellant explained that he had not failed to report for scheduled examinations in April 2022.  Rather, he traveled to the address provided and the building was in the process of being demolished.  He called the contractor, who insisted the address was correct, and then drove up and down the road looking for the building before ultimately giving up.  He also reported that he requires a walker to ambulate and he falls due to his left lower extremity radiculopathy.

The appellant was thereafter afforded a contracted back conditions examination in November 2022, which included neurological examination of the bilateral lower extremities.  The appellant endorsed pain and weakness bilaterally.  Muscle strength was 4/5 bilaterally, without atrophy.  Reflexes were hypoactive (1+) bilaterally.  Sensation was decreased to the bilateral feet and toes (L5) but otherwise normal.  Straight leg raise was positive bilaterally.  The appellant was noted to experience moderate constant pain, paresthesias/dysesthesias, and numbness bilaterally.  There was involvement of both the femoral and sciatic nerves bilaterally.

A November 2022 VA clinical note states that the appellant reported being weak on the left side.  He used a special walker to get around and could not use his left side.  His wife helped with bathing, grooming, ambulation, dressing, and toileting.  The appellant also reported that he often falls.  He required the use of a shower chair and a transfer chair.

A January 13, 2023, Report of General Information states that the appellant reported having trouble walking.

In a January 27, 2023, statement, the appellant stated that he uses a walker on good days and a wheelchair on days where flare-ups leave him bedridden.  He explained that he cannot stand up on his own.  The symptoms used to only affect his left lower extremity, but now he has the same symptoms on the right side, after favoring the left for many years.

A January 31, 2023, Report of General Information states that the appellant contacted VA and reported that his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy precludes him from being able to walk or stand on his own.  On bad days, he needs a wheelchair.  He explained that his wife helps him get up in the morning and she performs grooming and cleaning activities.  The appellant reported that he experienced foot drop on the left side, which makes standing and walking very difficult.  Some days it is impossible due to pain, numbness, and tingling bilaterally.

Received on February 4, 2023, was a statement from the appellant's then-wife in which she stated that the appellant had a bad fall in November 2021 due to his feet dragging on the floor.  Since then, walking was difficult due to pain and burning.  Even with a walker, the appellant's feet dragging resulted in more falls.  He was subsequently given a wheelchair.

Also received on February 4, 2023, was a statement from the appellant's son, who had been helping to take care of the appellant for two years.  The son reported that it was unsafe for the appellant to get in and out of the shower by himself.  In the past year, he had fallen six times.  The appellant dragged his feet when he walked, which resulted in trips and falls, even back when he could use a walker.  Since the November 2021 fall, the appellant had mostly been in a wheelchair.  He can be in bed for weeks at a time.

A February 2023 VA primary care note states that the appellant had fallen multiple times, including on January 12, 2023.  He spends most days in a wheelchair.  There was decreased nerve stimulation to the thighs.  He can use a special walker at times, but he still falls frequently.  He can walk about five feet before his legs give out and he cannot stand for very long.

The appellant was afforded a contracted back conditions examination in February 2023, which included neurological examination of the bilateral lower extremities.  Muscle strength was 3/5 for left ankle dorsiflexion and great toe extension, and 4/5 bilaterally otherwise.  There was no atrophy.  Reflexes were decreased (1+) for the left knee and ankle, but normal for the right side (2+).  Sensation was decreased for the bilateral feet and toes (L5), but otherwise normal.  Straight leg raise was positive bilaterally.  The appellant had mild constant pain, paresthesias/dysesthesias, and numbness of the right lower extremity.  There was moderate constant pain, paresthesias/dysesthesias, and numbness of the left.

A June 2023 rating decision, in pertinent part, increased the ratings for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and right and left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerves to 20 percent, effective January 19, 2023.  

As delineated above, a July 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision, in pertinent part, awarded service connection for loss of use of the feet due to bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves and assigned an initial 100 percent rating, effective January 19, 2023.  Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on loss of use of both lower extremities below the knee, specially adapted housing, and an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment was granted, effective January 19, 2023.  The AOJ issued the rating decision to the appellant with a notification letter on July 21, 2023.  As the appellant is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating from January 19, 2023, the issues on appeal are limited to the period prior to January 19, 2023.  

Applying the facts to the criteria set forth above, the Board finds that (1) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023; (2) a rating of 40 percent, and no higher, is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023; (3) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023; and (4) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

Turning to the appellant's right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, the Board finds that such has been manifested by, at worst, moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic and femoral nerves.

As delineated above, the appellant's right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves has been manifested by, at worst, moderate constant pain, moderate paresthesias/dysesthesias, and moderate numbness.  Strength was, at worst, 4/5.  Deep tendon reflexes were, at worst, 2/4.  Sensation was decreased on the feet and toes but otherwise normal.  Given the lay and clinical evidence, including the clinical findings of diminished or hypoactive reflexes, the Board finds that the criteria for a moderate disability have been met.  

The evidence, however, is persuasively against a finding of moderately severe or severe incomplete paralysis.  No clinician has described the appellant's disability as greater than moderate in severity.  Although the appellant demonstrated diminished and strength reflexes, it was not at a grade reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability, nor did he exhibit signs or symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.  There was no muscle atrophy.

As such, initial 20 percent ratings for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve under DC 8520, and right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 are warranted.  

Turning to the left lower extremity, such has been manifested by, at worst, moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve and moderate incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve.  

As delineated above, the appellant's left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves has been manifested by, at worst, moderate constant pain, moderate paresthesias/dysesthesias, and moderate numbness.  Muscle strength was decreased to 4/5 during the period on appeal, and also noted to be reduced to 3/5 within one month of the end of the appeal period.  Strength was 4/5 in April 2022 on the left side but full on the right side at that time.  This is consistent with the appellant's consistent reports that his left lower extremity radiculopathy symptoms as worse than on the right throughout the period on appeal.  Deep tendon reflexes were, at worst, 2/4.  

The evidence, however, is persuasively against a finding of severe disability.  Although the appellant's left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves is productive of reflex impairment, it is not at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability, and no atrophy is present as required for the next higher rating under DC 8520.  No clinician has described the appellant's left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic or femoral nerve as greater than moderately severe in severity.   

The Board also notes the competent reports of the appellant, the appellant's son, and the appellant's former wife regarding bilateral foot drop and foot dragging, which has resulted in multiple falls.  However, the existence of foot drop does not warrant a higher rating for either lower extremity under any diagnostic code.  The overall severity and manifestations of the appellant's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy has not more nearly approximated severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscle atrophy, or complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of the knee weakened or (very rarely) lost.  Again, there was no atrophy and active movement of muscles below the knee was not absent for either extremity.  The Board has considered the lay evidence to the effect that a foot drop has been present, but finds that the objective findings on the clinical evidence, which establish that no foot drop or atrophy was present, to be more probative as to the presence of that finding.  

The Board has considered all other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes, but there is no evidence showing the appellant has neurological impairment associated with any other peripheral nerves that have not already been service-connected.  Therefore, a separate or higher rating under a different Diagnostic Code is not warranted.  

As set forth above, under the benefit-of-the-doubt rule, for the appellant to prevail, there need not be a preponderance of the evidence in his favor, but only an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence.  In other words, the evidence must be persuasively against the claim for the benefit to be denied.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 54 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Given the evidence set forth above, such a conclusion cannot be made in this case.  Under these circumstances, the record is sufficient to award (1) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023; (2) a rating of 40 percent, and no higher, is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve prior to January 19, 2023; (3) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023; and (4) an initial rating of 20 percent, and no higher, is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the femoral nerve prior to January 19, 2023.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for IVDS with degenerative disc disease.

The Board finds that remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error in that the clinician who conducted the February 2023 back examination provided conflicting information in the examination report as to the existence of flare-ups. 

The February 2023 clinician first noted that the "Veteran states has frequent flare-ups of back" and had a medical appointment scheduled for his back the next day.  However, in the very next section of the Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), the clinician marked "no" to the question "does the veteran report flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine?"  The clinician also stated that "the Veteran denies flare ups" in the section addressing functional limitations during flare-ups.  The examination report is therefore internally inconsistent.

Remand is warranted in order to obtain clarification as to the existence of flare-ups at the time of the February 2023 examination and, if there are such, the severity and frequency thereof.

The Board also observes that, following the June 2023 rating decision from which the instant appeal originated, a VA Form 21-526EZ was received on July 13, 2023, upon which the appellant's representative, inter alia, sought an increased rating for the appellant's back disability.  A July 21, 2023, VA Report of General Information states that the appellant called and asked to withdraw his claim.  A September 20, 2023, VA Report of General Information states that the appellant was contacted to clarify his withdrawal request.  The appellant stated that he had only intended to apply for major depression in July 2023 and that the other claims for increase were listed in error.  In a September 21, 2023, letter, VA informed the appellant that it had discontinued action on his claim for, inter alia, intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) with degenerative disc disease.

Subsequently, the appellant's January 2024 VA Form 10182 indicated his desire to appeal the back disability increased rating claim from the June 2023 rating decision.  There is no indication that the appellant's intent to withdraw his back disability claim in July 2023 and September 2023 was meant to apply to any back disability claim other than that had been included in the July 13, 2023, VA Form 21-526EZ.  However, as the instant back disability increased rating claim is being remanded, should the appellant no longer desire to pursue the claim, he may withdraw it.  

In any event, remand is warranted at this time in order to obtain an adequate addendum to the February 2023 back examination report.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).   

2. Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain.

5. Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain.

The Board finds that remand is necessary to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors in that the etiological opinions obtained for the appellant's diagnosed bilateral hip and knee strains are inadequate.  Pre-decisional duty to assist errors were made with respect to both the July 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions currently on appeal.

Prior to both the July 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions on appeal, the July 2023 contracted examiner provided negative etiological opinions regarding the bilateral hips because she disagreed with the diagnoses of right and left hip strains which had been rendered by a February 2023 contracted clinician, even though this July 2023 examiner did not conduct an examination and the AOJ made favorable findings in the July 2023 rating decision that the appellant had currently-diagnosed bilateral hip strains.  There is no indication that the diagnoses were clearly and unmistakably erroneous.  The July 2023 examiner made no such finding.  Regarding the bilateral knees, the July 2023 contracted examiner failed to consider whether the appellant's competently-reported falls were the result of his service-connected disabilities, or the theory of aggravation.  

The appellant contends that (1) altered gait, and (2) falls, due to his service-connected back disability and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves has caused or aggravated bilateral hip and knee disabilities.  The appellant has contended that, even when he is using assistive devices, he is unsteady and weak when changing from seated to standing positions and getting in and out of a wheelchair or car, which causes him to fall and injure himself.

Additionally, prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the September 2023 contracted medical opinions are based on an inaccurate factual premise regarding the length of time that the appellant has been confined to a wheelchair.  These opinions state that the appellant had been in a wheelchair ever since separation from active service.  This is inaccurate.  Medical records indicate that the appellant was able to ambulate with a crutch or cane through at least 2018.

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  As such, new medical opinions should be obtained.

During the July 20, 2023, Higher-Level Review Informal Conference, the appellant reported that Dr. B.C. of Orthopaedic Associates has provided arguments linking the appellant's hip disabilities to his radiculopathy.  Records from Orthopaedic Associates were obtained and associated with the claims file in April 2022 and July 2023, but such do not contain any such nexus opinion.  The appellant and his representative are advised that it would be to their benefit to identify or submit any such opinions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum to the February 2023 back examination report to clarify the internal inconsistencies regarding flare-ups.

The February 2023 clinician first noted that the "Veteran states has frequent flare-ups of back" and had a medical appointment scheduled for his back the next day.  However, in the very next section of the Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), the clinician marked "no" to the question "does the veteran report flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine?"  The clinician also stated that "the Veteran denies flare ups" in the section addressing functional limitations during flare-ups.  

The clinician providing the addendum should answer the questions contained in sections 2B and 3D of the back (thoracolumbar spine) conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). 

The need for additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician rendering the opinion.   

2. Obtain a medical opinion from a clinician as to the nature and etiology of the appellant's diagnosed bilateral hip and knee strains.  Access to the claims file should be made available to the examiner for review. 

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should opine as to the following: 

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the appellant's diagnosed bilateral hip and knee strains had onset in service or is otherwise related to the appellant's active service?

If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the appellant's diagnosed bilateral hip and knee strains were proximately due to or the result of service-connected back disability and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves, to include altered gait and falls?

If neither, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the appellant's diagnosed bilateral hip and knee strains were aggravated (made worse) by service-connected back disability and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic and femoral nerves, to include altered gait and falls?  If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity prior to aggravation. 

In providing the requested opinions, the clinician should review the relevant evidence of record. 

The appellant has explained that, even when he is using assistive devices, he is unsteady and weak when changing from seated to standing positions and getting in and out of a wheelchair or car, which causes him to fall and injure himself.  Medical records indicate that the appellant was able to ambulate with a crutch or cane through at least 2018.

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Behlen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.