Citation Nr: A25032111
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240125-412287
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as due to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), to include as due to service-connected PTSD, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED), to include as due to service-connected PTSD, is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), to include as due to service-connected PTSD, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1971 to October 1991. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a May 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The Veteran filed his timely VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal and chose direct review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). 

Accordingly, the Board will consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.

The Board notes the Veteran indicated on his January 2024 VA Form 10182 that he wished to appeal the denial of service connection for diabetes and hypertension. However, these issues were adjudicated in the August 2022 rating decision and not the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. The Veteran did not file an appeal for the August 2022 rating decision and these issues are not on appeal here.

The Board notes that exposure to herbicides has been conceded by VA. The Veteran is free to file a supplemental claim, on the appropriate form prescribed by the Secretary, if he wishes to submit new evidence. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501 , 20.1105 (2019). For example, a diagnosis of hypertension or diabetes.

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA, to include as due to service-connected PTSD 

2. Entitlement to service connection for IBS, to include as due to service-connected PTSD

3. Entitlement to service connection for ED, to include as due to service-connected PTSD

4. Entitlement to service connection for GERD, to include as due to service-connected PTSD

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations and opinions for his OSA, IBS, ED, and GERD disabilities in March and April 2023. However, there are no opinions of record that discusses the second prong of secondary service connection. 

The Board finds the March and April 2023 VA opinions inadequate due to failing to address the aggravation prong of secondary service connection. Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 91 (2018) (causation and aggravation are independent concepts and should have separate findings and rationale); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (findings of "not due to," "not ... examiner failed to address aggravation in the context of secondary service connection.

Thus, remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors in failing to obtain VA opinions that properly addressed both prongs of secondary service connection.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain VA opinions to determine the nature and likely etiology of the claimed OSA, IBS, ED, and GERD disabilities. The entire claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. Schedule an examination if deemed necessary by the examiner. All indicated tests and studies should be performed, and the clinical findings should be reported in detail. The examiner should address the following:

Whether it is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's OSA, IBS, ED, and/or GERD were (i) caused or (ii) aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include medication for the disabilities. See recent Codesheet.

The Board notes that causation and aggravation are independent concepts and should have separate findings and rationales. See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018). The examiner is reminded that there is NO requirement of "permanent aggravation"; rather, the Board seeks to determine whether there was aggravation in general.

All opinions offered must be accompanied by a clear rationale consistent with the evidence of record.

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Hetman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.