Citation Nr: A25032722
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-434468
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

1. Service connection for hearing loss is dismissed.

2. Service connection for tinnitus is dismissed.

REMANDED

3. Service connection for a respiratory disorder.

?

FINDINGS OF FACT

An April 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD) was not timely for any eligible decision as to the issues of service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria for dismissal of the claims for service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R.§§ 20.104, 20.203.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2010 to December 2011.  Also, he has active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from June 2009 to February 2010.

The case is on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision.

In the April 2024 NOD, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 RO decisions on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R.§§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for a respiratory disorder condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

DISMISSAL

Legal Criteria

Under 38 U.S.C. § 7105, an appeal to the Board must be initiated by the filing of a NOD in the form prescribed by the Secretary.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.201.  The NOD must be in writing and identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  Under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a) a NOD must identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees.  Except as provided in the case of simultaneously contested claims, a claimant, or his or her representative, must file a properly completed NOD with a decision by the RO within one year from the date that the agency mails the notice of the decision.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(A); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b).  The Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal, but the Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).

1. Service connection for hearing loss.

2. Service connection for tinnitus.

Analysis

In the April 2024 NOD, the Veteran listed claims of service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus.  They were most recently denied in a September 2022 rating decision.  However, the Board finds the appeal must be dismissed as the Veteran did not file a timely appeal for these claims and the NOD was not timely as to an eligible decision for these two claims.

VA received a "Fully Developed Claim" form (Form 21-526EZ), which included claims for service connection hearing loss and tinnitus on September 27, 2020.  A rating decision issued on September 13, 2022, denied service connection for those claims.  The Veteran was notified in the September 14, 2022 notification letter that if the Veteran did not agree with the decision, he had one year from the date of this letter to select a review option in order to protect the initial filing date for effective date purposes.  The RO specifically wrote, "You must file your request on the required application form for the review option desired."  It then informed the Veteran that if he wanted to appeal the decision to the Board of Veterans Appeals, he needed to submit a "VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)."  The notification letter included the website from where to obtain the form.  The Veteran subsequently filed a VA Form 10182 NOD on April 23, 2024.

The Board finds the appeal must be dismissed, as the April 2024 NOD is untimely as to the issues of service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus.  In this regard, a claimant must file a properly completed NOD with a decision by the RO within one year from the date that the RO mails the notice of the decision.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b).  In this case, the rating decision denying service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus was issued on September 13, 2022.  The Veteran had one year from that the date of the notification letter to file an NOD pertaining to those issues.  As VA received an NOD concerning these issues on April 23, 2024, he did not timely appeal the September 13, 2022 rating decision within the one year time limitation.  In addition, there is no documentation in the claims file suggesting that an extension for the period of filing an NOD was made by the Veteran.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(c).  As a result, an appeal of these issues is not properly before the Board in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, and the appeal of these issues is dismissed.  The Board notes that the April 23, 2024 appeal concerning the issue of service connection for a respiratory disorder is considered timely and is addressed in the remand section below.

In summary, the Board finds that the Veteran's April 23, 2024 appeal is not a proper appeal as it pertains to service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus under AMA and was improperly docketed; there is no matter in controversy properly before the Board and there are no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Therefore, the appeal must be dismissed.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Service connection for a respiratory disorder.

The Veteran contends that he has respiratory disorder as a result of in-service toxic exposure during his deployment to Southwest Asia (SWA).

The Veteran's service personnel records (SPRs) show that he was a helicopter repairer who deployed to SWA from November 2010 to December 2011.  He is a Persian Gulf Veteran presumed to have been exposed to toxic matter.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that in a November 2011 post-deployment examination, he reported exposure to fog oils, garbage, insect bites, JP8 or other fuels, paints, sand and dust, smoke from burning trash and feces, smoke from oil fire, and an "unknown chemical."  The STRs do not show reports of or treatment for respiratory symptoms.

The Veteran's post-service VA treatment records show that in August 2017, a treating physician diagnosed him with bronchitis. 

In March 2024, the Veteran was provided a VA examination for a respiratory disorder.  The examiner indicated that the available records were reviewed using the Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) and that an in-person examination, or telehealth, was not necessary as the existing medical evidence provided was sufficient to prepare the examination report and an in-person examination will likely provide no additional relevant evidence.  The examiner denied any respiratory diagnosis.  Further, he reported that "the records do not sufficiently reflect current condition and a telephone interview is required.  I attempted to contact the Veteran 4 times with no response." 

The Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, the RO did not afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination or obtain a medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's respiratory.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  In this regard, while the March 2024 examiner indicated that no in-person examination was necessary based on the records, he then indicated that the records available were not sufficient to complete a proper examination.  While the examiner called the Veteran who was unavailable, the claims file does not show that the Veteran was adequately notified that such examination would occur via phone.  No further attempt were made to contact the Veteran.  Furthermore, the examiner did not address the Veteran's diagnosis of bronchitis and the STRs and SPRs that shows the Veteran reported toxic exposure and is presumed to have been exposed to toxic matter.  As such, a remand is warranted to correct the deficiencies mentioned above.

Also, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to toxic matter.  The record shows she has not been provided a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) examination under the PACT Act.  While it is still unclear whether the Veteran has a respiratory disorder, having participated in a TERA, if the examiner finds a respiratory disorder, the Veteran should be afforded a TERA specific examination.

The claim is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's respiratory.  The examiner should review the claims file, and a copy of this remand.  If the examiner determines that a physical examination of the Veteran is necessary in order to provide the requested opinion, such should be scheduled.  The examiner is to conduct all tests and studies necessary.  Thereafter, the examiner is to:

State whether the Veteran has a respiratory disorder.  If no diagnosis is made, consider whether there is nevertheless functional impairment.

State whether it is at least as likely as not that the respiratory disorder had its onset during service or is otherwise related to service, to include potential toxic exposure while serving in Kuwait and Iraq (SWA) from November 2010 to December 2011.

Also, if there is a diagnosis of a respiratory disorder, the Veteran should be afforded a TERA examination under the PACT Act.  The examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service and conduct a synergistic and combined effect analysis of all toxic exposure risk activities that may provide a basis to a respiratory disorder. 

The examiner is asked to consider that the Veteran has been determined to be Persian Gulf Veteran and have presumptive toxic exposure while deployed to Southwest Asia from November 2010 to December 2011 as a helicopter repairman that was exposed to toxic matter.

The examiner should review, address, and discuss the Veteran's reports of onset and symptoms and treatment.  Also, the examiner should review, consider, and address the Veteran's particular deployment history, STRs, SPRs, and VA treatment records.

A rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nevarez-Myrick, Nancy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.