Citation Nr: A25032025
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473079
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence of record shows that his obstructive sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected adjustment disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service with the Navy form October 1983 to October 1987 and with the Army from March 1997 to March 2002.  

In February 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.  This constituted an initial decision, therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeal Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of February 2023 rating decision.  A June 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.  

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, requesting review of the June 2023 rating decision.  A November 2023 rating decision found new and relevant evidence was received to reconsider the Veteran's service connection claim for sleep apnea, however, the previous denial of service connection was confirmed and continued.  

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 requesting HLR of the November 2023 rating decision.  An April 2024 rating decision identified a duty to assist error during HLR for the sleep apnea claim.  The Regional Office (RO) found a failure to get an examination and/or medical opinion.  Therefore, the record would be developed for examination/opinion. 

An August 2024 rating decision adjudicated the claim on the merits rather than whether new and relevant evidence was submitted to warrant readjudication.  As such, the Board concludes that there was an implicit finding of new and relevant evidence to warrant readjudication, which is a favorable finding by the AOJ.  The Board will proceed to the address this claim on the merits.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A (2012); 38C.F.R. §3.104(c).  The August 2024 rating decision confirmed and continued the previous denial of service connection for sleep apnea.  

In September 2024, the VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing Direct Review of the August 2024 rating decision.  

The Board notes that less than one year has elapsed since August 26, 2024, the mailing of notice of the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal prior to the expiration of the one-year period.  Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  However, as the Board herein grants the benefit sought on appeal in full, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding.

Applicable Law and Regulations 

Entitlement to VA compensation may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active duty.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Direct service connection can be established if the Veteran shows (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Due consideration must be given to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for service connection for any disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Competent lay evidence is any evidence that does not require the proponent to have specialized education, training, or experience.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 309 (2007).  Lay statements can be considered competent to establish a diagnosis when the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, reports a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or describes symptoms which support a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Once evidence is deemed competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310, service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  In order to prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence of a service-connected disability, and (3) nexus evidence establishing either the current non-service-connected disability was proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability or was aggravated beyond its natural progress by a service-connected disability.  See also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448; Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (reasonable doubt to be resolved in the Veteran's favor); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is in approximate balance).

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran contends his sleep apnea is due to his service-connected adjustment disorder.  

The August 2024 rating decision made the following favorable findings: the Veteran was service connected for adjustment disorder; he had a diagnosed disability of obstructive sleep apnea; and the evidence of record showed participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) (industrial exposure to kerosene/small arms fire).  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In November 2022, T.F. (Psy.D.) provided a private assessment.  Doctor T.F. noted review of all the records provided from the Veteran's claims file and thorough review of the Veteran's medical history.  Doctor T.F. opined the Veteran experiences mental health symptoms from his military service and has multiple mental health diagnoses based on his treatment records.  The insomnia and other sleep impairment associated with this differs from the symptoms and impairment associated with sleep apnea.  There was ample evidence of multiple risk factors which show an association with sleep apnea.  The presence of mental health difficulties was at least as likely as not on par with the various risk factors for sleep apnea.  Associated factors could significantly contribute to the development of sleep apnea and/or aggravate sleep apnea, for example weight gain.  There was scientific evidence that mental health difficulties were at least as likely as not to cause sleep apnea through multiple pathways.  Doctor T.F. questioned the reliance of examiners on UpToDate because it did not reflect an adequate literature review related to the evidence associated with sleep apnea as secondary to mental health difficulties.  It was not peer reviewed research literature, but gave a basic overview of the characteristics of sleep apnea to non-experts, and did not address the growing body of primary source journal articles specifically related to sleep apnea secondary to mental health difficulties.  Describing what sleep apnea is characterized by as if this is what ultimately causes the condition confuses the signs and symptoms of the sleep apnea process for the cause.  Factors such as sleep positions, weight gain, dentition, and pharyngeal anatomy are symptoms of or may worsen the symptoms of the sleep apnea process but do not necessarily reflect the ultimate cause.  

The Veteran's mental health difficulties likely had a profound impact on the development and subsequent substantial aggravation of his sleep apnea.  Pharyngea anatomy explains only a minimal portion of the variability in measure like the Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI).  It could not be just an anatomical disease when surgery to alter anatomy are of minimal benefit to many individuals with obstructive sleep apnea.  Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea often have hyperarousal concerns (a low threshold for arousal) which is an underlying mechanism of obstructive sleep apnea.  Mental health difficulties could lead to this hyperarousal.  It was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was due to his psychiatric difficulties from his military service.  His mental health concerns created hyperarousal and other physiological issues which in turn directly and proximately caused his sleep apnea while also substantially aggravating and worsening the course and severity of the disease.  The scientific literature supported a direct, causal connection between psychiatric difficulties and sleep apnea.  There was no indication that his sleep apnea existed prior to the onset of his mental health concerns.  

In March 2023, Doctor T.F. provided an addendum opinion in response to the VA examiner.  Doctor T.F. opined a low threshold for arousal during sleep in relation to airway narrowing was viewed as one specific phenotype of obstructive sleep apnea.  Recent advances in obstructive sleep apnea pathogenesis using upper airway and respiratory phenotyping techniques have identified four key causes of obstructive sleep apnea.  A narrow or collapsable upper airway was the primary cause.  However, the anatomical contribution to obstructive sleep apnea varied substantially.  Impairment in pharyngeal anatomy could be modest and, in many patients, pharyngeal collapsibility asleep was not different to people without obstructive sleep apnea.  Thus, non-anatomical factors or phenotypes that modulate non-anatomical factors or phenotypes that modulate pharyngeal patency were crucial determinants of obstructive sleep apnea for many people.  These included impairment in pharyngeal dilator muscle control and function during sleep, increased propensity for awakening during airway narrowing, and respiratory control instability. 

Doctor T.F. opined that the VA examiner focused on definitive causation and failed to adequately consider substantial aggravation.  Given the absence of any examination findings demonstrating any anatomical abnormalities present in the Veteran, the contract examiner's speculative opinion should be disregarded as inadequate and inconsistent with the burden of proof mandated by VA policy.  

The November 2022 and March 2023 opinions of Doctor T.F. were accorded positive probative value as the medical provider was sufficiently informed of the relevant facts including the Veteran's lay statements so as to be able to form an appropriate medical opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  

In November 2022, the VA examiner opined the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  The Veteran was formally diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea April 2022 via a sleep study.  The Veteran submitted a lengthy medical opinion from Doctor T.F., a psychologist, which included multiple studies discussing sleep apnea and psychiatric disorders including the Veteran's adjustment disorder.  While each of these studies notes a co-morbidity of adjustment disorder and sleep apnea, currently no study showed a definitive causative etiology between adjustment disorder and sleep apnea.  These studies were very clear to note that there might be a correlation however there was no definitive established direct causative etiology.  Obstructive sleep apnea comorbidity with adjustment disorder was not consistent with a direct causation between a psychiatric disability and the development of obstructive sleep apnea.  Furthermore, these studies showing hypothesized arousal based on mechanism was found in central sleep apnea which is not present in this case.  

Obstructive sleep apnea was caused by the anatomical obstruction of the oropharyngeal airway by hypertrophy of the airway, collapse, or combination of both.  The most common cause for these was obesity but could also be due to oropharyngeal patency, tongue and tonsil size, or a collapsible portion that extends form the hard palate to the larynx.  The Veteran was not obese.  However, the medical literature was clear to state that the specific cause of sleep apnea was indeed due to an anatomical obstruction.  To state otherwise is patently false.  There was insufficient evidence to show a causative etiology between obstructive sleep apnea and psychiatric disorder.  Therefore, the Veteran's claimed sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of service-connected adjustment disorder.   

In October 2023, the VA examiner opined the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition of adjustment disorder.  Obstructive sleep apnea was a sleep related breathing disorder in which the upper airway collapsed and cut off oxygen to the lungs during sleep.  This in turn caused hypoxia to the brain which ultimately woke the Veteran up in order to take a normal breath to improve oxygenation.  While adjustment disorder could certainly affect the quality of sleep, there was no current research that delineated adjustment disorder as a cause of obstructive sleep apnea.  As obstructive sleep apnea was not caused by adjustment disorder, no link between the two disorders could be made.  Dempsy, J.A. et al, "Pathophysiology of sleep apnea," Physiological Reviews, 90(1), 47-112 (2010).  

The November 2022 and October 2023 VA opinions failed to address the aggravation prong of secondary service connection.  Therefore, these opinions were accorded little probative weight.  

In May 2024, the VA examiner opined the claimed the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition of adjustment disorder.  The examiner could not determine the baseline level of severity of the claimed condition based upon the medical evidence of record available prior to aggravation or the earliest medical evidence following aggravation by a service-connected condition.  Regardless of an established baseline, the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by a service-connected condition.  The examiner noted review of the conflicting medical evidence of record.  It was well established that obstructive sleep apnea was caused by mechanical obstruction of the upper airway leading to transient asphyxia which caused apnea events during sleep affecting sleep.  Among the highest risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea included a large neck circumference, obesity with high BMI, and there was also an association with chronic rhinosinusitis/nasal defects.  There was no pathophysiological connection between a mental health condition (including adjustment disorder) and obstructive sleep apnea.  While there were studies noting a correlation between the conditions of PTSD and obstructive sleep apnea, a high prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea in patients with PTSD, there was no established mechanism that established them in causation pathway/link.  Thus, one could not and should not extrapolate the data and speculate of a causation or aggravation link between any mental health condition and obstructive sleep apnea.  

The May 2024 VA examiner further opined the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  While the Veteran sustained a potential toxic exposure, this was not associated with or form part of the pathogenesis of obstructive sleep apnea.  Obstructive sleep apnea was caused by mechanical obstruction of upper airway leading to transient asphyxia which caused apnea events during sleep affecting sleep.  There was no pathophysiological connection between the exposure and obstructive sleep apnea.  None of these conditions cause mechanical obstruction of upper airway.  The highest risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea is obesity with high BMI and large neck circumference.  Chronic rhinosinusitis and nasal anatomical defects have also been linked to obstructive sleep apnea.  The Veteran's neck size was unknown.  However, based on pathophysiology and pathogenesis of obstructive sleep apnea, the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by TERA.   

The May 2024 VA examiner opined that obstructive sleep apnea was caused by mechanical obstruction of the upper airway, however, the supporting rationale failed to explain what mechanic obstruction was involved in this Veteran's case.  The examiner acknowledge that they did not know the Veteran's neck size and there was no indication that he was obese.  Therefore, the rationale failed to adequately explain why the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder was not a cause of his obstructive sleep apnea.  Regarding the negative TERA nexus, the opinion rationale failed to explain why there was no causal connection between the sleep apnea condition and his exposure to TERA in service.  A conclusory statement that there was no pathophysiology and pathogenesis between the two was relied on in addition to the mechanic obstruction argument discussed above.  The May 2024 VA opinions were accorded little probative weight.   

Based on a review of the evidence of record and consideration of the Veteran's credible reports, the Board concludes that there is at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the question of whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was incurred in or caused by his service-connected adjustment disorder.  Therefore, reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran, and service connection for his obstructive sleep apnea condition is granted.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.L. Byers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.