Citation Nr: A25032440
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231030-390433
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

For the period on appeal prior to January 17, 2023, an initial disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for the service-connected migraine headaches is granted.

For the period on appeal from January 17, 2023, the criteria for disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected migraine headaches, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the period on appeal prior to January 17, 2023, the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches more nearly approximate migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on average once a month over the last several months; at no time during the appeal period do the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches more nearly approximate very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged migraine attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, prior to January 17, 2023, the criteria for an initial disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for the service-connected migraine headaches have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

2.  For the period on appeal from January 17, 2023, the criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected migraine headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2004 to May 2005.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that rating decision, the RO granted service connection for migraine headaches with an initial noncompensable disability rating effective July 17, 2009, and an initial 30 percent disability rating from January 17, 2023.

In the same month, the Veteran appealed the October 11, 2023, rating decision to the Board by submitting an October 2023 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (notice of disagreement or NOD).  The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  As the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, the Board is limited to review of the evidence in the record up to and until the October 11, 2023, rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b).  

Notably, the Veteran's NOD disagreed with the effective date assigned for the 30 percent disability rating, and requested an effective date prior to January 17, 2023 for the assignment of the 30 percent disability rating for the service-connected migraine headaches.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Rather than limit the appeal to whether a 30 percent rating is factually ascertainable prior to January 17, 2023, the Board will construe the NOD liberally in the light most favorable to the Veteran which includes a determination of whether any compensable disability is warranted prior to January 17, 2023 and whether a disability rating in excess of 30 percent is warranted for the period on appeal from January 17, 2023.  

Any evidence associated with the claims after the October 11, 2023, rating decision has not been considered in this decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider in this decision, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings and Effective Dates

In this case, the RO assigned initial staged ratings (of 0 and 30 percent), effective from July 17, 2009 and January 17, 2023, respectively for the service-connected migraine headaches.  As noted above, the Veteran's appeal is for an effective date prior to January 17, 2023 for the assignment of the 30 percent disability rating. 

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred if the application is received within one year from such date.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3).  Similarly, the effective date of an award of increased disability compensation is the earliest date on which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability occurred if application is received within one year from that date. Otherwise, the effective date will be the date of VA receipt of the claim for increase, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a), (b)(2); Hazan v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 511 (1997).

In this case, the Veteran's appeal for an effective date prior to January 17, 2023 for the assignment of the 30 percent rating for service-connected headaches is essentially a disagreement with the initial staged ratings assigned for the service-connected headaches.  As noted above, rather than limiting the appeal to whether the criteria for a 30 percent rating are factually ascertainable prior to January 17, 2023, the Board will construe the Veteran's NOD broadly to include an appeal for higher initial disability ratings throughout the period on appeal, to include whether higher initial staged ratings are warranted prior to, and since, January 17, 2023.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  All reasonable doubt regarding a degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where, the appeal arises from the original assignment of a disability evaluation following an award of service connection, the severity of the disability at issue is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Moreover, staged ratings are appropriate in any increased-rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for the service-connected migraine headaches prior to January 17, 2023, and in excess of 30 percent thereafter

The Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  As stated above, the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, granted service connection for migraine headaches with a noncompensable disability rating effective July 17, 2009, and a 30 percent disability rating from January 17, 2023.

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, migraine headaches manifested by very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability warrant a maximum schedular 50 percent disability rating.  A 30 percent disability rating is warranted for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  Migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months are rated as 10 percent disabling.  Migraine headaches with less frequent attacks are rated as noncompensable.   38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

The Court has defined "prostrating" migraine headaches as those migraine attacks that typically produce a lack of vitality or powerlessness.  Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 70 (2020) (citing Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018)).  The phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency greater than once a month.  See id.  Further, the term "productive of severe economic adaptability" has been explained as "either producing or capable of producing severe economic inadaptability."  See id. at 70.

The criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the criteria corresponding to the lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id.  (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria require that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having the meaning of either "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

The Board acknowledges the VA Adjudicative Procedures Manual M21-1 (hereinafter M21-1) contains provisions regarding rating headache disabilities.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the Board is not bound by the provisions of the M21-1 and the manual does not "carry the force of law."  DAV v. Sec'y of Veterans Affs., 859 F.3d 1072, 1077 (Fed. Cir. 2017).  It is "an internal manual used to convey guidance to VA adjudicators.  It is not intended to establish substantive rules beyond those contained in statute and regulation." Id.  The M21-1 provisions do not go through the regular rulemaking procedures and is little more than evidence as to how VBA applies law and regulation in practices; it is not binding on the Board as it is not a regulation, instruction of the Secretary, or OGC opinion.  Id.; see also 38 U.S.C. § 7104 (c).  The regulations further clarify that the Board "is not bound by Department manuals, circulars, or similar administrative issues."  38 C.F.R. § 20.105.

Nevertheless, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Overton v. Wilkie held that the Board is required to discuss "any relevant provisions contained in the [M21] as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases, but because it is not bound by those provisions, it must make its own determination before it chooses to rely on an [M21] provision as a factor to support its decision."  Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018).  More recently, the Court has further explained that the Board cannot simply invoke or ignore a relevant M21-1 provision to support its decision but must provide an independent rationale relating this decision to the relevant guidance.  Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 75, 80 (2021).

Pursuant to Wilson, the Board finds that VA's M21-1 does contain guidance relevant to the adjudication of the issue currently on appeal.  Specifically, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A of the M21-1 provides general guidelines for the terms "prostrating," "completely prostrating," and "severe economic adaptability" in the context of evaluating migraine headaches.

With respect to "prostrating" the M21-1 indicates that the term means "causing extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, debilitation or incapacitation with substantial inability to engage in ordinary activities."

Regarding "completely prostrating" the M21-1 indicates that the term means, "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness with essentially total inability to engage in ordinary activities" [emphasis in original].

With respect to "severe economic inadaptability" the M21-1 indicates that the term denotes a degree of substantial work impairment.  It does not mean the individual is incapable of any substantially gainful employment.  Evidence of work impairment includes but not necessarily limited to the use of sick leave or unpaid absence.

The M21-1 further notes that although prostrating is substantially defined by how the disabled individual subjectively feels and functions when having migraine headache symptoms, medical evidence is required to establish that the reported symptoms are due to the service-connected migraine headaches.  A Veteran's own testimony regarding symptoms and limitations when having those symptoms can establish prostration as long as the testimony is credible, and symptoms are otherwise competently attributed to migraine headaches through medical evidence.

The M21-1 further indicates that 38 CFR 4.124a does not define the terms less frequent for the zero percent criterion or very frequent for the 50 percent criterion, however the overall rating criteria structure provides a basis for guidance.  "Less frequent" is defined in the M21-1 as characteristic prostrating attacks on average more than two months apart over the last several months.  "Very frequent" is defined as characteristic prostrating attacks on average less than one month apart over the last several months.  Per the M21-1, frequency of migraine headache attacks or episodes is a factual determination and headache journals, which routinely and relatively contemporaneously record headache episodes may be accepted as credible lay testimony regarding headache frequency, prostration, and occupational impairment.  Headaches recorded on non-workdays may be used to prove frequency and prostration however they will not generally be relevant to work availability and performance or limitations which are considerations in determining severe economic inadaptability.

The Veteran had four VA examinations for this claim during the appeal period.

In a June 2012 VA examination, the Veteran reported having headaches beginning in 2004 which an examiner diagnosed as stress headaches secondary to her heavy gear.  The secondary headaches began while in theater and the Veteran reported she self-treated with ibuprofen with fairly good results.  She reported continuing headaches but with less frequency about three to four a month which she treats with ibuprofen with good results.  The Veteran's description of symptoms includes pain localised on one side of the head which worsens with physical activity, and changes in vision.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine headaches, but he marked yes for having prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain.  The examiner noted the frequency was less than once every two months but also marked that the Veteran had very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine headache pain.  The examiner noted the functional impact on her ability to work as absenteeism because she often has to leave work when the headaches occur.

In an October 2019 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed migraines.  The Veteran reported the onset in 2004 and that her headaches have worsened and now occur about three to four times per week.  The Veteran reported taking Sumatriptan as needed.  The Veteran's description of symptoms includes pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of the head, sensitivity to light and sound, and changes in vision.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of either a migraine or non-migraine headaches pain.  The examiner noted the functional impact to her ability to work was difficulty focusing at times due to migraines.

In an April 2021 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed tension headaches.  The Veteran reported current symptoms of headaches, heavy feeling behind her eyes, radiating up and to the back of her head, and a nausea feeling.  The Veteran reported taking ibuprofen as needed but tries not to take it if not necessary.  The Veteran reported the impact on employment as her employer allows her to work from home four times a week.  Additional symptoms noted were nausea and sensitivity to light.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of either a migraine or non-migraine headaches pain.

In a January 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed migraines.  The Veteran reported she is starting to have more visual symptoms with her migraines.  Treatment was noted as ibuprofen, Topamax, and Tylenol as needed.  Symptoms were described as pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, changes in vision, and sensory changes.  The examiner stated the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks of a migraine or non-migraine headaches pain that occurs once every month.  The examiner stated the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The Veteran reported one to two weeks work time lost in the last twelve months and the impact on employment was described as difficulty focusing at times due to the migraines especially with her visual changes associated with the migraines.

In a September 2013 gastroenterology private record, the Veteran was reported as having frequent headaches.  See December 2013 Medical Treatment Record.  In an April 2015 private medical record for a fibromyalgia referral, the Veteran was noted to have a history of migraines.  See September 2016 Medical Treatment Record.

VA treatment records show a July 2014 mental health note where the Veteran reported that her migraine headaches have begun to flare back up.  In an August 2014 primary care note the Veteran was seen for complaints of headaches.  She stated she had migraines while in service and they were recurrent and she cannot tolerate light.  She reported using Tylenol with relief.  The physician noted that her headaches were recurrent, and they would plan to start her on Excedrin.  In an October 2014 mental health note, the Veteran reported having daily migraines for which she takes Excedrin and is no longer taking a prescription migraine medication because her primary care provider through the medication interaction may be causing her psychiatric occurrence a few weeks prior.  In a December 2015 primary care note, the Veteran reported intermittent headaches that occur sometimes every two days and she has started back on the Excedrin and would like a neurology evaluation.  In a January 2016 primary care note, the Veteran reported headaches every other day.  The physician indicated she would review the head CT. 

The ameliorative effect of medication, where the diagnostic code does not specifically outline use of medication in the criteria, may not be considered in evaluating the disability.  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  Stated another way, when assigning an evaluation, if the diagnostic code under which the Veteran is evaluated "does not specifically contemplate the effects of medication, the Board is required pursuant to Jones to discount the ameliorative effects of medication."  McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271 (2016).  Here, the rating criteria do not specifically consider the effects of medication.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

Here, it is plausible that some of the Veteran's headaches may be longer lasting and more severe in the absence of the Veteran's use of ibuprofen, Excedrin, Tylenol, Sumatriptan, Topamax, and other migraine medications over the years.  However, based on the Veteran's lay statements regarding the severity of her headache symptoms, she has consistently reported the severity of headache symptoms before indicating that medication can help those symptoms.  In other words, the Veteran described the frequency and severity of her headaches, and then subsequently indicated what medication she took and whether it helped alleviate those symptoms.  Accordingly, it is reasonable to infer, based on the Veteran's lay statements, that the description of her symptoms as noted above, indicate the frequency and severity of her headaches followed by her symptoms with the use of medication.  The assignment of a rating in this case is based on the pre-medication description of the frequency, duration and severity of symptoms and as such, the Board has discounted the effects of the Veteran's migraine medications in this case.  

In this case, prior to the January 2023 VA examination, the evidence is at least approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches more nearly approximate characteristic prostrating attacks averaging once a month over the last several months.  In this regard, the June 2012 VA examination showed that the Veteran had prostrating attacks less than once every two months and the Veteran had reported she has them every three to four months but with use of ibuprofen for relief.  The Veteran had very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of a non-migraine headache pain.  The Veteran's VA treatment records and private medical records also indicate a history of migraine or headaches throughout the entire appeal period.  Additionally, the January 2023 VA examination showed that her characteristic prostrating attacks were of a frequency averaging once a month and provided a positive nexus stating the record shows ongoing migraines that require medications and impede the Veteran's ability to perform her job tasks at times.

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches more nearly approximate characteristic prostrating attacks averaging once a month over the last several months, when considering the ameliorative effects of medication.  Accordingly, an initial disability rating of 30 percent for the service-connected migraine headaches is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 53 (1990).

However, for the entire period on appeal, the evidence persuasively weighs against assignment of a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected migraine headaches.  In this regard, at no point during the period on appeal, do the Veteran's migraine headaches more nearly approximate migraine headaches with very frequent completely prostrating attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  

The Veteran is currently employed, and the January 2023 VA examiner specifically noted that the Veteran reported the impact on employment was impeding her ability to perform her job tasks at times.  While the Veteran reported having to leave work when the headaches occur in the June 2012 VA examination, in the subsequent October 2019 and January 2023 VA examinations, the Veteran reported difficulty focusing at times.  The Veteran's migraines have also not been described, prior to medication use, as causing extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, debilitation or incapacitation with substantial inability to engage in ordinary activities and the record does not show that the Veteran's migraines cause severe economic inadaptability where the Veteran has had substantial work impairment.  While VA and private treatment records indicate that the Veteran has sought treatment for headaches during the rating period, the available lay and medical evidence does not suggest that the migraine headaches are of such frequency, duration, and severity as to more nearly approximate the criteria for a 50 percent rating.  

Accordingly, an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected migraine headaches is not warranted during any period on appeal, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robinson, C. B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.