Citation Nr: A25032629
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250218-516776
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left shoulder disability is causally related to his active-duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a left shoulder disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran honorably served in the United States Marine Corps Reserve on active duty for training from September 1957 to March 1958.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2025 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the February 2025, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ January 2025 decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As a final preliminary matter, generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act (AMA) docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows Veterans to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new VA Form 10182 within 60 days from when the Board receives the original VA Form 10182, or one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, whichever is later, unless (1) a Veteran has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§?20.302 and 20.303, or (2) the Veteran or their representative has requested a waiver of the ability to request to switch dockets during this timeframe.  See also Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305, 307.  If the Board issues a decision before this timeframe has elapsed - and does not otherwise find that the appellant waived the ability to request a docket switch - the Board fails to afford the appellant due process.

In this case less than one year has elapsed since the Veteran was notified of the November 2024 rating decision on appeal and less than 60 days has elapsed from when the Board received the original VA Form 10182.  However, due to the Veteran's age, this case has been advanced on the Board's docket (AOD).  Moreover, as the Board is granting the Veteran's claim in full, no prejudice will result from issuance of this decision.

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is granted.  

The Veteran contends his left shoulder disability was caused by an in-service injury, during the Veteran's active duty for training service.  See November 1998 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active-duty service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Where the evidence shows a "chronic disease" in service or "continuity of symptoms" after service, the disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service.  For the showing of a "chronic" disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  With chronic disease during active service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected unless they are clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  Generally, if a condition noted during active service is not shown to be chronic, then, a "continuity of symptoms" after service is required to establish service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

The term "Veteran" is defined in 38 U.S.C.A. § 101 (2) as "a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  The term "active military, naval, or air service" includes (1) active duty, (2) any period of active-duty training (ACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty, and (3) any period of inactive-duty training (INACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty.  38 U.S.C.A. § 101 (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a); see Biggins v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 474, 477-78.

ACDUTRA is defined, in part, as "full-time duty in the Armed Forces performed by reserves for training purposes."  38 U.S.C.A. § 101 (22); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(c).  The term INACDUTRA is defined, in part, as duty, other than full-time duty, under sections 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505 of the title 32 [U. S. Code] or the prior corresponding provisions of law.  38 U.S.C.A. § 101 (23); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(d).

While service on active duty alone is sufficient to meet the statutory definition of Veteran, service on ACDUTRA (or INACDUTRA), without more, will not suffice to give one "Veteran" status.  Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 172 (2010).  Before Veteran status can be established for a period of such service, it must first be established that a claimant was disabled from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty during ACDUTRA, or that he or she was disabled from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty during INACDUTRA.

Although medical evidence is generally necessary for a nexus to service, lay evidence can be sufficient to show continuity of symptoms after service, as a foundation for a nexus opinion, or to link chronic in-service symptoms to the same diagnosed current disability, or as a substitute for a nexus.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of the facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. §§3.159(a)(2).

It is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record.  38 U.S.C. § 7104(a).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  When the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 778 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In this case, the Veteran's May 1957 military enlistment medical examination reported the Veteran had no medical limitations and the only abnormalities identified were body marks and/or scars.  See STR - Medical (Report of Medical Examination). April 2023.  However, later in 1957 while the Veteran was serving on active duty for training the Veteran was medically treated four times for a left shoulder injury.  See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility, September 2024.  The Veteran reported his 1957 left shoulder injury happened while he played football with his fellow service members.  The Veteran further reported since this left shoulder injury, he has always had some in pain in his left shoulder and recalled being told at the time of the injury he may have experienced a chipped bone, that was not detected by an x-ray.  See May and November 1998 VA 21-4138 Statements in Support of Claim.

In 2017, the Veteran sought VA medical treatment for his left shoulder and was diagnosed with arthritis in his left shoulder.  In this 2017 VA treatment record, the Veteran reported his football injury resulted in left shoulder pain that has continued and worsened since.  See CAPRI, May 2017.

In response to the Veteran's September 2024 service connection claim for his left shoulder disability, VA completed a shoulder and arm examination of the Veteran, and the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with left shoulder strain and degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic.  During this examination, the Veteran reported the onset of his left shoulder disability was November 1957, during his active duty for training service after injuring his left shoulder playing football.  The Veteran denied any other intervening injury of his left shoulder and noted that his condition has worsened over time.  See November 2024 C&P Exam - Shoulder and Arm Conditions VA Examination.  The Board finds the Veteran has established he has a current disability, a left shoulder disability, satisfying the first element of service connection.

In December 2024, VA completed a medical opinion that opined the Veteran's left shoulder disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The opinion's rationale was a nexus for service connection cannot be made at this time due to the missing elements of origin and chronicity of the current condition as found in the C&P exam; a disability which began in service or was caused by some event in service must be considered "chronic" before a nexus for service connection can be established.  Although an acute left shoulder condition is noted in the service treatment records, no permanent residual or chronic disability is shown by the service medical records or demonstrated by evidence immediately following discharge from the service.  See December 2024 C&P Exam - Shoulder and Arm Conditions VA Medical Opinion.  However, the examiner did not address the Veteran's statements or reports of his continued symptoms since onset and that such symptoms have worsened over time, nor did the examiner address prior VA treatment records that documented the Veteran was treated in 2017 for left shoulder treatment and the Veteran reported having a history of left shoulder pain treatment for left shoulder arthritis.  Moreover, the examiner did not opine as to the etiology of the Veteran's left shoulder disability.  Therefore, the Board finds the opinion has minimal probative value.

The Veteran has consistently and thoroughly described his shoulder injury from football while on active duty for training, the subsequent onset of his left shoulder disability symptoms, and that for the last sixty-plus years he has endured his symptoms and, upon worsening, sought medical treatment.  The Veteran's service treatment records and VA treatment records corroborate the Veteran's reported in-service injury or incurrence of his left shoulder injury.  Moreover, as part of the January 2025 rating decision, the AOJ conceded the Veteran has a left shoulder disability and that the Veteran's service treatment records show a qualifying event, injury, or disease that had its onset during the Veteran's active-duty service.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  Therefore, the Board finds the Veteran has established there was an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury of his left shoulder, satisfying the second element of service connection.

As to the third element of service connection, a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the Board finds the Veteran is competent to report his current left shoulder disability symptoms and their onset.  The Veteran claimed his left shoulder disability symptoms began during his active-duty service and have continued since, with no reason to find him not credible.  Therefore, the third element of service connection, a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service has been shown.  

Accordingly, the Veteran's service connection claim for a left shoulder disability is granted.

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Morales

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.