Citation Nr: A25032789
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448269
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1997 to July 2001 and October 2002 to March 2003. This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeal (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted her claim for service connection for migraines headaches. Subsequently, in October 2023, the RO denied this claim. In response, in November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Higher-Level Review Request seeking review of the October 2023 rating decision. Thereafter, in November 2023, the RO again denied this claim. 

In response, the Veteran submitted a June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (NOD) and selected the Direct Review docket at the Board.

Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of October 31, 2023-the date of the rating decision subject to the November 2023 higher-level request.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after October 31, 2023, the Board did not consider it. 

As a final note, in June 2024, the Veteran was informed that she had a year from the date the November 2023 rating decision was mailed to her or within 60 days of the date the Board received her NOD to switch her Board review option. The Veteran did not respond to the Board's June 2024 letter. As more than year passed since the November 2023 rating decision was issued and the 60-day period specified in the June 2024 letter has lapsed, the Board finds that the period to switch her Board review option has expired. Accordingly, the Board will adjudicate her appeal.

Service Connection - Headaches

After reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the October 2023 rating decision. 

Specifically, the September 2023 and October 2023 VA examiners failed to address an alternative theory of entitlement raised by the record. In this regard, the Veteran reported that her headaches began during service and continued to the present, but neither examiner addressed this theory of entitlement. This is of particular importance because the Veteran sought treatment for the headaches during service and a few months after she separated from service. See April 2001 Service Treatment Record (STR) and October 2003 VA Treatment Record. Accordingly, the Board finds that an addendum opinion is needed to address whether the headaches had their onset in service.

In ordering?a?remand in the instant case, the Board is not making a preliminary formal finding as to the credibility of the Veteran's lay reports.?Rather, the Board is merely requesting that the?examiner?on remand consider the Veteran's own descriptions of the history of her migraine headaches.?See Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332, 338-39 (2020).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO should send the claims file to an appropriate VA clinician to provide an addendum that determines whether the headaches had their onset in service.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination. If a clinical evaluation is deemed necessary to answer the questions presented, one should be scheduled. A notation indicating that the claims file and remand was reviewed should be included in the examination report. Following review of the file and this remand, the examiner is to address the following:  

(a.) Please state at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that the migraine headaches had their onset during service. Please explain why or why not. 

In providing a response to Part (a), please specifically consider and address the Veteran's STR showing complaints and treatment for headaches and her treatment after service. See April 2001 STR and October 2003 VA Treatment Record October 2003 VA Treatment Record. Please explain why or why not.

In providing the requested opinions, consider the Veteran's description of her in-service symptoms as well as her post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of her current condition, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about her symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or are they implausible?

Please keep in mind that the phrase "at least as likely as not" means that "the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or is nearly equal

(The Board reminds the Veteran that in asking the examiner to accept the history she provided, the Board is not at this time making an assessment of the credibility of her statements).    

In offering any opinion, the examiner should consider medical and lay evidence dated both since the filing of the claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered. If the examiner's opinion is negative, he or she must clearly explain why. If he or she cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this. 

 

S.C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Foster, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.