Citation Nr: A25032554
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240408-431333
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD most nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks; the Veteran's PTSD did not manifest by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from September 2015 to January 2023.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the Veteran was gainfully employed throughout the rating period on appeal.  See e.g., January 2024 VA Examination.  Thus, the issue of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability has not been raised by the record.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent for PTSD from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a rating higher than 30 percent for his service-connected PTSD.  The Board notes that, in a March 2025 rating decision, the AOJ awarded the Veteran a 70 percent rating for his PTSD, effective September 13, 2024.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Thus, the issue before the Board is entitlement to an initial rating higher than 30 percent from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024.

A 30 percent rating is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), and chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, and recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted if it is productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating contemplates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Lastly, a 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Board notes that the symptoms enumerated under the schedule for rating mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular disability rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  When the symptoms and/or degree of impairment due to a Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability cannot be distinguished from any other diagnosed psychiatric disorders, VA must consider all psychiatric symptoms in the adjudication of the claim.  Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his PTSD in January 2024.  The VA examiner opined the Veteran's PTSD most closely approximated occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  The Veteran reported that he lives with his wife, and they have a good relationship.  He also reported that he stays in contact with his parents, siblings, and a few friends.  The Veteran reported working at Fort Riley as an advisor for soldiers and loving his job, although his lack of sleep affected his mood and motivation during the day causing him to sometimes be on guard during work.  The Veteran had the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  The Veteran affirmatively denied any suicidal or homicidal ideations.  The examiner noted the Veteran was appropriately dressed and groomed, had normal and goal-directed thought processes, did not have any signs of hallucinations or delusions nor of obsessive or ruminative thoughts.  The examiner did note the Veteran was noticeably anxious in the examination with an irritable mood.

The Veteran's treatment records present a similar disability picture.  Throughout service treatment records, the Veteran regularly denied suicidal ideation, he was reported to have a normal affect and thought processes, and there is no indication he ever struggled with memory problems.  In September 2021, the Veteran reported a panic attack he experienced when he had to recertify in the gas chamber, but there is nothing in the records to indicate he regularly experienced panic attacks from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024.  He also regularly reported a "really good" marital relationship and that he had additional social support from his childhood best friend and friends from his unit.  

When considering all of the evidence of record, the Board finds, from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024, the Veteran's PTSD disability picture most nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, which was contemplated by his currently assigned 30 percent rating.  The evidence of record does not show the Veteran experienced symptoms of the type and severity contemplated by the 50 percent rating during the appeal period.

The Veteran enjoys good relationships with his wife, friends, and family.  He can maintain employment in a job he loves.  The Board's decision is by no means meant to minimize the struggles the Veteran faces with his PTSD.  Rather, the Board notes that, instead of demonstrating symptoms such as flattened affect, panic attacks more than once a week,  difficulty in understanding complex commands, impairment of short- and long-term memory, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, or an inability to perform the activities of daily living, the Veteran maintained employment and was noted to be appropriately groomed, with his judgment intact.  There is simply not sufficient evidence to indicate the Veteran's occupational and social impairment most closely approximated reduced reliability and productivity from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024.  

The Board appreciates the statements and reports submitted by the Veteran and accepts them as both competent and credible evidence of the nature of his symptoms.  However, even accepting that the Veteran experienced all these symptoms, his symptoms were not of the type, nature, severity, or frequency, as those contemplated by the 50 percent rating during the appeal period.  As the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the rating criteria for a higher 50 percent disability rating from January 27, 2023, to September 13, 2024, it follows that his symptoms also did not meet the even more severe rating criteria for an increased 70 or 100 percent disability rating.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Feistritzer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.