Citation Nr: A25032963
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230417-340316
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating of 100 percent for depressive disorder (psychiatric disorder), is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment during the entire appeal period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 100 percent, but not higher, for psychiatric disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9440, 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2017 to December 2019.  

This matter is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from November 2022 (increased rating for psychiatric disability) and March 2023 (service connection for migraine headaches and for TBI) rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the April 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran timely appealed the portion of the rating decisions pertaining to the issues above and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the RO.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 (increased rating for psychiatric disability) and the March 2023 (service connection for migraine headaches and for TBI) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claim of increased rating for psychiatric disorder, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

Further, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for migraine headaches and TBI, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

1. Disability Rating for Psychiatric Disorder

By way of background, an April 2022 rating decision granted service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood with cannabis use disorder (also claimed as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and depression).  The RO assigned a 50 percent evaluation effective December 31, 2019, the day after the Veteran's discharge from service.  

The Veteran submitted an August 2022 claim seeking an initial higher rating for the psychiatric disorder.  A November 2022 rating decision increased the psychiatric rating to 70 percent effective May 19, 2022, the date of receipt of an intent to file claim.  

After this appeal was submitted in April 2023, the Veteran subsequently submitted an October 2023 increased rating claim for psychiatric disorder.  A December 2023 rating decision recharacterized the Veteran's disability as service-connected depressive disorder, alcohol induced, and cannabis disorder, and increased his rating to 100 percent effective September 6, 2023, the date of receipt of an intent to file claim.   

In light of Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), while the Veteran at various times was service connected for multiple psychiatric conditions, the Board has recharacterized the issues into one issue encompassing any psychiatric disorder.  

The question before the Board is whether the Veteran is entitled to a higher rating for his service-connected psychiatric disorder.  

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.  

The Veteran presented for a VA examination in March 2022.  He was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had an occupational and social impairment with occasional decreased in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  Regarding his social life, the Veteran reported that he was separated from his wife a month after leaving the military following a domestic violence incident that led to his arrest.  He reported struggling with housing instability and often living in his car in the year after he separated from service.  He reported having a somewhat contentious relationship with his girlfriend until he was arrested in May 2021 for failing to appear in court for the domestic violence incident involving his wife.  After his release from prison in February 2021, he did not have his car or any of his other belongings what remained in the custody of his ex-girlfriend.  He reported being homeless after being released from prison and thus, had to live with his stepfather.  When asked about social relationships, he described smoking marijuana daily with friends from high school.  

He reported not being employed since separation from service.  He reported that he could not work because of his anger problem.  He used to enjoy working with his hands but does not want to do that anymore and rather have a job where he sits down.  He also expressed a desire to be self-employed.  Regarding his mental history, it was noted that the Veteran does have fleeting thoughts of suicide several times a week.  He reported having problems managing depression, anger, and anxiety since service.  He had difficulty managing stress from being unemployed, uncertainty in finding a career, financial problems, not having a car, and being socially isolated.  

Regarding symptoms that apply to his diagnoses, the examiner noted that the Veteran had depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; disturbance of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  

He presented for another VA examination in September 2022.  He was diagnosed with cannabis use disorder, and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decreased in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  The Veteran reported that he lived with his girlfriend and remained separated from his wife.  He did not work or go to school.  When asked about activities, he stated that he is "blaming other people" and "smoking marijuana."  He did not have any apparent in gainful employment.  He reported symptoms of anger, low sleep quantity, bad dreams, low mood, anxiety, and trouble maintaining relationships.  He also reported that he verbally lashes out at others.  

Regarding symptoms that apply to his diagnosis, the examiner noted that the Veteran had depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  

The Veteran was also afforded a January 2023 VA examination.  He was diagnosed with chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood, and early remission of cannabis use disorder.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  Regarding his symptoms, the examiner noted that the Veteran's condition manifest in symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; impairment of short and long term memory, for example, retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The examiner remarked that the Veteran's adjustment disorder was chronic in nature.  

The Veteran most recently presented for a November 2023 VA examination.  However, as this examination occurred outside the evidentiary window of the appeal, it may not be considered in evaluating the Veteran's condition.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

The record also shows that the Veteran was treated at VA facilities for his psychiatric disorder.  During a June 2020 VA treatment, the Veteran reported that he was living in his car for the past 2 months and would shower at gas stations when he needs one.  He reported that he worked full time installing streetlights for the state.  

In a July 2020 VA treatment, he reported that he avoids thinking and discussing his experience, and had peristent diminished emotional state, difficulty experiencing positive emotions, hypervigilance, hyperarousal, irritability, and angry outburst.  He reported that he could not share a room and lives in his car.  

The Veteran was treated at a VA emergency room in December 2020 for suicidal ideations and situational stress.  He reported that he was homeless, lived in his car, and wanted to tell someone before he harmed himself but did not share a specific plan.  He felt hopeless, helpless, and isolated.  In the past month, he had worked or was working out details of killing himself.  

During a June 2021 VA treatment, he reported that he struggled with being able to focus, was constantly on guard, and avoided people and places.  He reported that he had been working with a temporary agency as a forklift operator at BMW for 3 months prior to his arrest.  

In a September 2022 VA treatment, he reported being unemployed and having a history of incarceration since his separation from service.  He reported having a desire to own a business but reported that he had difficulty working due to his psychiatric disorder.  

At an October 2022 VA treatment, he reported that he has been having thoughts of suicide but never followed through.  He reported depression, anxiety, and admitted to having suicidal ideation.  He complained of being homeless since he got discharged from service.  He would sleep in his car and does not share houses or room with anyone.  

In a February 2023 VA treatment, it was noted that the Veteran sought to participate in the Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) program.  He reported that he started a position several months ago through a temporary agency but did not have success.  He reported concerns with anxiety, paranoia, sensitivity to sounds and noises in a work area, and increased irritability.  

During a March 2023 VA treatment, it was noted that the Veteran had very severe poor concentration and inability to pay attention, very severe forgetfulness, very severe difficulty falling or staying asleep, severe feeling of anxiety, very severe irritability and annoyance, very severe poor frustration tolerance, and very severe feeling easily overwhelmed by things.  He reported that he does not have a family and separated from his wife.  He has a girlfriend and reside with her since April 2022.  

The Veteran also submitted lay statements in support of his claim.  In a May 2020 lay statement, the Veteran reported that he was currently working and homeless and living in his car.  In a December 2020 lay statement, he reported being homeless.  In the January 2023 claim, he reported that he cut off all of his family, never looked at people in the eyes, and felt like being scared and in jail.  

Upon review of the evidence of record during the appeal period, the Board notes that the January 2023 examination show the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, and judgment that was associated with the 70 percent criteria.  However, a review of his lay statements and the entirety of the medical record shows that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was worse than the findings reflected in the examination, and likely manifested by symptoms associated with a 100 percent rating.  

A 100 percent rating warrants evidence showing total occupational and social impairment.  "Total" is defined as "whole, not divided; full; complete," and "utter, absolute."  Black's Law Dictionary, 1498 (7th ed. 1999).  Here, after the Veteran left service, he was separated from his wife and was not associated with his family.  He was briefly incarcerated for failing to appear in court.  While there were instances when he briefly resided with his girlfriend or stepfather, the Veteran mostly reported being socially isolated, homeless, and living in his car.  He reported that he did not look people in the eyes, and when asked regarding his activities, he reported that he blamed other people.  Furthermore, the Veteran has reported suicidal ideation, and even sought care at an emergency room because he feared he might cause self-harm.  

The Board also acknowledge that there were times when the Veteran held jobs briefly and sought assistance with the VR&E program in obtaining employment.  However, the Veteran could not hold a job due to his psychiatric symptoms, to include as due to his anger problems and inability to be near other people.  Given these lay and medical evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate total social and occupational impairment.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the probative evidence of record shows total occupational and social impairment, and the maximum 100 percent rating is warranted during the appeal period.  Thus, the appeal is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service Connection for Migraine Headaches is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that his migraine headaches was secondary to his service-connected tinnitus.  See January 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  

Prior to the March 2023 decision, the AOJ obtained a January 2023 VA examination where the Veteran was diagnosed with common headache.  The examiner opined that the headache disability was not caused by the service-connected tinnitus.  However, the medical opinion failed to address whether the headache disability was aggravated by the service-connected tinnitus.  To address secondary service connection, opinions for both causation and aggravation must be obtained.  Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing secondary service connection.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

Furthermore, prior to the March 2023 decision, the service treatment records indicated that the Veteran complained of headache in November 2018 and April 2019.  A medical opinion should have been obtained to address whether the current headache condition as related to service.  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing direct service connection.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his headache symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

2. Service Connection for TBI is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for TBI is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that he has a TBI condition that was caused by his active-duty service.  See March 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  He asserted that he got hit in the head with an RPG (rocket-propelled grenade) in Syria during his first deployment.  Id.  

A review of service treatment records showed that the Veteran was involved in a motor vehicle accident in April 2019 where he hit his head in the steering wheel of the vehicle.  He was treated and observed as having positive TBI screening.  He also reported in April 2019 that he hit his head while riding in a moving vehicle during his first deployment in March to April 2018.  

A review of VA treatment records available before the March 2023 rating decision showed indication of TBI.  During a March 2023 VA treatment, he received a provisional diagnosis of positive TBI screening.  It was noted that the Veteran had a history of mild TBI.  

Given the service record showing complaints for TBI, and the VA treatment for TBI, the Veteran should have been afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed TBI.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to schedule the Veteran for an examination.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his TBI symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to offer an opinion regarding the following:

(a.) Whether the current headache disability onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the examiner is asked to consider the service complaints for headache in November 2018 and April 2019.

(b.) Whether the current headache disability was caused by the service-connected tinnitus.

(c.) Whether the current headache disability was aggravated by the service-connected tinnitus. 

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether any current TBI disability onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the examiner is asked to the consider the April 2019 service record where it was noted that the Veteran was involved in a motor vehicle accident where he hit his head in the steering wheel of the vehicle and observed as having positive TBI screening; and his report in April 2019 that he hit his head while riding in a moving vehicle during his first deployment in March to April 2018.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and consider the lay statements of record.  The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. 

A rationale for all opinions expressed is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mathew, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.