Citation Nr: A25032572
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241001-478349
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from March 1964 to January 1968, to include service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Unfortunately, the Veteran died in October 2014.  The appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.

In March 2024, the appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for the Veteran's cause of death, most recently addressed in a January 2024 rating decision.  In August 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes the appellant has the right to select a different Board review option by submitting a new VA Form 10182 within one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever date is later.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2); see Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  Although the period to change dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not elapsed, the issue on appeal is being remanded for further development due to a duty to assist error and, therefore, there is no prejudice to the appellant in proceeding to adjudicate the appeal. 

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is remanded.

The appellant contends that the Veteran's cause of death is related to his presumed exposure to herbicide agents during military service in Vietnam.  The Veteran's death certificate identifies cardiorespiratory failure and stomach cancer as the causes of death.  During his lifetime, the Veteran was service-connected for a mandible fracture and loss of teeth.  The appellant contends that herbicide agent exposure caused the Veteran's cardiorespiratory failure and/or stomach cancer.  Alternatively, the appellant has also argued that exposure to asbestos during service may have caused his death.   

Initially, the Board notes that cardiorespiratory failure and stomach cancer are not among the diseases known to be presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Nonetheless, service connection for cause of death may still be warranted on a direct basis if there is evidence that either of these diseases were directly related to the Veteran's herbicide agent exposure.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

In a January 2019 letter, the Veteran's private oncologist wrote that "it is in my medical opinion and the medical literature that it is more likely than not that [the Veteran's] military experience and exposure to agent orange was the underlying cause or aggravating cause for his gastric cancer."  Unfortunately, the doctor did not identify the medical literature that supports her conclusion or provide a supporting medical rationale for her otherwise conclusory opinion.  

VA obtained medical opinions in December 2023 and January 2024.  The VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's cardiorespiratory failure or stomach cancer were caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) as there is no known, established pathophysiological relationship between agent orange exposure and/or asbestos exposure and either of the claimed diseases.  The examiner did not provide any medical rationale to support his otherwise conclusory opinions.  Therefore, the opinions are inadequate to fairly resolve the appellant's claim.  

The Board finds that, while the AOJ took steps to obtain a VA medical opinion on the appellant's behalf, it did not ensure that the opinion was adequate for the purposes of the determination being made.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  This constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which must be corrected on remand prior to the adjudication of the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).     

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims file to a VA physician of appropriate expertise to provide a medical opinion that addresses the etiology of the Veteran's cause of death. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND, must be provided to the examiner and reviewed in full, and that review must be noted in the report.  

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to provide a fully-articulated medical opinion addressing the following:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any of the Veteran's causes of death (cardiorespiratory failure and/or stomach cancer) were incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness, to include exposure to herbicide agents and/or asbestos?

The examiner is reminded that the fact that a presumption based on exposure to herbicide agents has not been established for cardiorespiratory failure and/or stomach cancer is not dispositive of the issue of nexus; consideration must still be given to the exposure and addressed on a direct basis.

The opinion must specifically consider and address the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's TERAs.   

The examiner is also asked to specifically comment on the January 2019 medical opinion provided by the Veteran's private oncologist.  

If the answer to (a) is "no," the examiner is next requested to consider whether the Veteran's nonservice-connected hypertension, which is a presumptive disease associated with herbicide agent exposure, caused or contributed to the Veteran's death.  

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension was a contributory cause of death in that it contributed substantially or materially to death, combined to cause death, or aided or lent assistance to the production of death?

The examiner should specifically address whether the Veteran's hypertension contributed to the development of cardiorespiratory failure.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinions offered, citing to the examiner's own expertise, medical principals, and/or evidence in the record, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before such an opinion could be rendered.

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Melissa Barbee, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.