Citation Nr: A25032166
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240322-426301
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for arthritis of the right hand/fingers is remanded.

Service connection for arthritis of the left hand/fingers is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1999 to September 2002.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 higher-level review of a November 2023 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The November 2023 rating decision readjudicated and continued the denial of service connection for arthritis, left hand/finger and arthritis, right hand/fingers.  The March 2024 rating decision confirmed and continued the denial of service connection for arthritis, right hand/fingers and arthritis, left hand/fingers.

In a March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  This evidence, if any, will be considered on remand.

1. Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the right hand/fingers 

2. Entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the left hand/fingers 

The Veteran contends that his currently diagnosed arthritis of the right and left hands/fingers is related to his active military service.  Specifically, he reported that during active military service, he worked as a tank systems mechanic and had to use his hands and fingers for extended periods of time to fix, maintain, and lift heavy tools and parts and repair tanks.  He also alleged that he was exposed to fire resistant hydraulic (FRH) fluids without the use of protective gloves for most of his military career, and over time, he began to have pain and discomfort in his hands and fingers.  He claims that since separation from service, he has experienced limited range of motion, numbness, tingling, loss of grip strength, weakness, muscle fatigue, and popping in the pinkie, ring, middle, and index finger and thumbs of both hands, as well as in the knuckles and bones in the center of his hands.  See Veteran's December 2018, August 2019, and September 2019 Statements in Support of Claim, August 2019 NOD, February 2022 Supplemental Claim Application, March 2022 VA Hand and Fingers Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) and February 2023 VA Hand and Fingers DBQ.

Service treatment records are negative for any evidence of complaints, findings or a diagnosis of a right or left hand or finger disability during active duty or at discharge.  However, as noted above, constant use of hand tools during active military service is conceded based on the Veteran's MOS of tank systems mechanic during active military service.  See Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active Duty (DD-214).  Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's reports of bilateral hand pain during service are consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service as a mechanic. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Post-service medical evidence shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative arthritis in both hands.  VA treatment records show x-rays in November 2018 revealed mild osteoarthritic changes of the distal radial ulnar joint and left tri-scaphoid interface.  See November 2018 CAPRI records.  These joints are located in the wrists or at the base of the hand.  Accordingly, in a February 2021 rating decision, the RO noted that the first diagnosis of arthritis in the hands was noted in November 2018 VA treatment records.  The Veteran was subsequently diagnosed with arthritis of the hands on VA examination in March 2022 and arthritis of the hands, specifically, mild degenerative changes of the radiocarpal joints, confirmed by x-ray on VA examination in April 2023.  See March 2022 and April 2023 VA Hand and Fingers DBQs.

In an October 2021 report, private clinician, Gina Uribe, APRN, MN, FNP, LNC, opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current left hand and right hand disabilities, which include osteoarthritic changes of the distal radial ulnar joint and left tri-scaphoid interface of both hands, is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his MOS mechanic duties and complaints of hand pain during active duty military service.  The clinician noted the Veteran's reports of bilateral hand pain resulting from his MOS duties as a mechanic beginning during active military service and continuing thereafter.  The clinician also cited to medical literature which indicates that osteoarthritis is one of the most devastating chronic conditions, that occupational activities appear to be the most common causes of osteoarthritis in young and athletic populations, and that sudden-impact loading and twisting movements of the joints can result in premature osteoarthritis.  Furthermore, the articles noted that work-related musculoskeletal disorders of the hand and wrist are induced by the performance of highly repetitive tasks with or without forceful exertions.  Based on the evidence of current bilateral hand arthritis, the Veteran's reports of bilateral hand pain and mechanic duties during active duty, and his reports of chronicity of symptomatology from his initial complaint during active duty and afterwards, the clinician concluded that the Veteran's current bilateral hand arthritis is related to his MOS mechanic duties and complaints of bilateral hand pain during active duty military service.  See October 2021 Medical Opinion Regarding Bilateral Hand Conditions to include Osteoarthritic Changes of Both Distal Radial Ulnar Joint and Left Tri-Scaphoid Interface from Gina Uribe, APRN, MN, FNP, LNC.  The Board is not persuaded by that medical opinion.  There is no affirmative indication that the file was actually reviewed or that Ms. Uribe ever examined the Veteran's fingers and hands.  Furthermore, the opinion is largely conclusory, lacking a clear explanation for the conclusions rendered.  Although Gina Uribe does broadly cite to medical literature, the cited studies, at best, note only a correlation between (1) osteoarthritis and occupational activities that require sudden-impact loading and twisting movements of the joints and (2) work-related musculoskeletal disorders of the hand and wrist and the performance of highly repetitive tasks.  Moreover, although Ms. Uribe noted the Veteran's in-service MOS of mechanic, her opinion does not address the Veteran's particular symptoms in conjunction with the medical literature.  For these reasons, the Board finds that the October 2021 opinion is of little probative value and does not provide a basis upon which to grant the benefit sought.

On VA hand and fingers examination in April 2023, the Veteran reported that he was working as a personal trainer.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported a history of chronic bilateral hand pain that started a few years earlier, and denied any injury or trauma.  The examiner opined that the diagnosed bilateral hand arthritis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner explained that the condition was diagnosed well after separation from service in 2002, with no evidence of similar precipitating events in service.  He concluded that the condition was more likely related to aging and ongoing physical demand.  See April 2023 VA Hand and Fingers (DBQ) and VA Medical Opinion.

The April 2023 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate for evaluation purposes.  The examiner essentially relied on the Veteran's reports of more recent chronic pain that "started a few years earlier.  Although there is no documented evidence of medical treatment for the Veteran's hands in service or for years after service, as noted, during the appeal period he has reported experiencing hand pain during service and continuously thereafter.  Thus, the examiner discounted the Veteran's lay statements of pain since service, and relied solely on the lack of in-service complaints, treatment or findings of hand pain.  The lack of evidence of a disorder in the service treatment records is not necessarily fatal to a claim for service connection.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007).  Furthermore, it is symptoms, not treatment, that is relevant for the determination of whether there is a relationship between the in-service injury and subsequent symptomatology and the current disability.  The April 2023 VA examiner's report that the Veteran claimed to have a history of chronic bilateral hand pain that started a few years earlier, and denied any injury or trauma, is inconsistent with numerous statements in the record where the Veteran reported hand pain in service and continuously thereafter. See Veteran's December 2018, August 2019, and September 2019 Statements in Support of Claim, August 2019 NOD, February 2022 Supplemental Claim Application, March 2022 VA Hand and Fingers Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) and February 2023 VA Hand and Fingers DBQ.  The Veteran is competent to report the overuse of his hands in service and that he has experienced pain ever since, as these types of symptoms are observable through the five senses.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  However, the question of the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hand arthritis falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Here, the examiner's opinion is inadequate because it does not consider the Veteran's lay statements throughout the appeal regarding continuity of symptomatology.  Although the examiner opined that the hand arthritis was more likely due to aging and a lack of treatment for years following service, the examiner's notation that the Veteran reported pain more recently is not consistent with the other reports in the record as noted above.  As such it is also not clear whether the Veteran was relying on an inaccurate factual background.  Adjudicating a claim based on the findings of an inadequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ requiring remand. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

Notably, however, the record shows that the Veteran has diagnoses of left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy and right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy that have been service connected.  As such, it is not clear whether the Veteran's hand symptoms are related to the arthritis or the peripheral neuropathy symptoms, which can also include pain.

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, was enacted on August 10, 2022.  This new law expands VA health care and benefits for veterans exposed to burn pits or other toxic substances during military service.  The PACT Act lists several diseases or illnesses that can be considered presumptively service-connected if a veteran was exposed to burn pits or other toxic substances during the Vietnam, Gulf War, and post 9/11 eras.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1120.

The Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to fuels, oils, lubricants, grease, acid, exhaust fumes, and asbestos while performing duties related to his military occupational specialty (MOS) of tank mechanic during active service. See November 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memo.  Therefore, he participated in a TERA for the purposes of the PACT Act. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1116(d); 1710(e)(4)(A); 1168(c).  However, arthritis is not on the list of diseases presumed service connected based on service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1120.

Pursuant to the PACT Act, when a Veteran submits a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability together with, "evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during active military... service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall - (A) provide... a medical examination under section § 5103 of this title...; and (B) obtain a medical opinion (to be requested by the Secretary in connection with the medical examination under subparagraph (A)) as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity." 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

A TERA opinion was obtained in February 2023.  The February 2023 VA examiner opined that the claimed bilateral hand disability was less likely secondary to exposure to hydraulic fluids and depleted uranium.  See February 2023 VA Medical Opinion.  The Board finds the February 2023 examiner's opinion inadequate.  In this regard, the examiner only considered whether the Veteran's bilateral hand arthritis was related to his exposure to hydraulic fluids and depleted uranium.  As noted, in addition to hydraulic fluids (fuels, oils, lubricants, grease), the Veteran was also exposed to acid and exhaust fumes and asbestos.  The examiner did not consider these additional exposures in his negative opinion.  The opinion is, therefore, incomplete and inadequate for evaluation purposes.  Adjudicating a claim based on the findings of an inadequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ requiring remand. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

For the reasons noted above, a remand is required to obtain a new VA examination with opinions addressing all theories of entitlement in order to fairly decide the claims.  

In remanding the claim, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current nature and likely etiology of the Veteran's right hand/finger arthritis and left hand/finger arthritis.  The examiner must be provided access to the electronic claims file and indicate review of the claims file, including a copy of this REMAND.  The examiner should record the Veteran's self-reported history regarding the claim of service connection for right hand/finger arthritis and left hand/finger arthritis, and then review the Veteran's pertinent documented medical history.  The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale in addressing a medical opinion on the following (as applicable):

Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's currently diagnosed right hand/finger arthritis and/or left hand/finger arthritis either began during service; or, whether it is otherwise related to any injury or disease in service, to include conceded exposure to toxic chemicals and other environmental hazards while performing duties related to his MOS of tank mechanic, which exposed him to fuels, oils, lubricants, grease, acid, and exhaust fumes and asbestos.

In reaching the above opinion, the medical professional must consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

In providing this opinion, the examiner is referred to the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy of both hands; his self-reported history in his December 2018, August 2019, and September 2019 Statements in Support of Claim, August 2019 NOD, February 2022 Supplemental Claim Application, and during his March 2022 VA Hand and Fingers Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), and February 2023 VA Hand and Fingers DBQ, and summarized in the narrative portion of the remand above.

If possible, differentiate the Veteran's upper extremity neuropathy symptoms in the hands from his arthritis symptoms.  If it is not possible, please indicate why this is so.

A complete rationale is required for all of the requested opinions.  If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion(s), without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	F. Yankey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.