Citation Nr: A25032670
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230918-377515
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for kidney failure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities, as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1964 to August 1967.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the above-captioned issues most recently addressed in an August 2015 rating decision. In September 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received.

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 5, 2023.

In April 2024, the Board issued a decision that readjudicated the claims for service connection by finding that new and relevant evidence had been submitted but again denied the claims on the merits. The Veteran appealed the matter to the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), which partially vacated the April 2024 Board decision, pursuant to a January 2025 Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR). The Court remanded the matter for action consistent with the terms of the JMPR.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. §20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for kidney failure is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

In the January 2025 JMPR, the parties agreed that the Board erred in not determining whether VA committed a duty to assist error in not attempting to obtain certain documents that may be related to the Veteran's contended exposure to hazardous substances during active service.

First, the parties noted that the Board acknowledged that the Veteran submitted an article that described the use of herbicides in the Korean demilitarized zone (DMZ) in late 1963, shortly before the Veteran arrived in 1964. See CAVC Decision, p. 3. The article cited a primary source from the "Combat Developments Command Chemical Biological-Radiological Agency in Fort McClellan, Alabama, dated June 2, 1969." Id.; see also August 2023 Correspondence, pp. 2, 10. However, the Board noted that "[w]hile it is possible that the primary source could contain additional specific information as to the locations of such spraying in late 1963, the source itself has not been associated with the Veteran's claims file and the Board is therefore unable to consider it." See April 2024 BVA Decision, p. 13.

The parties agreed that the Bored erred in failing to discuss whether the duty to assist required VA to obtain the report. See CAVC Decision, p. 3. The Board notes that when requesting records in the custody of another Federal department or agency, VA must make as many attempts as necessary until it obtains the records or concludes that further efforts would be futile. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). As the source in question appears to be from an agency associated with Fort McClellan, the Board finds that the source would be considered a "record in custody" of another Federal department or agency. Therefore, the matter must be remanded in order for VA to obtain the record and associate it with the claims file.

Additionally, the parties noted in the JMPR that in August 2014, VA determined that the Veteran did not submit sufficient evidence to "corroborate exposure to herbicides" and send the matter to the U.S. Army Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC). See CAVC Decision, p. 4; see also August 2015 Administrative Decision. However, the parties noted that since that determination, the Veteran informed VA of his activities around the DMZ while in service. See CAVC Decision, p. 4; see also April 2023 Correspondence. The parties agreed that on remand, the Board must determine whether the duty to assist requires that a request via the MRC/JSRCC is warranted in light of the Veteran's additional correspondence. See CAVC Decision, p. 4.

The Board notes that there has been a regulatory amendment removing the reference to the JSRRC in 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c)(2). The Federal Register explained that the JSRRC no longer exists, but that the military records themselves previously researched by the JSRRC remain available for research by VA as an official source of records. As the claims file does not contain an herbicide exposure determination that addresses the Veteran's April 2023 contentions, the Board finds that, upon remand, VA must search for any records consistent with the Veteran's claims by contacting all appropriate government records repositories.

4. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities, as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is remanded.

The parties agreed that the issues of service connection for the Veteran's neuropathy claims are inextricably intertwined with his claim for service connection for diabetes. See January 2025 CAVC Decision, p. 4. Therefore, the claims for service connection for bilateral neuropathy of the upper and lower extremities will be remanded. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (holding that issues are inextricably intertwined and must be considered together when a decision concerning one could have a significant impact on the other).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the primary source, "Combat Developments Command Chemical Biological-Radiological Agency in Fort McClellan, Alabama," dated June 2, 1969 that is cited in the article that the Veteran associated with the claims file in August 2023. See August 2023 Correspondence.

All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such record. If the record cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that the record does not exist or that further efforts to obtain it would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The appellant must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide the record, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. Determine whether the Veteran engaged in any toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during his period of active service. In making this determination, VA must address the Veteran's contentions regarding such exposure. See April 2023 Correspondence. 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Watkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.