Citation Nr: A25032541
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230808-517973
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for a respiratory disability (variously claimed as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), breathing issues, lung obstruction, sleep apnea and asthma)) is remanded.

The claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

The claim for service connection for scars/blisters is remanded.

The claim for service connection for right lower extremity (RLE) neuropathy is remanded. 

The claim for service connection for left lower extremity (LLE) neuropathy is remanded. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1970 to July 1973.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2023 rating decision. The Veteran requested a higher level review (HLR) of this decision. The HLR decision denied the claims in June 2023, and the Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board, requesting the Direct Review Docket. This means that the Board, in adjudicating this appeal, may only review the evidence that was of record at the time of the February 2023 rating decision.  Additional evidence has been added to the claims file since the rating decision on appeal was issued, which cannot by operation of law be reviewed in conjunction with this appeal.  However, as the claim is being remanded, the additional evidence will be reviewed by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

It is noted that the Veteran submitted an additional VA form 10182 in March 2025 requesting a hearing.  Unfortunately, the Veteran had one year from notice of the rating decision on appeal (issued in February 2023) to appeal and change dockets.  That time has now expired, and the claim will be processed in the Direct Docket.  However, it is noted that several conditions are being remanded, giving the Veteran the opportunity to request a hearing if he disagrees with the results of the AOJ's decision. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The issues of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, (variously claimed as COPD, breathing issues, lung obstruction, sleep apnea and asthma), diabetes mellitus type II, peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, and scars/blisters are being remanded to correct a duty to assist error involving the development of the evidence that occurred prior to the February 2023 rating decision, namely the AOJ's failure to verify the Veteran's alleged exposure to herbicide agents while on temporary duty (TDY) assignment, and for failure to schedule the Veteran for a TERA examination. 

The Veteran seeks service connection for the disabilities on appeal as due to in-service exposure to tactical environmental toxins, to include, but not limited to, chemical herbicides (colloquially known as "Agent Orange"). The Veteran maintains that he was exposed to environmental hazards due to the disposal of equipment shipped from the Republic of Vietnam to Japan.  Specifically, he explained how he was placed in charge of several large burn pits.  See Correspondence received 6/20/2022.  The Veteran's reports are credible and consistent with his MOS.  The Veteran was also given several in-service awards which underscore his truth and candor, and leave no doubt in the veracity of his statements.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran had burn pit exposure while in service.

VA laws and regulations provide that if a Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents during service, certain listed diseases are presumptively service connected. 38 U.S.C. § 1116 (a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. The PACT Act provides, in pertinent part, presumptions of exposure to herbicide agents for Veterans who served in the Republic of Vietnam (from 1/9/62- 5/7/75), Thailand at any US or Royal Thai base (from 1/9/62- 6/30/76), Guam, or American Samoa or their territorial waters (from 1/9/62 -7/31/80). 

There is also a presumption of exposure to herbicide agents for veterans who "during active military, naval, or air service, served in or near the Korean [DMZ], during the period beginning on September 1, 1967, and ending on August 31, 1971." See Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019, Pub. L. No. 116-23 (2019) (codified at 38 U.S.C. § 1116B). If presumed exposure cannot be established, a veteran may nevertheless establish exposure to herbicides on a direct, facts-found basis. See 38 U.S.C. § 1113 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d); Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Diabetes mellitus is among the conditions listed as presumptively related to herbicide agent exposure in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). COPD and asthma are among the conditions listed as presumptively related to exposure to burn pits and toxins. 38 U.S.C. § 1120(b).

In the February 2023 and appealed June 2023 HLR rating decision, the AOJ, provided a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with the following disabilities: COPD; diabetes mellitus; and scars of the back (February 2023 rating decision). The Board is bound by such favorable findings. The AOJ also concluded that herbicide agent exposure has not been conceded. The AOJ based its conclusion that the Veteran had not been exposed to herbicide agents based on his initial allegation that he had been exposed to environmental hazards due to disposal of equipment shipped from the Republic of Vietnam to Japan. In doing so, the AOJ relied on a February 2023 memorandum from the Records Research Response, wherein it was concluded that there was no evidence to support documentation of the Veteran's claimed incident/event (i.e., exposure to environmental hazards due to disposal of equipment shipped from the Republic of Vietnam to Japan) and February 2023 VA memorandum indicating that the Veteran did not participate in a Toxic Risk Exposure Activity (TERA). 

However, and as indicated in the preceding paragraph, the Veteran reported that he had several TDY assignments during his period of military service. Specifically, the Veteran stated that he was on TDY from his homebase in Japan to Thailand (1971); Camp Casey, Korea (1971); Anderson Air Base, Guam (1972); 78th Signal Battalion in Okinawa, Japan (1972); and, Wake Island Airfield, Wake Island 1973. See Veteran's statement to VA, labeled as "Correspondence" and received into the record in mid-September 2022. The Board notes that his statement appears to equate his assignments while on TDY for the purpose of establishing exposure to environmental toxins, such as herbicide agents during these visits. Regardless of this lack of clarity, the point remains that the Veteran alleged visitation to these countries, and the AOJ did not attempt to investigate this contention or address his TDY assignments.  Because the evidentiary record is inadequate without these records, or a finding that such records could not be obtained, the Board finds a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. 

Moreover, VA regulations provide that if a veteran submits to the Secretary a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during active military, naval, air, or space service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish a service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity. 

Here, the evidence supports the conclusion that the Veteran was exposed to burn pits while in service.  He has also presented evidence of current disabilities.  As such, he is entitled to an examination.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Military Records Research Center (MRRC) and/or other appropriate resource to determine when and if the Veteran was TDY to the following countries/territories: (i) Thailand (1971); (ii) Camp Casey, Korea (1971); (iii) Anderson Air Base, Guam (1972); (iv) 78th Signal Battalion in Okinawa, Japan (1972); and, (v) Wake Island Airfield, Wake Island 1973.

2.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination(s) to determine whether it is at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that his in-service exposure to burn pits (see correspondence received 6/30/2022) caused his respiratory disability, (variously claimed as COPD, breathing issues, lung obstruction, sleep apnea and asthma), diabetes mellitus type II, peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, and/or scars/blisters.  Why or why not? 

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner should consider the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carole Kammel, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.