Citation Nr: A25032209
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231213-401319
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for heart condition to include tachycardia and chest pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for liver condition is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's COPD is related to the harmful effects of tobacco products; although the Veteran smoked in service, the evidence does not support a finding that COPD, or symptoms of COPD, manifested during active-duty training between July 1970 and October 1970.

2. The persuasive evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has a service-connected disability that caused or aggravated his GERD, or that GERD, or symptoms of GERD manifested during active-duty training between July 1970 and October 1970. 

3. The persuasive evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has a service-connected disability that caused or aggravated his hypertension, or that hypertension, or symptoms of hypertension, manifested during active-duty training between July 1970 and October 1970. 

4. The persuasive evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has a service-connected disability that caused or aggravated his heart condition, or that a heart condition, or symptoms of a heart condition manifested during active-duty training between July 1970 and October 1970. 

5. The persuasive evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has a service-connected disability that caused or aggravated his liver condition, or that a liver condition, or symptoms of a liver condition manifested during active-duty training between July 1970 and October 1970. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for COPD are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 38 U.S.C. §§ 1103, 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.300 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypertension are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310. 

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for heart condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310. 

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for liver condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active-duty training in the United States Army from July 1970 to October 1970. Currently, he is service connected for hearing loss and tinnitus based on this period of service.

These issues come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 Rating Decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the December 2023 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On April 19, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for migraines, secondary to service-connected tinnitus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Initially, the Board acknowledges that the AOJ was unable to locate the Veteran's service treatment records, despite multiple attempts to multiple agencies to do so. See June 2022 Correspondence. The Veteran reports that he served on active duty for training from July 1970 to October 1970 and then served in an inactive duty training status in the National Guard and Reserves for the remainder of his six-year service obligation performing the traditional one weekend a month and two weeks of annual training per year. See Military Personnel Records. The AOJ concluded that they exhausted all efforts in order to locate the records, which would include, presumably, the Veteran's entrance examination into the military and any subsequent treatments during his initial military entrance training and his subsequent drill periods. The Veteran has not alleged that any of the conditions here are rooted in those periods for which the records, if any, would be relevant in the disposition of his claims. 

Applicable Law

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a)-(b). Recently, the Federal Circuit clarified that secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disability was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted). Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id.

1. Entitlement to service connection for COPD.

The Veteran contends his COPD should be service-connected due to his smoking promoted by the military through cigarettes issued in C rations. See July 2021 Fully Developed Claim. 

The AOJ found favorably that the Veteran has COPD. See November 2023 Rating Decision. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). As such, the Board turns to whether the second and third elements are service connection are met. 

The Veteran's Benefits Act of 1998, enacted as Subtitle B of Public Law No. 105-178, § 8202, 112 Stat. 492, amended 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 and 1131 to prohibit VA compensation for disabilities attributable to a Veteran's use of tobacco products in service. That legislation was approved on June 9, 1998; and was made effective for all claims filed thereafter. Then, in Public Law No. 105-206, § 9014, 112 Stat. 865, approved on July 22, 1998, the amendments made by section 8202 of the previous statute were rescinded. Rather than amending 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 and 1131, section 9014 created a new 38 U.S.C. § 1103 which provides, in pertinent part, as follows:

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a Veteran's disability or death shall not be considered to have resulted from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in the active military, naval, or air service for purposes of this title on the basis that it resulted from injury or disease attributable to the use of tobacco products by the Veteran during the Veteran's service.

Thus, section 1103 bars an award of service connection for a disability arising long after service based upon a finding that such disability was caused by tobacco use during service. It does not, however, preclude the establishment of service connection based upon a finding that a disease or injury (even if tobacco-related) became manifest or was aggravated during active service or became manifest to the requisite degree of disability during any applicable presumptive period specified in 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1116. See 38 U.S.C. § 1103(b). See also VAOPGCPREC 6-2003.

Here, the Veteran filed the current claim in July 2021. As such, the Veteran cannot prevail based on the theory that COPD was caused by smoking in service and in-service smoking cannot serve to satisfy either the second or third element of service connection. 

The Veteran submitted his private medical treatment records in which he argues is evidence that the onset began when he was 19 and in the Army Reserves. See October 2022 Supplemental Claim. The Board has reviewed the submitted records and determined that they in fact do not support the assertion that the Veteran's now diagnosed COPD began in service. Rather, the medical treatment provider merely documents the Veteran's reports that his smoking, the origin of his COPD, began when he was 19 and in the Army Reserves. This is insufficient to show that the Veteran's now diagnosed COPD manifested during service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1103, 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.300. Thus, the Board finds the Veteran has not presented any medical or lay evidence to suggest his COPD was manifest during service. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with this claim. A medical examination or opinion is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but contains competent evidence of a current diagnosed disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; establishes that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or certain disease manifested during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and indicates that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease in service or with another service-connected disability. See Mclendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

In this case, the standards of Mclendon are not met. The Veteran has not contended that his COPD onset, or symptoms of COPD manifested during his active-duty training period between July 1970 and October 1970. Furthermore, there is no evidence of any reasonably related symptomatology during service or shortly thereafter. For these reasons, the duty to assist to provide a VA examination has not been triggered here and the analysis is at an end.

As all elements of service connection are not met, service connection must be denied. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

2. Entitlement to service connection GERD.

The Veteran contends his diagnosed GERD is entitled to service connection secondary to his COPD. See July 2021 Fully Developed Claim. 

The AOJ found favorably that the Veteran has a diagnosis of GERD. See November 2023 Rating Decision. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the first element of secondary service connection, a current disability, has been met. The Board turns next to whether the second element of secondary service connection has been met. 

The Board finds that the second element of service connection cannot be satisfied because COPD is not service connected. In order for the Veteran to prevail on the theory that his GERD was caused or aggravated by COPD, COPD must be service connected, which it is not. Thus, the second element of secondary service connection is not met.

Because there is no allegation that GERD onset during service or is otherwise related to service except as caused or aggravated by COPD, a non-service-connected disability, the analysis ends here.

As all elements of service connection are not met, service connection must be denied. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, supra.

3. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran contends his diagnosed hypertension is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus. See July 2021 Fully Developed Claim. 

The AOJ made two favorable findings concerning the Veteran's hypertension claim. First, the AOJ found favorably that the Veteran is diagnosed with hypertension. Second, the AOJ found favorably that the Veteran's claimed primary disability, tinnitus, is service connected. See November 2023 Rating Decision. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

In order to substantiate his assertion that this hypertension is caused or aggravated by tinnitus, the Veteran submitted a medical article that he reported shows that his hypertension is secondary to his tinnitus. See October 2022 Supplemental Claim. 

The Board has reviewed the submitted evidence and finds that it in fact does not support the Veteran's assertions. On the contrary, the article actually suggests the opposite, that tinnitus may be caused by hypertension. See October 2022 Correspondence. Nowhere does it suggest or indicate that tinnitus may cause hypertension, nor does it suggest that this particular Veteran's hypertension is caused or aggravated by his tinnitus. 

As mentioned, a medical examination or opinion is necessary when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i) (2023).

Here, discounting the article submission, there is no evidence of record to suggest that the Veteran's hypertension was caused or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus, other than his general assertion, which relied on an inaccurate premise. Thus, the second element of service connection is not satisfied. Although the McLendon third prong is a low threshold, it still requires something to trigger the requirement of a VA examination and medical opinion. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. At 83. 

As the Veteran has not alleged and the record does not suggest the onset of hypertension in service and the criteria for secondary service connection are not established, service connection must be denied. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, supra.

4. Entitlement to service connection for heart condition.

The Veteran contends his diagnosed heart condition is secondary to his hypertension. See July 2021 Fully Developed Claim. 

The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a diagnosis of tachycardia. See November 2023 Rating Decision. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the first element of secondary service connection, a current disability, has been met. The Board turns next to whether the second element of secondary service connection has been met. 

The Board finds that the second element of service connection cannot be satisfied because hypertension is not service connected. In order for the Veteran to prevail on the theory that his heart condition was caused or aggravated by hypertension, hypertension must be service connected, which it is not. Thus, the second element of secondary service connection is not met.

Because there is no allegation that a heart condition onset during service or is otherwise related to service except as caused or aggravated by hypertension, a non-service-connected disability, the analysis ends here.

As all elements of service connection are not met, service connection must be denied. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt rule and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, supra.

5. Entitlement to service connection for liver condition.

The Veteran contends his diagnosed liver condition is secondary to his hypertension. See July 2021 Fully Developed Claim. 

The AOJ found favorably that the Veteran has a diagnosis of a liver condition. See November 2023 Rating Decision. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the first element of secondary service connection, a current disability, has been met. The Board turns next to whether the second element of secondary service connection has been met. 

The Board finds that the second element of service connection cannot be satisfied because hypertension is not service connected. In order for the Veteran to prevail on the theory that his liver condition was caused or aggravated by hypertension, hypertension must be service connected, which it is not. Thus, the second element of secondary service connection is not met.

Because there is no allegation that a liver condition onset during service or is otherwise related to service except as caused or aggravated by hypertension, a non-service-connected disability, the analysis ends here.

As all elements of service connection are not met, service connection must be denied. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt rule and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection headaches, secondary to service-connected tinnitus.

The Veteran contends he has headaches caused or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus. See July 2021 Fully Developed Claim.

The Veteran was provided with a VA examination and opinion in August 2023 to determine whether his headaches are caused or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus. The examiner found that a nexus had not been established. The examiner's rationale was that "headaches are multifactorial in nature and given lack of documentation or evidence showing origin, I am unable to attribute majority cause to any one cause therefore at this time they are less likely than not due to the Veteran's tinnitus." 

The Board finds the examination inadequate for rating purposes. First, the examiner did not provide an opinion regarding aggravation. A medical opinion is inadequate when it does not consider all raised theories of entitlement. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007). A secondary opinion which addresses a causal relationship, but which does not address the question of aggravation, is inadequate. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). Finally, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has recently clarified the applicable standard for secondary service connection and a new adequate opinion must be obtained to comply with the standard, noted above. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023). The failure to obtain an adequate examination and opinion with regard to the Veteran's claim constitutes a pre-decisional error in the duty to assist. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A.

On remand, another opinion should be obtained as to whether the Veteran's current migraines are secondary to his service-connected tinnitus under the holding in Spicer.

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an qualified examiner to provide an opinion on:

a. Whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus, he would not have headaches.

b. Whether the Veteran's headaches would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus.

If the examiner opines that the headache disability would result in less functional impairment but for the tinnitus disability, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed headaches prior to aggravation by the service-connected tinnitus disability.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions and any resort to speculation explained.

 

 

C.B. Iwanowski

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pulaski, Michael F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.