Citation Nr: A25032234
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241029-486604
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla (now in remission) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla is related to his military service.

2.  The Veteran's tinnitus is related to his military service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2.  Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1968 to May 1975.  He had earlier service in the United States Air Force Reserve.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) determined that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claims, but it denied the underlying merits.  

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in October 2024 and elected to have a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision and prior to the Board hearing or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38?C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  Nevertheless, this decision represents a full grant of the benefits sought on appeal for the issues decided herein.  The AOJ will also be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider for the other issue being remanded. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

A hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in February 2025, and a hearing transcript is of record.  The Veterans Law Judge confirmed on the record that the Veteran waived the remainder of the subsequent 90-day evidence submission period once his representative filed the additional evidence referenced at the hearing.

Law and Analysis

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in the active military, naval, air, or space service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  That an injury or disease occurred in service is not enough; there must be chronic disability resulting from that injury or disease.  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

A veteran who performed covered service shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide agent, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service.  "Covered service" includes active military, naval, air, or space service performed in Thailand at any United States or Royal Thai base during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on June 30, 1976, without regard to where on the base the veteran was located or what military job specialty the veteran performed.  38 U.S.C. § 1116 (as amended by the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), expanding presumption of herbicide agent exposure to additional locations); 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.  When a claimed disability is not included as a disorder presumptively related to herbicide agent exposure, a veteran may nevertheless establish service connection based on evidence of actual direct causation.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994) and Brock v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 155 (1997) (applying principle to Agent Orange exposure); 38 U.S.C. § 1116 and 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

For the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  As tinnitus is considered to be a chronic disease for VA compensation purposes, if chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013) and Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015) (holding that presumptive provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) include tinnitus, at a minimum where there is evidence of acoustic trauma, as an organic disease of the nervous system).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits.  VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

Squamous Cell Carcinoma

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla.

The Veteran has contended that he has the claimed disorder due to herbicide agent exposure while stationed in Thailand at Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base (RTAFB). See, e.g., January 2024 original compensation claim (reported onset in 2007 based on "PACT Act" exposure); February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not document any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla.  His relevant body systems were found to be normal on examinations, and he denied a history of relevant symptoms on the corresponding reports of medical history.  See, e.g., examination reports and corresponding reports of medical history from September 1968 (entrance examination with November 1968 physical inspection), April 1970, and March 1975 (separation examination).

The AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran had covered service during a time in which herbicide agent exposure is presumed through his assignment at Udorn RTAFB (an in-service event) and a current diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla that are binding on the Board.  38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4), 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  The record also supports those determinations.  See, e.g., 1972 and 1973 performance reports (service location); historical private treatment records from February 2007 and January 2012 (initial diagnosis and radiation oncology follow-up; diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla/right maxillary sinus).  The October 2024 private medical opinion from Dr. S.B. (initials used to protect privacy) confirms that the cancer is currently in remission.

Moreover, post-service evidence shows that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma of the right maxilla is related to his military service.  In an October 2024 private medical opinion, Dr. S.B. noted that he was trained in internal medicine and neurology with training and experience in toxicology as part of his Pharmacology Ph.D. program.  He also noted that he was provided relevant records to review, including the March 2024 VA toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memorandum and private treatment records in the claims file, and that an in-person examination, if possible, would add no significant clarification because the Veteran's current clinical diagnosis was well supported.  Initially, Dr. S.B. stated that whether going by the name dioxin, benzene, or 2, 3, 7, 8 - tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), the chemical, the inherent chemical composition of herbicides, is highly toxic and a putative carcinogen.  He also stated that the words dioxin and benzene would be used interchangeably in his opinion since dioxin is a compound of benzene.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6) (defining herbicide agent for VA purposes).

Dr. S.B. opined that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma of the maxillary sinus was at least as likely as not secondary to his exposure to dioxin.  In so finding, he indicated that the Veteran did not have any overt factors that may have contributed to his disease.  He further indicated that there are scant literature findings on the effects of dioxins on nasal mucosa, but the properties of the nasal mucosa and oropharynx are quite similar in nature, and the nasal mucosa is an extension of the oropharynx, making it clinically appropriate to extrapolate the information for the nasal mucosa.  He also explained that there are considerable literature studies showing dioxin had a strong nexus to those tissue types in the human body.  Dr. S.B. concluded that there is a plethora of literature noting that there is a nexus between benzene, organic solvent exposure, and squamous cell carcinoma; that after studying the properties of the contaminants and how it may cause damage to the human tissue, one could not deny there is a nexus between dioxin and squamous cell carcinoma of the maxillary sinuses; and that multiple variables, including dosing, exposure, and latency, were never individualized for the Veteran, but that fact should not preclude finding a nexus between the presumed exposure and the development of his squamous cell carcinoma, given that numerous medical literature findings show a strong relationship, as the contaminants persist for many years in the human body and can cause damage years later.

Dr. S.B.'s medical opinion is entitled to probative weigh because it addresses the central medical issues in the case and is based on an analysis of the evidence and current medical understanding.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012) (an examination is not rendered inadequate where the rationale provided by an examiner "did not explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from the facts to a conclusion") and Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 294 (2012) (medical reports must be read as a whole and in the context of the evidence of record).  There is no medical opinion to the contrary.

Based on the foregoing and resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for the disorder is warranted.  To the extent that the Veteran has identified any current residuals of the cancer, the AOJ will have an opportunity to review the evidence and determine whether a VA examination is needed for rating purposes (i.e., a downstream issue) in effectuating the service connection grant.  See, e.g., email correspondence submitted in February 2025.

Tinnitus

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran has claimed that he developed tinnitus during service due to loud noise exposure through his photo processing duties because his work area was always close to the flight line with airplanes and jets, and he was sometimes in very small rooms with film processing equipment and machines.  See, e.g., June 2024 written statement; February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr.

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had in-service noise exposure (an in-service event) that is binding on the Board.  38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4), 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  The record also supports that determination.  See, e.g., DD 214s (military occupational specialty) and 1968 to 1975 performance reports; February 1975 hearing conservation program form.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not document any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of tinnitus.  See, e.g., examination reports and corresponding reports of medical history from September 1968 (entrance examination with November 1968 physical inspection), April 1970, and March 1975 (separation examination).  The March 2024 VA examiner did not provide an etiology opinion because she indicated that the Veteran denied currently having tinnitus.

Nevertheless, the Board finds that there is no reason to doubt the Veteran's statements as to the onset of his tinnitus other than the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002) (noting that tinnitus is a type of disorder capable of lay observation and description).  Following the March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran clarified that there was a misunderstanding between the VA examiner and him as to his tinnitus.  He explained that he began to have in-service problems with tinnitus and a loud humming during the day; that since his Air Force discharge, the symptoms went away during the day, but he experiences the ringing at night; and he never told the examiner that he did not currently have any ringing in his ears.  See June 2024 written statement; February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr.

Based on the foregoing, there is at least a reasonable doubt as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service.  Thus, resolving reasonable doubt in his favor, service connection for the disorder is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

On review, the Board finds that additional development is needed to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors for the remaining issue on appeal.  Specifically, it appears that there may be outstanding non-VA treatment records, as detailed in the directives below.

In addition, a March 2024 VA examiner opined that it was not at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was caused by or a result of an event in military service.  In so finding, she acknowledged the Veteran's reported in-service noise exposure from his location near airplanes and film processing areas, but she indicated that a nexus could not be established because the entrance and separation examinations showed normal hearing with no standard threshold shifts seen/no permanent positive threshold shifts (worse than reference threshold) greater than normal measurement variability.  Nevertheless, it is unclear if the examiner considered the complete history of the development of the hearing loss, as the Veteran indicated during the examination that he did not have the same level of noise exposure after his military service.  He also submitted a potentially relevant hearing loss article in June 2024, between the VA examination and the rating decision on appeal, and his representative specifically requested consideration of that article by a VA examiner in a corresponding written statement.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional VA medical opinion was needed.

For purposes of clarity as to the medical opinion request, the Board notes that it revised its policy regarding service connection claims for hearing loss for Vietnam-era veterans in March 2017.  When interpreting audiometric data from service treatment records, the Board historically considered that service departments changed from using American Standards Association (ASA) standards to International Standards Organization-American National Standards Institute (ISO-ANSI) standards as of November 1967.  The revised policy provides that for service department audiograms conducted between January 1, 1967, and December 31, 1970, the data should be considered under both the ASA and ISO-ANSI standards where the standard used is not clearly indicated, relying on the unit measurements most favorable to the claimant, and that after December 31, 1970, it should be assumed that the ISO-ANSI standard was used.

In this case, the standard used in the September 1968 entrance examination is not clear.  The remainder of the in-service audiological examination results clearly reflect that the ISO-ANSI standard was used.  On review, considering the September 1968 entrance examination results under the ISO-ANSI standard is most favorable to the Veteran in this case, and as such, the Board will not instruct the VA examiner to consider the results under both standards.

The case is REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  The AOJ should request that the Veteran provide the names and addresses of any and all health care providers who have provided treatment for his bilateral hearing loss.  After acquiring this information and obtaining any necessary authorization, the AOJ should obtain and associate these records with the claims file. See, e.g., April 2024 authorization form (appears to be unprocessed); February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr. (testified that has had several hearing tests since first one in 2015).

2.  After completing the above development, the AOJ should obtain a medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the absence of evidence of a hearing loss disability during service is not always fatal to a service connection claim.  Evidence of a current hearing loss disability and a medically sound basis for attributing that disability to service may serve as a basis for a grant of service connection for hearing loss where there is credible evidence of acoustic trauma due to significant noise exposure in service, post-service audiometric findings meeting the regulatory requirements for hearing loss disability for VA purposes, and a medically sound basis upon which to attribute the post-service findings to the injury in service.

It should also be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hearing loss manifested in or is otherwise related to his military service, including noise exposure therein.

In providing this opinion, the examiner should address the following:

(a) The Veteran's contention that his current hearing loss is due to loud in-service noise exposure through his photo processing duties because his work area was always close to the flight line with airplanes and jets, and he was sometimes in very small rooms with film processing equipment and machines.  He has explained that he has not had the same level of noise exposure since service, having worked outside in cable television most of the time before becoming a manager.  See, e.g., March 2024 VA examination report; February 2025 Bd. Hrg. Tr.  The AOJ has acknowledged in-service noise exposure.

(b) The article submitted in June 2024 in which the authors concluded that analysis of certain data from former military personnel suggests that noise exposure during military service accelerates the progression of hearing loss for frequencies where the hearing loss is absent or mild at the end of military service.

(c) The examiner should also discuss the medically known or theoretical causes of hearing loss and describe how hearing loss which results from noise exposure generally presents or develops in most cases, as distinguished from how hearing loss develops from other causes, in determining the likelihood that any current hearing loss was caused by noise exposure in service as opposed to some other cause.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.