Citation Nr: A25032327
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210527-162666
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been submitted and the claim for service connection for a bilateral plantar fasciitis disability is readjudicated.

New and relevant evidence has been submitted and the claim for service connection for a left knee disability is readjudicated.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis disability is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A January 2016 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis and a left knee disability, March 2020 and August 2020 rating decisions confirmed and continued the denials, and an April 2021 rating decision declined to readjudicate the claims based on new and relevant evidence.

2. New and relevant evidence has been submitted and the claims for service connection for service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis and a left knee disability are to be readjudicated.

3. The Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis is at least as likely as not related to active service.

4. The Veteran's left knee disability is at least as likely as not related to active service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudicating the claims of service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis and a left knee disability have been met. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

2. The criteria for service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1119, 1120; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.320.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1119, 1120; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.320.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from May 2001 to December 2007 and the Army from December 2007 to August 2015.

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (to be codified as amended in various sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019.

The AMA modernized review system applies to all claims for which VA issues a notice of an initial decision on or after the February 19, 2019, effective date of the modernized review system. The AMA may also apply to claims where the claimant has elected review of a legacy claim under the modernized review system. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2.

In an April 2021 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) declined to readjudicated the Veteran's claims for bilateral plantar fasciitis and a left knee disability. In response, the Veteran submitted a timely Board Appeal Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182) received by VA in May 2021, in which he chose the "Hearing Lane."

As explained on Form 10182, per the "Hearing Lane," the review is based only on evidence of record at the time of April 2021 rating decision and evidence received within 90 days of the hearing, which in this case was held on March 25, 2025. However, since the claims are being granted, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in not waiting the 90 days.

New and Relevant Evidence

A claimant or his or her authorized representative, if any, who disagrees with a prior VA decision may file a supplemental claim by submitting in writing or electronically a complete application on a form prescribed by the Secretary any time after the agency of original jurisdiction issues notice of a decision, regardless of whether the claim is pending or has become finally adjudicated. If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the agency of original jurisdiction will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record. If new and relevant evidence is not presented or secured, the agency of original jurisdiction will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim. In determining whether new and relevant evidence is presented or secured, VA will consider any VA treatment records reasonably identified by the claimant and any evidence received by VA after VA issued notice of a decision on the claim and while the evidentiary record was closed. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim. Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (a)(1). For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(b).

1. New and relevant evidence has been submitted and the claim for service connection for a bilateral plantar fasciitis disability and a left knee disability and these issues are readjudicated.

In this case, a January 2016 rating decision denied service connection for a bilateral plantar fasciitis disability and a left knee disability. In doing so, the AOJ found that there was no evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's claimed disabilities and his service. An April 2021 rating decision declined to readjudicate the claims for lack of new and relevant evidence and this decision was appealed to the Board. Thus, the question before the Board is whether new and relevant evidence has been submitted since the March 2020 rating decision.

A review of the record shows that new and relevant evidence has been submitted since the January 2016 denial. Specifically, the March 2025 testimony of the during which he testified that these disabilities began in service and have continued to the present time. This evidence could be used as a basis to link the Veteran's current disabilities to his active service. Therefore, the Board finds the evidence is new since it has not been previously considered by decision makers. The evidence is also relevant as it tends to prove or disprove the matter at issue, an in-service event. Therefore, readjudication of the claims of service connection for a bilateral plantar fasciitis disability and a left knee disability is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis.

The Board notes that there is no dispute that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis as noted in a February 2020 VA examination, and that he had treatment for foot pain with a diagnosis of plantar fasciitis in service as noted in a June 2010 service treatment record. The only remaining matter is nexus.

Turning to nexus, the Veteran has testified that his bilateral plantar fasciitis pain began in service and continued until the present diagnosis of plantar fasciitis. The Board finds that the Veteran is credible in his complaints of pain since service and that he is competent to report pain in his feet. Furthermore, the Board notes that the nature of the Veteran's service which was characterized by repeated parachute jumps and an award of a Combat Action Badge, is consistent with the Veteran's reports of foot problems. The Board also recognizes that the Veteran's statement can be sufficient to find a nexus between service and a current disability. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.

Upon weighing the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's February 2020 VA opinion has limited probative value. As the examiner states that there is no evidence of chronicity of care the Veteran's feet. However, the Veteran has testified that he has suffered from pain in his feet since his separation from service. The examiner never addressed these complaints and therefore his opinion in not probative on the issue of nexus.

Given the fact there is no probative negative opinion of record, the Veteran's service treatment records which document the same disability the Veteran is now claiming, the credible statements of the Veteran regarding the continuing symptoms since his separation from service, and the later diagnosis of the plantar fasciitis, the Board finds that service connection is warranted. Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; and Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability

The Board notes that there is no dispute that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a left knee disability as noted in an August 2020 VA examination, and that he had treatment for a left knee disability in service as noted in an August 2006 service treatment record. The only remaining matter is nexus

Turning to nexus, the Veteran has testified that his knee pain began in service and continued until the present diagnosis of degenerative joint disease. The Board finds that the Veteran is credible in his complaints of left knee pain since service and that he is competent to report pain in his feet. Furthermore, the Board notes that the nature of the Veteran's service which was characterized by repeated parachute jumps and an award of a Combat Action Badge is consistent with the Veteran's reported knee injury and symptoms in service. The Board also recognizes that the Veteran's statement can be sufficient to find a nexus between service and a current disability. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.

Upon weighing the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's February 2020 VA opinion has limited probative value. As the examiner states that there is no evidence of chronicity of care the left knee. However, the Veteran has testified that he has suffered from pain in his left knee since his separation from service. The examiner never addressed these complaints and therefore his opinion in not probative on the issue of nexus.

Given the fact there is no probative negative opinion of record, the Veteran's service treatment records which document the same disability the Veteran is now claiming, the credible statements of the Veteran regarding the continuing symptoms since his separation from service, and the later diagnosis of a left knee disability that mirrors the diagnosis in service, the Board finds that service connection is warranted. Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; and Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Acosta, J. 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.