Citation Nr: A25032883
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-461480
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for arthritis of right shoulder (dominant), which is currently 20 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraines (headaches) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1987 to July 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran uploaded documents/statements with his August 2024 VA Form 10182. However, this is duplicative of evidence previously in the file. Further, the August 2024 docketing letter addresses the Veteran's options under Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023). Therefore, there are no concerns with the Board proceeding.  

The Board also notes that, to the extent any time remains for a docket switch pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the Board finds that the Veteran will not be prejudiced by the Board immediately issuing the decision herein, which fully remands all issues. 

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claims so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for arthritis of right shoulder (dominant), which is currently 20 percent disabling, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an increased rating for his service-connected right shoulder. See August 2024 VA Form 10182.

While the record contains a May 2024 VA examination, it does not comply with the requirements in Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). The examination does not contain weightbearing measurements or non-weightbearing measurements. 

Further, the May 2024 VA examination indicates that the Veteran takes pain medication. It is unclear whether the examination's findings reflect any beneficial effects of that medication, which must be discounted when assigning the evaluation of a musculoskeletal disability. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327.

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds the VA examination inadequate. The AOJ's reliance on an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. As such, the Board finds that a new examination, inclusive of a retrospective medical opinion, is necessary.

Additionally, the Board has considered whether an inferred claim for a total disability based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) has been raised pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). It appears from the record that the Veteran is employed, and he has not alleged, and the record does not establish, that he is unable to obtain and maintain employment due to his right shoulder disability. As such, the Board finds that a claim for a TDIU is not raised in connection with the instant appeal.

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraines (headaches) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for migraines (headaches) second to his service-connected right shoulder. See August 2024 VA Form 10182.

In the June 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a finding that the Veteran is service connected for his right shoulder and that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

VA afforded the Veteran an examination in June 2024. At that time, the examiner determined the Veteran had no headache diagnosis. However, it is unclear how the examiner came to that conclusion given that the Veteran has indicated that he has headaches. For instance, in an August 2009 VA Form 9, the Veteran noted that the pain from his right shoulder sometimes goes to the back of his head. More recently, in his May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran said that his right shoulder pain is causing him to have headaches. He said that when the shoulder is "fatigued out," pain is initiated. Id. Therefore, the Board finds the examination and subsequent June 2024 medical opinions that state there is no diagnosis, inadequate. 

Additionally, the Board notes that there are entries in the service treatment records (STRs) that could support the second element of direct service connection (February 1984 STR that notes a headache and a May 1990 STR that talks about pressure behind the eyes); therefore, the AOJ should also have obtained a direct service connection medical opinion. 

The reliance upon an inadequate examination and the failure to obtain a direct service connection opinion are pre-decisional duty to assist errors that require remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected right shoulder. The claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.

(a)	The examiner should provide a full description of the current severity of the Veteran's right shoulder and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. 

(b)	Additionally, the VA examiner is asked to provide a retrospective opinion concerning the severity of the Veteran's right shoulder at the May 2024 VA shoulder examination. 

The examiner must keep the following in mind: 

(1)	The examiner must report on the symptoms as they are without the ameliorative effects of medication and note that this was done.

(2)	The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(3)	The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

As noted above, the examiner must review the claims file (including this remand) and note that such review was conducted. The examiner should review all medical evidence and all lay evidence.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record. The VA clinician is advised that medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.

If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the VA clinician must so indicate and discuss why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to address the Veteran's claim for service connection for the Veteran's migraines (headaches). Any indicated tests and studies should be completed, and the examination should reflect a full description of the Veteran's disability.

Following a review of the entire record, to include any lay statements, the clinician should address the following: 

(a)	Does the Veteran have a headache disability diagnosis? If not, the examiner must provide a rationale as to how the examiner made that determination, considering the Veteran's statements about headaches in the August 2009 VA Form 9 and the May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions.

(b)	Is any headache diagnosis at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including any in-service headache issues or related to the Veteran's conceded in-service TERA? 

When providing an opinion about exposure to toxins, the examiner must consider:

i.	 the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and

ii.	the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

When providing any opinion, the examiner must address the following: February 1984 STR that notes a headache, a May 1990 STR that talks about pressure behind the eyes, and the June 2024 TERA memorandum.

(c)	Is any diagnosed headache disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) due to the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder?

(d)	Is any diagnosed headache disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated, i.e., made worse, by the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder?

The examiner should be sure to address both causation and aggravation.

As noted above, the examiner must review the claims file (including this remand) and note that such review was conducted. The examiner should review all medical evidence and all lay evidence.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record. The VA clinician is advised that medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.

If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the VA clinician must so indicate and discuss why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Veljic, Erica A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.