Citation Nr: A25032786
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-438395
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity nerve condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity nerve condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity nerve condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a neck disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 10 percent for limitation of left hip flexion is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 0 percent for limitation of extension of the left hip is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 0 percent for impaired abduction, adduction, or rotation of the left hip is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran does not have a current left elbow disability, nor is there in in-service injury or event to which he attributes such a disability.

2. The persuasive evidence favors a finding that the Veteran's left lower extremity nerve condition is diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy and is not caused or aggravated by his service-connected back disability.

3. The persuasive evidence favors a finding that the Veteran's right lower extremity nerve condition is diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy and is not caused or aggravated by his service-connected back disability.

4. The persuasive evidence favors a finding that the Veteran's left upper extremity nerve condition is diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy and is not caused or aggravated by his service-connected neck disability.

5. The persuasive evidence favors a finding that the Veteran's right upper extremity nerve condition is diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy and is not caused or aggravated by his service-connected neck disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity nerve condition have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity nerve condition have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity nerve condition have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1985 to September 1992.

The Veteran initially filed a claim requesting entitlement to service connection for the majority of the issues below in May 2023.  The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a rating decision in August 2023.  That rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for a back disability, neck disability, right ankle disability, left shoulder disability, and three manifestations of a left hip disability.  The August 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disabilities, PTSD, a left elbow disability, and nerve conditions of the bilateral upper and lower extremities.  

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim for service connection for PTSD.  In a January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ confirmed and continued the denial of service connection for PTSD.  

Also in September 2023, the Veteran submitted a new claim of entitlement to service connection for headaches.  In January 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying that claim.  

In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 to appeal the August 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions to the Board.  Specifically, the Veteran requested to appeal the initial ratings for his back, neck, right ankle, left shoulder, and left hip disabilities.  The Veteran also requested to appeal the denial of service connection for PTSD, a left elbow condition, right and left knee conditions, headaches, and nerve conditions of the bilateral upper and lower extremities.  

Notably, the Veteran also included on his VA Form 10182 the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for tinnitus.  The AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for tinnitus in an April 2019 rating decision.  The Veteran did not appeal that decision and it became final.  To appeal a decision to the Board, the Veteran must submit his VA Form 10182 within one year of that decision.  Thus, the May 2024 VA Form 10182 was not timely as to the April 2019 rating decision.  The issue of entitlement to an increased initial rating for tinnitus was not docketed to the Board and will not be addressed in this decision.  If the Veteran wishes to seek an increased rating for tinnitus, he may do so by filing a new claim on the appropriate form prescribed by the Secretary.  

On the May 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected to have his appeal adjudicated under the Direct Review docket.  Accordingly, with regard to service connection for PTSD and headaches, the Board may only consider the evidence that was of record at the time of the respective January 2024 rating decisions.  With regard to the remaining issues on appeal, the Board may only consider the evidence that was of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision.  The Board may consider argument that has been raised at any time.  

The Board notes that evidence related to the Veteran's mental health condition was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.304.  Service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Walker v. Shinseki, 701 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Moreover, disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected.  Any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease, will be service connected as well.

Notwithstanding the lack of evidence of disease or injury during service, service connection may still be granted if all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability

As was discussed above, the first requirement in establishing service connection is evidence of a current disability.  Although the Veteran included a left elbow disability in his claim and appeal, there is no evidence of record demonstrating a current left elbow disability.  Post-service treatment records are silent for any left elbow condition and the Veteran has not provided any lay testimony regarding his left elbow.  In the absence of any evidence of a current disability, the Board must deny the claim.  

Additionally, there is no evidence of any in-service injury or event that would be causally related to a current left elbow disability.  

As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity nerve condition

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity nerve condition

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity nerve condition

The evidence demonstrates evidence of symptoms of sensory peripheral neuropathy.  In statements accompanying his May 2023 claim, the Veteran attributed his lower extremity nerve conditions to his service-connected back disability and attributed his upper extremity nerve conditions to his service-connected neck disability.  

In a November 2015 neurology record, the treating provider noted peripheral neuropathy in all distal extremities, most severely in both feet.  The provider indicated that the Veteran also had chronic lumbar radiculopathy due to "degenerative spine."  The provider stated that the etiology was most likely due to a combination of degenerative spine as well as the Veteran's many years of heavy alcohol use.  

However, a January 2016 VA treatment record shows that an electromyography (EMG) study was performed in response to the Veteran's complaints of numbness and pain in his extremities.  The EMG report showed a sensory peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities with no evidence of lumbosacral radiculopathy.  

In a July 2022 VA treatment note, the provider identified peripheral neuropathy that was likely alcohol-related, as the aforementioned EMG study demonstrated no radiculopathy.  The provider noted that the Veteran had been taking gabapentin to treat these symptoms.  

The Veteran then underwent VA back and neck conditions examinations in June 2023.  At that time, the VA examiner found that, for the back, muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes were normal.  Straight leg testing was negative.  There was no radicular pain or other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.  For the neck, muscle strength testing and sensory examination were both normal.  There was no radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.  

Aside from the November 2015 neurology note-which the Board notes was re-transcribed on several occasions in the Veteran's treatment records, with no additional comments or findings-there is no competent evidence in the record demonstrating that the Veteran's nerve conditions of the upper and lower extremities are the result of radiculopathy of the cervical and lumbosacral spine, respectively.  Rather, multiple treatment providers have specifically indicated that the Veteran's symptoms are not the result of radiculopathy and are instead solely related to the Veteran's history of alcohol use.  This etiological conclusion was further confirmed by the June 2023 VA examinations which reported negative results to testing for radiculopathy and found no signs or symptoms attributed to radiculopathy.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions in his May 2023 statements that his nerve conditions are causally related to his neck and back disabilities.  However, as a layperson, the Veteran is not competent to assign etiologies to those symptoms, as doing so requires medical expertise.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

As a result, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran's upper and lower extremity nerve conditions are the result of his history of alcohol use and are not caused or aggravated by his service-connected neck and back disabilities.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and entitlement to service connection for nerve conditions of the bilateral upper and lower extremities is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

VA is obliged to provide an examination when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or signs and symptoms of a current disability, the record indicates that the disability or signs and symptoms of disability may be associated with active service; and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Further, the Veteran is not expected to know the exact diagnosis of the disability for which he has claimed entitlement to service connection.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 6 (2009). 

In this case, the Veteran filed a claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.  Treatment records do not demonstrate a diagnosis of PTSD.  However, the record shows a longstanding diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder.  The Veteran has submitted lay statements attributing his psychiatric disorder to service and has also submitted a statement from A.E., a nurse practitioner, opining on a general relationship between the psychiatric disorder and service.

Although this evidence does not meet the requirements for an award of service connection, it does meet the low threshold required to trigger VA's duty to assist by providing an examination.  As of the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran had not undergone a VA examination for his claimed psychiatric disorder.  Accordingly, on remand, the Veteran should be afforded such examination.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

In a May 2023 statement accompanying his claim, the Veteran described ongoing pain in his knees that he attributed to injuries incurred during service.  Service treatment records document a left leg injury following a March 1988 motor vehicle accident.  The Veteran was seen for complaints of a five-month history of right knee pain in June 1990, a strain in the left calf and knee in December 1990, and additional complaints of right leg pain in September 1991 and April 1992.  

In his May 2023 statement, the Veteran also attested that his service-connected back and hip disabilities affected his gait, causing strain on his knees that he believed resulted in current disabilities.  

To date, the Veteran has not undergone a VA examination for his knees.  The evidence of record meets the low threshold required to trigger VA's duty to assist by providing an examination.  Therefore, on remand, the Veteran should be afforded an examination of the knees.  

4. Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Whenever VA undertakes to either provide an examination or to obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  An adequate medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

In this case, the Veteran underwent a VA headaches examination in October 2023.  At that time, the Veteran reported experiencing headaches two to three times per week, with headaches lasting from one to two hours.  He described the pain as occurring in the back of his head, his temples, and in his neck.  

The VA examiner found that there was no diagnosis of a chronic headache condition.  This was based on the fact that the Veteran's medical records were silent for a diagnosis of a headache disability.  The examiner provided no explanation as to how they came to this conclusion, given the Veteran's competent statements describing his symptoms.  

The Board also notes that, in September 2023, the Veteran submitted a medical treatise regarding the relationship between neck pain and episodic migraine headaches.  The October 2023 VA examiner did not address this evidence, to include discussion of whether the Veteran's headache symptoms may be a manifestation of his service-connected neck disability.  

Based on this, a new, adequate examination is necessary on remand.  

5. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a right ankle disability is remanded.

6. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a neck disability is remanded.

7. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

8. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is remanded.

9. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 10 percent for limitation of left hip flexion is remanded.

10. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 0 percent for limitation of extension of the left hip is remanded.

11. Entitlement to an increased initial rating in excess of 0 percent for impaired abduction, adduction, or rotation of the left hip is remanded.

In evaluating the severity of a disability, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication on that disability unless the use of medication is specifically contemplated by the rating criteria.? See Jones v. Shinseki,?26 Vet. App. 56, 63?(2012).  This includes musculoskeletal disabilities in which the use of medications is not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria.  Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (2025).  Thus, in evaluating the Veteran's back disability, the Board must discount the benefits of medication, to include additional functional impairment as due to flare-ups and repeated use over time.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017). 

Here, the Veteran underwent VA examinations for his right ankle, neck, left shoulder, back, and left hip in June 2024.  At that time, the examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment for his musculoskeletal disabilities included taking 800 milligrams of Ibuprofen daily.  However, there is no indication that the examiner discounted the beneficial effects of this treatment in assessing the severity of the disability or in assessing the additional functional impairment caused by flare-ups or repeated use over time.  As a result, the examination is inadequate.  On remand, new examinations are necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA mental disorders examination.  The examiner should review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and the report of examination should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.  

The examiner should clearly identify all current acquired psychiatric disorders, with consideration made to the diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder documented in the Veteran's VA treatment records.  Then, with respect to each such diagnosed disability, the examiner should render an opinion, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability had onset in, or is otherwise related to service.  

In doing so, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's contentions, to include the May 2023 statement accompanying his claim for service connection.  The examiner should also address the statement from A.E. submitted in September 2023. 

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with complete rationale for the conclusions reached, in a printed report.  Complete rationale should include an explanation of the evidence used in support of the conclusion, as well as an explanation as to why such evidence supports the conclusion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA knee and lower leg examination.  The examiner should review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and the report of examination should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.  

The examiner should clearly identify all current disabilities of the left and right knees.  Then, with respect to each such diagnosed disability, the examiner should render an opinion, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability had onset in, or is otherwise related to service.  

In doing so, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's May 2023 statement attributing current knee symptoms to injuries incurred in service, noting that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms.  The examiner should also address the leg or knee injuries documented in the Veteran's service treatment records in March 1988, June 1990, December 1990, September 1991, and April 1992.  

The examiner should also render an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that a left or right knee disability was caused or aggravated by effects of the Veteran's service-connected back, right ankle, and left hip disabilities.  

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with complete rationale for the conclusions reached, in a printed report.  Complete rationale should include an explanation of the evidence used in support of the conclusion, as well as an explanation as to why such evidence supports the conclusion.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA headaches examination.  The examiner should review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and the report of examination should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.  

The examiner should clearly identify all current headache disabilities, noting that the Veteran is competent to describe the symptoms he has experienced.  Then, with respect to each such diagnosed disability, the examiner should render an opinion, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability had onset in, or is otherwise related to service.  

The examiner should also render an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected neck disability, or whether the Veteran's headaches are a manifestation of his neck disability.  In doing so, the examiner should specifically consider and address the medical treatise submitted in September 2023 regarding the relationship between neck pain and episodic migraines.     

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with complete rationale for the conclusions reached, in a printed report.  Complete rationale should include an explanation of the evidence used in support of the conclusion, as well as an explanation as to why such evidence supports the conclusion.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination of the current severity of his right ankle disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(A) All indicated tests should be performed, including range of motion findings expressed in degrees and in relation to normal range of motion;

(B) The examination must include testing results of joint pain on both active and passive motion, and in weight-bearing and non-weight bearing.  The examiner should assess where pain begins on the Veteran's initial range of motion and upon repetitive testing.  If such testing cannot be completed, an explanation should be provided as to why this is so. 

(C) The examiner must also estimate any functional loss in terms of additional degrees of limited motion of the right ankle experienced during flare-ups and repetitive use over time.  If the examiner cannot provide this estimate without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable medical evidence had been considered, to specifically include the Veteran's description as to the severity, frequency, duration of the flare-ups and his description as to the extent of functional loss during a flare-up and after repetitive use over time; whether the inability is due to the limits of medical community or the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge; and whether there is additional evidence, which if obtained, would permit the opinion to be provided.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).

The examiner's evaluation of the Veteran's right ankle disability should include an opinion as to the effects of that disability when the?ameliorative effects?of medication (including Ibuprofen and any other pain relievers) are disregarded.? In other words, if the Veteran were not taking medications to treat his service-connected disabilities, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disabilities would result in additional symptoms, as contemplated by the rating criteria listed in the disability benefits questionnaire?  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement when discounting the ameliorative effects of medication without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

5. Schedule the Veteran for an examination of the current severity of his neck disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(A) All indicated tests should be performed, including range of motion findings expressed in degrees and in relation to normal range of motion;

(B) The examination must include testing results of joint pain on both active and passive motion, and in weight-bearing and non-weight bearing.  The examiner should assess where pain begins on the Veteran's initial range of motion and upon repetitive testing.  If such testing cannot be completed, an explanation should be provided as to why this is so. 

(C) The examiner must also estimate any functional loss in terms of additional degrees of limited motion of the neck experienced during flare-ups and repetitive use over time.  If the examiner cannot provide this estimate without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable medical evidence had been considered, to specifically include the Veteran's description as to the severity, frequency, duration of the flare-ups and his description as to the extent of functional loss during a flare-up and after repetitive use over time; whether the inability is due to the limits of medical community or the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge; and whether there is additional evidence, which if obtained, would permit the opinion to be provided.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).

The examiner's evaluation of the Veteran's neck disability should include an opinion as to the effects of that disability when the?ameliorative effects?of medication (including Ibuprofen and any other pain relievers) are disregarded.? In other words, if the Veteran were not taking medications to treat his service-connected disabilities, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disabilities would result in additional symptoms, as contemplated by the rating criteria listed in the disability benefits questionnaire?  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement when discounting the ameliorative effects of medication without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

6. Schedule the Veteran for an examination of the current severity of his left shoulder disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(A) All indicated tests should be performed, including range of motion findings expressed in degrees and in relation to normal range of motion;

(B) The examination must include testing results of joint pain on both active and passive motion, and in weight-bearing and non-weight bearing.  The examiner should assess where pain begins on the Veteran's initial range of motion and upon repetitive testing.  If such testing cannot be completed, an explanation should be provided as to why this is so. 

(C) The examiner must also estimate any functional loss in terms of additional degrees of limited motion of the left shoulder experienced during flare-ups and repetitive use over time.  If the examiner cannot provide this estimate without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable medical evidence had been considered, to specifically include the Veteran's description as to the severity, frequency, duration of the flare-ups and his description as to the extent of functional loss during a flare-up and after repetitive use over time; whether the inability is due to the limits of medical community or the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge; and whether there is additional evidence, which if obtained, would permit the opinion to be provided.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).

The examiner's evaluation of the Veteran's left shoulder disability should include an opinion as to the effects of that disability when the?ameliorative effects?of medication (including Ibuprofen and any other pain relievers) are disregarded.? In other words, if the Veteran were not taking medications to treat his service-connected disabilities, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disabilities would result in additional symptoms, as contemplated by the rating criteria listed in the disability benefits questionnaire?  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement when discounting the ameliorative effects of medication without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

7. Schedule the Veteran for an examination of the current severity of his back disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(A) All indicated tests should be performed, including range of motion findings expressed in degrees and in relation to normal range of motion;

(B) The examination must include testing results of joint pain on both active and passive motion, and in weight-bearing and non-weight bearing.  The examiner should assess where pain begins on the Veteran's initial range of motion and upon repetitive testing.  If such testing cannot be completed, an explanation should be provided as to why this is so. 

(C) The examiner must also estimate any functional loss in terms of additional degrees of limited motion of the back experienced during flare-ups and repetitive use over time.  If the examiner cannot provide this estimate without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable medical evidence had been considered, to specifically include the Veteran's description as to the severity, frequency, duration of the flare-ups and his description as to the extent of functional loss during a flare-up and after repetitive use over time; whether the inability is due to the limits of medical community or the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge; and whether there is additional evidence, which if obtained, would permit the opinion to be provided.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).

The examiner's evaluation of the Veteran's back disability should include an opinion as to the effects of that disability when the?ameliorative effects?of medication (including Ibuprofen and any other pain relievers) are disregarded.? In other words, if the Veteran were not taking medications to treat his service-connected disabilities, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disabilities would result in additional symptoms, as contemplated by the rating criteria listed in the disability benefits questionnaire?  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement when discounting the ameliorative effects of medication without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

8. Schedule the Veteran for an examination of the current severity of his left hip disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(A) All indicated tests should be performed, including range of motion findings expressed in degrees and in relation to normal range of motion;

(B) The examination must include testing results of joint pain on both active and passive motion, and in weight-bearing and non-weight bearing.  The examiner should assess where pain begins on the Veteran's initial range of motion and upon repetitive testing.  If such testing cannot be completed, an explanation should be provided as to why this is so. 

(C) The examiner must also estimate any functional loss in terms of additional degrees of limited motion of the left hip experienced during flare-ups and repetitive use over time.  If the examiner cannot provide this estimate without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable medical evidence had been considered, to specifically include the Veteran's description as to the severity, frequency, duration of the flare-ups and his description as to the extent of functional loss during a flare-up and after repetitive use over time; whether the inability is due to the limits of medical community or the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge; and whether there is additional evidence, which if obtained, would permit the opinion to be provided.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).

The examiner's evaluation of the Veteran's left hip disability should include an opinion as to the effects of that disability when the?ameliorative effects?of medication (including Ibuprofen and any other pain relievers) are disregarded.? In other words, if the Veteran were not taking medications to treat his service-connected disabilities, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disabilities would result in additional symptoms, as contemplated by the rating criteria listed in the disability benefits questionnaire?  

(continued on next page)

?

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement when discounting the ameliorative effects of medication without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Giaquinto

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.