Citation Nr: A25032036
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231009-384043
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a foot disability, to include pes planus, plantar fasciitis, foot pain, and calcaneal spurs, is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for atrial fibrillation is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bronchial epithelial cells is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for mixed inflammatory cells is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for osteoarthrosis, to include pain in the knees, toes, fingers, elbows, and shoulders, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a gall bladder disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for cholecystectomy is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for spondylolisthesis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bladder disability, to include ureteropelvic junction obstruction, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for transverse myelitis, to include loss of use of legs, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for clusters of histiocytic aggregates is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The appeals for entitlement to service connection for a foot disability and shin splints are dismissed under this docket number as they were addressed in February 2025 Board decisions.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the existence of bronchial epithelial cells constitutes a disability.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the existence of mixed inflammatory cells constitutes a disability.

5. The evidence of record shows osteoarthrosis in relationship to the right hip only, which was specifically addressed in a separate appeal. 

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of CFS; his fatigue is a symptom of his service-connected insomnia and his non-service-connected obstructive sleep apnea and is addressed with those issues.  

7. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of diverticulitis.  

8. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current disability of the gall bladder, as the record does not contain evidence of complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a gall bladder disability after removal of his gall bladder.  

9. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's cholecystectomy is causally related to his active service.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for a foot disability, to include pes planus, plantar fasciitis, foot pain, and calcaneal spurs, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for atrial fibrillation have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bronchial epithelial cells have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for mixed inflammatory cells have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for osteoarthrosis, to include pain in the knees, toes, fingers, elbows, and shoulders, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for CFS have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a gall bladder disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

10. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for cholecystectomy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active-duty service from June 1993 to June 1997 and June 1999 to September 1999.  

The Veteran submitted a notice of disagreement (NOD) in October 2023 electing the direct review lane.   

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for each issue. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal for each individual issue cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, for any claims that have been remanded below, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran's claims related to his left hip and right shoulder were also addressed on the October 2023 NOD.  However, as these appeals were repeated in the September 2023 NOD, the Board has addressed them a single time in a separate Board decision so as to consolidate the issues and not provide repetitive findings.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a foot disability, to include pes planus, plantar fasciitis, foot pain, and calcaneal spurs.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for a foot disability and shin splints will be addressed together as they stem from the same legal and factual basis.  

The Veteran submitted numerous NODs relating to the above claims.  In this instance, two separate NODs requested an appeal of the issues of entitlement to service connection for a foot disability and shin splints with regards to the same rating decision and the same evidentiary period.  The Board adjudicated these claims in February 2025 Board decisions.  Accordingly, the appeal under this docket number is duplicative.  As such, the duplicate appeals under this docket number must be dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  There remains no case or controversy at issue for the Board to adjudicate.  

The Board does not have jurisdiction over the appeals for entitlement to service connection for a foot disability or bilateral shin splint and the issues are dismissed under this docket number.

3. Entitlement to service connection for atrial fibrillation

The Veteran contends that he has atrial fibrillation.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of atrial fibrillation and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran's treatment records show no diagnosis, treatment, or complaints of atrial fibrillation.  

In his July 2023 claim, the Veteran asserted he had atrial fibrillation because is heart races during his panic attacks.  The Board notes that the Veteran's panic attacks are rated as part of his service-connected psychiatric disability.  Any symptoms related to his panic attacks are already service-connected and addressed under that regulation.  

Atrial fibrillation is different than a rapid heartbeat during a panic attack.  Atrial fibrillation is an arrhythmia (any variation from the normal rhythm of the heartbeat) where instead of intermittently contracting, the atria quiver continuously in a chaotic pattern, causing a totally irregular, often rapid ventricular rate. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (31st ed. 2007).

Here, the Veteran's rapid heart rate is related to his panic attacks.  The record contains no evidence that he has a cardiac disability resulting in atrial fibrillation.  

While the Veteran is competent to note a rapid heart rate during a panic attack, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation in this case.  Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation.  As such, the claim must be denied.  

4. Entitlement to service connection for bronchial epithelial cells.

The Veteran contends that the presence of bronchial epithelial cells constitutes a disability.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the presence of bronchial epithelial cells is not a disability. 

Bronchial is defined as pertaining to the bronchus.  The bronchus are any of the larger air passages of the lungs, having an outer fibrous coat with irregularly placed plates of hyaline cartilage, an interlacing network of smooth muscle, and a mucous membrane of columnar ciliated epithelial cells.  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (31st ed. 2007). 

Epithelial is defined as pertaining to or composed of epithelium.  Epithelium is defined as the covering of internal and external surfaces of the body, including skin and the lining of vessels and other small cavities.  It consists of cells joined by small amounts of cementing substances.  Epithelium is classified into types on the basis of the number of layers deep and the shape of the superficial cells.  Id.

Therefore, bronchial epithelial cells are simply cells that line the bronchus.  Having these cells is normal and is not a disability.  The record contains no evidence of a disability related to these cells.  

The Board notes that the Veteran was separately denied service connection for bronchitis and pneumonia in the same October 2023 rating decision, but did not appeal that decision in this NOD.  As such, that issue is not before the Board.  

While the Veteran believes that the presence of bronchial epithelial cells is a disability, the Veteran is not competent to make that determination.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical definitions provided by Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary.

Given the evidence cited above, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the presence of bronchial epithelial cells constitutes a disability.  

5. Entitlement to service connection for mixed inflammatory cells.

The Veteran contends that the presence of mixed inflammatory cells constitutes a disability.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the presence of mixed inflammatory cells is not a disability. 

Mixed is defined as affecting various parts at once, showing two or more different characteristics.  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (31st ed. 2007).

Inflammatory is defined as pertaining to or characterized by inflammation.  Inflammation is a localized protective response elicited by injury or destruction of tissues, which serves to destroy, dilute, or all off (sequester) both the injurious agent and the injured tissue.  It is characterized in the acute form by the classical signs of pain, head, redness, swelling, and loss of function.  Histologically, it involves a complex series of events, including dilation of arterioles, capillaries, and venules, with increased permeability and blood flow, exudation of fluids, including plasma proteins, and leukocytic migration into the inflammatory focus.  Id. 

Therefore, mixed inflammatory cells are simply cells that have reacted as a protective response.  These cells may be present in a reaction to an injury or destruction of tissue as noted above, but they are a symptom of a disability and are not themselves considered a disability.  The Veteran has numerous medical complaints, which may result in mixed inflammatory cells.  

While the Veteran believes that the presence of mixed inflammatory cells is a disability, the Veteran is not competent to make that determination.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical definitions provided by Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary.

Given the evidence cited above, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the presence of mixed inflammatory cells constitutes a disability.

6. Entitlement to service connection for osteoarthrosis, to include pain in the knees, toes, fingers, elbows, and shoulders,

The Veteran contends that he has osteoarthrosis that is causally related to his active service.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board notes that the evidence shows a diagnosis of osteoarthrosis only in relation to his right hip disability.  The Veteran's medical records show a diagnosis of osteoarthrosis in April 2016.  The Veteran does not have a diagnosis of osteoarthrosis related to his knees, toes, fingers, elbows, or shoulders.  In any event the Veteran has separately appealed the issues of service connection for a foot disability, arm disability, knee disabilities, and shoulder disabilities.  

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of osteoarthrosis of any joint not separately considered in this or another Board appeal and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

Given the medical evidence that the Veteran only has osteoarthrosis of the right hip and that he has separately addressed appeals regarding his knees, feet, shoulders, and arm, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has any additional findings of osteoarthrosis.  As such, the claim of entitlement to service connection for osteoarthrosis must be denied.

7. Entitlement to service connection for CFS.

The Veteran contends he has a diagnosis of CFS that is causally related to his active service.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of CFS and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2022.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have CFS.  The Veteran noted he was tired from sleep apnea.  He acknowledged that he had never been diagnosed with CFS.  The examiner found no evidence of CFS. 

The Veteran's treatment records show treatment for sleep apnea as well as complaints of insomnia.  The Veteran's insomnia is currently service connected and rated as part of his psychiatric disability.  Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's sleep apnea has been separately denied and is not addressed in this appeal.  

While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of fatigue, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis of CFS in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of CFS.  As such, the claim of entitlement to service connection for CFS must be denied.  

8. Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis.

The Veteran contends that he has diverticulitis that is causally related to his active service.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of diverticulitis and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran's treatment records consistently show no diverticulitis.  May 2020 imaging showed scattered colonic diverticula.  In June 2020, treatment records showed few colonic diverticula.  In June 2002, imaging showed few colonic diverticula within the left colon.  March 2023 imaging again showed colonic diverticulosis without evidence of diverticulitis.  

The Board notes that diverticulosis is the presence of diverticula, particularly of colonic diverticula, in the absence of inflammation.  Diverticula are circumscribed pouches or sacs of variable size occurring normally or created by herniation of the lining mucous membrane through a defect in the muscular coat off a tubular organ. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (31st ed. 2007).  The presence of diverticula may occur naturally without symptoms and is not considered a disability. 

While the Veteran believes he has diverticulitis, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence, to include imaging results showing no diverticulitis.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of diverticulitis.  As such, the claim of entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis must be denied.

9. Entitlement to service connection for a gall bladder disability.

The Veteran contends he has a gall bladder disability that is causally related to active service.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a currently diagnosed gall bladder disability and has not had a gall bladder disability present for the entire period on appeal and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

Medical records show that the Veteran had a cholecystectomy, or removal of the gall bladder, in either 2014 or 2016, prior to the period on appeal.  The issue of entitlement to service connection for a cholecystectomy has been separately claimed and is addressed in a separate analysis below.  

The remaining medical records show no further gall bladder complaints or treatment throughout the period on appeal, even without the gall bladder present.  The Veteran had no gall bladder attacks, and no findings related to his gall bladder beyond the marked absence of a gall bladder.  

Given the lack of a gall bladder with no subsequent complaints, treatment, or diagnosis throughout the period on appeal, the Board finds that the Veteran did not have a disability during this period.  Without evidence of a current disability, service connection may not be granted.  The Court has held that "Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim."  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a gall bladder disability, the claim for entitlement to service connection for a gall bladder disability must be denied.  

10. Entitlement to service connection for cholecystectomy.

The Veteran contends that his cholecystectomy was due to his active service.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran had a cholecystectomy prior to the period on appeal, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that it began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

The Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a gall bladder disability that would result in a cholecystectomy.  The Veteran underwent an enlistment examination and filled out a report of medical history in April 1999, which noted no complaints related to the gall bladder.  This examination was subsequent to his separation from the Navy.  The Veteran's treatment records for his subsequent period of service in 1999 in the Army show no complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to the gall bladder.  The Veteran declined a separation examination in September 1999.  

The Veteran's lay statements do not assert that his gall bladder symptoms were related to his active service.  The Veteran's lone statement regarding his gall bladder indicates he believes it is related to food.  The Veteran has not specified what food specifically or why food in active service would be different from food he subsequently ate for 15 years leading up to his cholecystectomy.  

Of note, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for his claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i).  According to McLendon, VA must provide a medical examination when there is evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service event, injury, or disease, (3) some indication that the claimed disability may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease, and (4) insufficient competent evidence of record for VA to decide.  The third prong, which requires evidence that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Here, the record does not show an in-service disease, injury, or event to which his cholecystectomy could be related.  As noted above, the Veteran and his representative have not specified an in-service event, injury, or disease to which his cholecystectomy could be associated.  Without evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease, a VA examination is not warranted under the standards of McLendon.

While the Veteran believes his cholecystectomy is related to service, the Board reiterates that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against findings that any in-service injury, disease, or event occurred to which the cholecystectomy could be related.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

The Board notes that the issues of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, a left knee disability, a left ankle disability, and a right ankle disability were remanded in February 2025 rating decisions.  Although the Veteran properly appealed the issues in the current NOD on appeal, the Board finds that as further development has already been noted as required prior to a decision on the merits and no evidence of record in the extended appeal period allows for a grant of service connection, the Board must reiterate the reasons for remand set forth in the February 2025 Board decision.  As such, the issues are remanded for compliance with the February 2025 Board remand directives, which are restated below.

5.  Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for spondylolisthesis is remanded.

The Board notes that a review of the record reveals the Veteran uses medication for his spondylolisthesis.  Specifically, his VA medication list shows that the Veteran used Tylenol, lidocaine, and methocarbamol to treat his spondylolisthesis.  As the applicable diagnostic codes and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of such medication, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's spondylolisthesis.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

6.  Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The Veteran claimed that his erectile dysfunction is due to his psychiatric disability.  The Veteran was afforded a VA psychiatric examination prior to the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, but the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was a result of his psychiatric disability.  As such, the Board finds that an addendum nexus opinion is necessary before a decision on the merits may be made.  

7. Entitlement to service connection for a bladder disability, to include ureteropelvic junction obstruction, is remanded. 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a bladder disability is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Prior to the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran began complaining of incontinence in July 2022.  He did not receive a VA examination to address his bladder complaints after that time.  The Board finds that a VA examination is necessary before a decision on the merits may be made.  

8. Entitlement to service connection for transverse myelitis, to include loss of use of legs, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for transverse myelitis, to include loss of use of legs, is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran failed to appear for a June 2023 VA examination; however, the Veteran has been in and out of the hospital and rehabilitation.  Additionally, the Veteran's treatment records are extensive, and an opinion may be obtained without an examination.  As such, the Board is remanding the issue to attempt to obtain a nexus opinion based upon the medical record if an examination is not possible.  

9. Entitlement to service connection for clusters of histiocytic aggregates is remanded.  

The issue of entitlement to service connection for clusters of histiocytic aggregates is being remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The Veteran's bronch findings showed lymphohistiocytic aggregates.  This is a finding, but was related to a diagnosis of lymphadenopathy.  The Veteran may have claimed for the symptom, but as it is associated with a diagnosis, VA should liberally construe the claim.  See Clemmons v. West, 206 F.3d 1401, 1403 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (finding that a veteran's claim "cannot be limited only to that diagnosis, but must rather be considered a claim for any mental disability that may be reasonably encompassed.").  Additionally, the Veteran has submitted multiple articles about the exposure to PFAs while in service.  As such, the Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine if his diagnosed lymphadenopathy is causally related to his active service.  

10. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

11. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded. 

The issues of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability and a cervical spine disability are remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The Veteran submitted lay evidence that he fell from a ladder and was injured during basic training for the Army.  He was then discharged for being unable to complete basic training.  The Veteran asserts that his left shoulder and cervical spine disabilities are related to his injury during service.  As such, a remand for a VA examination and nexus opinion is necessary before a decision on the merits may be made.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his diabetes mellitus, type II. The claims file must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise due to his service. 

The examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II was caused or aggravated by his service-connected spondylolisthesis. Aggravation is defined for these purposes as a worsening of the underlying condition versus a temporary flare-up of symptoms. 

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct concepts, and each must be addressed separately.

The examiner should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record. 

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his left knee condition. The claims file must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed. 

The examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left knee condition was caused or aggravated by his service-connected spondylolisthesis. Aggravation is defined for these purposes as a worsening of the underlying condition versus a temporary flare-up of symptoms. 

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct concepts, and each must be addressed separately.

The examiner should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his left ankle condition. The claims file must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed.

The examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left ankle condition was caused or aggravated by his service-connected spondylolisthesis. Aggravation is defined for these purposes as a worsening of the underlying condition versus a temporary flare-up of symptoms. 

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct concepts, and each must be addressed separately.

The examiner should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his right ankle disability.  The claims file and a complete copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician.  All diagnostic testing deemed necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.  

Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, the clinical records, and the lay statements, the clinician is instructed to provide opinions responsive to the following questions:

a.)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right ankle disorder was incurred in service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include an in-service fall in 1999?

b.)	Is it at least as likely as not that, but for a service-connected disability, to specifically include spondylolisthesis, he would not have his current right ankle disorder?

c.)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right ankle disorder would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for a service-connected disability, to specifically include spondylolisthesis?

The examiner should consider the lay statements regarding an injury during service, but should also note the December 2010 injury when the Veteran partially fell into a manhole.

The clinician is instructed to address (i) causation and (ii) aggravation separately for the claimed disability.  If separate opinions are not provided for causation and aggravation, the opinion will be returned as inadequate. 

If aggravation is shown, the clinician should indicate to the extent possible the baseline level of severity of the disorder (that is, the approximate level of severity of the disorder prior to the onset of the worsening). 

In forming opinions, the clinician must address the November 2021 buddy statement and the lay statements from the Veteran in the May 2022 and July 2022 VA examinations describing how he developed severe right sided pain following an in-service fall in 1999. 

It would be helpful to the Board if the clinician could explain why the medical evidence is either consistent with or inconsistent with a finding that the Veteran's left hip disorder was either directly incurred in or related to service.  It would also be helpful if the clinician could explain why the medical evidence is either consistent or inconsistent with findings that the Veteran's right ankle disorder was caused or worsened by a service-connected disability, to specifically include spondylolisthesis.  

A thorough rational for any opinion must be provided.

5. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of the Veteran's spondylolisthesis.  An examination should only be scheduled if the clinician deems one is necessary to provide the requested opinions. 

a.)	The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service-connected spondylolisthesis. 

b.)	If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motions would be without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.

In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record. 

A rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

6. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate examiner regarding the Veteran's erectile dysfunction and bladder complaints.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Is the Veteran's erectile dysfunction causally related to a service-connected disability, to include his psychiatric disability, back disability, or the medication used to treat his service-connected disabilities? 

b.)	Is the Veteran's erectile dysfunction aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include his psychiatric disability, back disability, or the medication used to treat his service-connected disabilities? 

c.)	Are the Veteran's bladder complaints causally related to a service-connected disability, to include his psychiatric disability, back disability, or the medication used to treat his service-connected disabilities? 

d.)	Are the Veteran's bladder complaints aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include his psychiatric disability, back disability, or the medication used to treat his service-connected disabilities?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an additional examination is required for the examiner to sufficiently address the above questions, then a new examination should be afforded.

7. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding the Veteran's transverse myelitis.  Should the Veteran be unable to attend an examination, the examiner is requested to attempt to provide an opinion based upon the medical evidence of record and the examiner's expertise regarding the cause of transverse myelitis.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Is the Veteran's transverse myelitis causally related to a reported fall from a ladder during service in 1999?

b.)	Is the Veteran's transverse myelitis causally related to a service-connected disability, to include his back disability? 

c.)	Is the Veteran's transverse myelitis aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include his back disability? 

The examiner should consider the lay statements regarding an injury during service, but should also note the December 2010 injury when the Veteran partially fell into a manhole.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  

8. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination regarding his lymphadenopathy.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinion:

Is the Veteran's lymphadenopathy causally related to his exposure to PFAs during his military service?  The examiner should address the articles submitted in June 2022 and the March 2020 congressional testimony.  

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered

9. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding his claim for a left shoulder and neck disability.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Does the Veteran have a currently diagnosed left shoulder disability?  The examiner should consider any functional impairment due to pain. 

b.)	Does the Veteran have a currently diagnosed neck disability?  The examiner should consider any functional impairment due to pain.

c.)	Is the Veteran's left shoulder disability causally related to his active service, to include the described fall during service?

d.)	Is the Veteran's neck disability causally related to his active service, to include the described fall during service?

The examiner should note the lay statement regarding the Veteran's injury during service, but should also note the December 2010 injury when the Veteran fell partially into a manhole. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Veresink, Patricia

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.