Citation Nr: A25032250
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473185
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of Lyme Disease to include nerve damage from Bell's Palsy 

FINDING OF FACT

The most probative evidence shows that the Veteran experiences residuals of Lyme Disease, to include nerve damage from Bell's Palsy.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for residuals of Lyme Disease to include nerve damage from Bell's Palsy are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from June 1992 to May 1996.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veteran's Affairs (VA) Regional Office of the Veteran's Benefits Administration, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran requested Higher-Level Review of a March 2023 rating decision on February 2, 2024.  However, during the Higher-Level Review a development error was discovered in the prior decision and her claim was assigned to the Supplemental Review Lane on May 23, 2024, for additional development.  A special review of the Veteran's file was mandated on May 23, 2024.  A September 2024 rating decision confirmed and continued the denial of service connection for nerve damage from Lyme Disease (Bell's Palsy).  

In September 2024, the Veteran elected to appeal this issue to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and selecting the direct review docket.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed on the date of the prior decision.

The Board has recharacterized the Veteran's claim to accurately reflect the evidence developed in the record, including during an informal conference and upon higher level review.

1. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of Lyme Disease to include nerve damage from Bell's Palsy

Favorable Findings, which are binding on the Board, have been identified by the AOJ as follows:  The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  Service treatment records show Lyme Disease, August 1993.  Service treatment records show that you were treated for Lyme disease in September 1993, which is a cause of Bell's Palsy. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA peripheral nerves examination with respect to the claimed condition of nerve damage from Lyme Disease in March 2023.  The examiner noted onset during service in 1993 when the Veteran was exposed to deer tick in the back of her leg.  The tick was removed from her leg.  She had a full body rash and was treated at an Air Force Base.  The condition since onset has progressed/worsened.  The Veteran reported nerve pain going from her lower back to her right leg.  The pain is intermittent five times per week, treated with ibuprofen.  Mild incomplete paralysis right sciatic nerve lower extremity was noted.  EMG studies have not been performed.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has weakness in the right leg due to a spinal condition, causing right lower extremity radiculopathy.  The peripheral nerve examination shows no signs of weakness in either extremity.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition of nerve damage was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the Veteran's claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The rationale was that the stated Lyme Disease in August 1993, nerve pain in right leg from wearing gun belt in February 1995, low back pain symptoms and hip pain diagnosed in October 1995.  Lyme titer lab results on 9/2/93 were considered normal.  Therefore, the examiner stated that, "it is my medical opinion that the Veteran's claimed nerve damage form Lyme Disease condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness."

An informal conference in May 2024 determined that the wrong examination was provided for the Veteran's Bell's Palsy and that a cranial nerves examination was warranted.  A Higher-Level review rating decision identified a duty to assist error and requested a cranial nerves examination and medical opinion to determine the degree of any residual disability from the Lyme disease shown in active service as Bell's palsy is the most common manifestation of Lyme disease. 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for infectious diseases (Lyme Disease) in July 2024.  A diagnosis of Lyme Disease was noted on September 16, 1993.  The status was noted as inactive from December 31, 1993.  Evidence review did not show Bell's Palsy.  Residuals were described as Bell's Palsy; onset date: 2009.  Details of onset: Treated for Lyme disease in the military, this was diagnosed after a TDY exercise where she was bit by a tick carrying Lyme disease.  It later caused Bell's Palsy after discharge (2009) that has been treated and now nerve pain that flares-up.  She hasn't been able to get records from urgent care clinic regarding diagnosis and treatment of Bell's Palsy.  Current symptoms: none.  Current medication: none.  Procedures and treatment:  She was treated with amoxicillin in 1993 for Lyme disease; was treated in 2009 for Bell's Palsy with medication but can't recall what medication.  Course of condition: improved.  Severity: low.  Per subjective report about a month or so after being treated for Lyme disease, symptoms resolved and didn't have any related symptoms until developed Bell's Palsy in 2009.  Subjective report of Bell's Palsy in 2009 but available records silent for any interaction with healthcare providers regarding Bell's Palsy.

The Veteran was provided a VA cranial nerves disease examination in July 2024.  The examiner stated that she does not now have, nor has she ever been diagnosed with a cranial nerve condition.  Evidence review is silent for Bell's Palsy.  September 1993:  STRs for treatment of Lyme Disease.  Although subjective complaints of periodic symptoms possibly related to the claimed condition as stated in the contention narrative, the veteran's specific symptomology on the day of examination are insufficient to warrant a diagnosis as there is a lack of objective evidence in the medical records and or on my evaluation to confirm or render a current diagnosis related to the claimed condition.  Onset Date: 2009.  Details of onset: Treated for Lyme disease in the military, this was diagnosed after a TDY exercise where I was bit by a tick carrying Lyme disease.  It later caused Bell's Palsy after my discharge (2009) that has been treated and now nerve pain that flares-up.  She hasn't been able to get records from urgent care clinic in Texas regarding diagnosis and treatment of Bell's Palsy.  Current symptoms: none; she reported a few times since having Bell's Palsy in 2009 that she feels may have some slight right eye drooping when tired or stressed - last occurrence years ago.  Current medication: none.  Procedures and treatment: she was treated with amoxicillin in 1993 for Lyme Disease; was treated in 2009 for Bell's Palsy with medication but can't recall what medication.  Course of condition: improved.  Severity: low.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The rationale was that there is evidence in the available records regarding diagnosis and treatment of Lyme disease while in service in September 1993.  Although subjective complaints of periodic symptoms possibly related to the claimed condition as stated in the contention narrative, the Veteran's specific symptomology on the day of exam are insufficient to warrant a diagnosis as there is a lack of objective evidence in the medical records and or on my evaluation to confirm or render a current diagnosis related to the Cranial Nerves Diseases Disability Benefits Questionnaire or related to claimed condition.

A statement was submitted in July 2024 from the Veteran's prior manager in April /May 2009 who stated he authorized her to seek medical attention for facial paralysis of the right side.  Upon her return to work, she presented a note from urgent care with a diagnosis of Bell's Palsy.  She was under treatment for roughly six weeks. 

The Veteran's spouse submitted a statement in August 2024.  He stated that he was there in September 1992 when she was treated for Lyme Disease by a U.S Air Force doctor.  He was again with her through the diagnosis and treatment for Bell's Palsy in 2009.  She was treated at CareNow Urgent Care.  He believes that was in the summer of 2009.

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of all medical and lay evidence of record, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Board must resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Competent lay evidence is any kind of evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2).  This may include some medical matters, such as describing symptoms or relating a contemporaneous medical diagnosis.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Board finds that the negative nexus opinions are not significantly probative as the examiners did not adequately address the Veteran's lay evidence.  A medical examination is inadequate where the examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions regarding onset of symptoms or injury during service.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007).  Furthermore, lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, can ultimately be considered competent, regardless of a lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

The Board notes the VA examiner acknowledged a diagnosis of Lyme Disease during service and "subjective" complaints of periodic symptoms "possibly related to the claimed condition" including right eye drooping when tired or stressed but provided a negative nexus because the Veteran did not exhibit symptomatology on the day of the examination and there were no contemporaneous medical records showing Bell's Palsy.  The requirement of a current disability is "satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim."  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  Further, lay statements may serve to support a claim for service connection by supporting the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation.  38 U.S.C. § 1153 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Symptoms of Bell's Palsy experienced by the Veteran and observed by her husband and coworker are lay-observable and the Board finds the Veteran and her husband and coworker were competent to report these symptoms.  The Board finds these lay statements are credible.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  

In summary, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate equipoise as to whether the Veteran experiences residuals of Lyme Disease, to include Bell's palsy.  This evidence includes the medical evidence, the lay statements, findings made during the VA examinations, and the VA examiner's acknowledgement of lay reports of periodic symptoms "possibly related to the claimed condition," which reports the Board has found to be credible.  The evidence also includes the informal conference in May 2024 which acknowledged the Veteran's Bell's Palsy.  Also, on Higher-Level review, the AOJ identified a duty to assist error and requested an examination and medical opinion "to determine the degree of any residual disability from the Lyme disease shown in active service as Bell's palsy is the most common manifestation of Lyme disease."  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Providing the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran, the Board therefore finds that service connection is warranted for residuals of Lyme Disease to include nerve damage from Bell's Palsy.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mcloughlin, Debra

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.