Citation Nr: A25032388
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 220207-218650
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

An effective date prior to June 15, 2012, for the award of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

An effective date prior to August 17, 2021, for the award of service connection for a traumatic brain injury is denied.

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected traumatic brain injury is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on June 15, 2012, and no earlier. 

2. The Veteran filed a Notice of Intent to file a claim on August 17, 2021, and within one year of that filing he filed a claim for service connection for traumatic brain injury. There is no earlier claim for service connection of record.

3. The highest level of impairment caused by the Veteran's traumatic brain injury is Level 1 under the "Facets of cognitive impairment and other residuals of TBI not otherwise classified."

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date prior to June 15, 2012, for the award of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

2. The criteria for an effective date prior to August 17, 2021, for the award of service connection for a traumatic brain injury are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.155, 3.400.

3. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected traumatic brain injury are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from November 1976 until his honorable discharge in November 1980.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 10, 2022, Higher-Level Review (HLR) Rating Decision issued by a Regional Office of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

The Board received two VA Forms 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on February 7, 2022, from the Veteran. He elected the Direct Review docket in each form. A February 15, 2022, Board letter informed the Veteran and his representative that his appeal had been formally placed on the Board's Direct Review docket. 

1. An effective date prior to June 15, 2012, for the award of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

Procedural History

On May 25, 2021, the VA Regional Office issued a Rating Decision awarding the Veteran service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). It assigned an initial 50 percent disability rating effective June 15, 2012. 

On July 29, 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0995 (Supplemental Claim Application), seeking an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for OSA. 

On September 3, 2021, he filed another Supplemental Claim listing "sleep apnea" as the issue with which he disagreed and "May 2021" as the decision. 

On September 30, 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996 (Higher-Level Review Request). He identified "sleep apnea" as the issue he disagreed with, and "1977" as the date of the decision, and no such decision exists. On the same date, he also filed VA Form 20-0995 (Supplemental Claim Application). Again, he identified "sleep apnea" and "1977." 

On November 22, 2021, the VA Regional Office issued a Rating Decision addressing only the rating for the Veteran's OSA. It denied a disability rating in excess of 50 percent.

On December 10, 2021, the Veteran filed another HLR Request, stating that he believed he was entitled to an earlier effective date for his OSA. Yet, he identified the date of the decision as "6-15-2012," which does not exist. 

It appears that the VA Regional Office determined that the Veteran chose to withdraw his supplemental claims, and that he sought higher-level review of the May 25, 2021, Rating Decision, as to the assigned initial rating and the effective date for the award of service connection for OSA. In the AMA, claimants may use only one lane at a time, either: (1) higher-level review, (2) a supplemental claim, or (3) appeal directly to the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(1); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 151, 157 (2021). Concurrent use of the options is prohibited by 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A). The Veteran filed multiple forms electing concurrent lanes, higher-level review and supplemental claims, which was not permitted. The VA Regional Office accepted the last filing on December 10, 2021, as indicative of the Veteran's intent to proceed under the HLR lane. The VA Regional Office issued a HLR Rating Decision on January 10, 2022, denying an increased rating and denying an earlier effective date. 

The Veteran filed his Notice of Disagreement on February 7, 2022. He only indicated that he was appealing the assigned effective date for the award of service connection for OSA, identifying the January 11, 2022, Notification Letter associated with the January 10, 2022, HLR Rating Decision. He requested an effective date of November 15, 1980. The Board finds he has not appealed the assigned rating. 

Evidentiary Standards

When a claimant chooses the HLR lane, the VA Regional Office is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the underlying rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f). Here, the Veteran selected higher-level review of the May 25, 2021, Rating Decision. Thus, the VA Regional Office's January 10, 2022, HLR Rating Decision was limited to consideration of the evidence at the time of the May 25, 2021, Rating Decision. Likewise, under the Direct Review docket, the Board's review of the January 10, 2022, HLR Rating Decision is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the May 25, 2021, Rating Decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2601(f), 20.301.

Any findings favorable to the Veteran made by the VA Regional Office in notification of a decision are binding on the Board unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). "Findings" means "conclusions on questions of fact and application of law to facts made by an adjudicator concerning the issue under review." Id.

In deciding claims, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal. VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). It follows, that when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The law requires the Board address its reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the claimant. Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128?29 (2000). The Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence. Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence within the period on appeal and on what this evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim.

Preliminary Matter

In some of his filings, the Veteran has used the phrase "clear and unmistakable error" (CUE) in reference to his service-connected obstructive sleep apnea. See, e.g., December 3, 2021, VA Form 20-0995 (Supplemental Claim Application); December 28, 2021, VA Form 21-4138 (Statement in Support of Claim). The VA Regional Office properly did not adjudicate his assertion of CUE under the associated legal principles in this instance. 

VA's final decisions are subject to reversal or revision on the grounds of CUE. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105. "CUE proceedings are fundamentally different from direct appeals," as they are a limited statutory exception to the rule of finality. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2009). A CUE motion is a collateral attack of an adjudicated claim that was not appealed and became final and binding. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 1999). Generally, a rating decision of a regional office becomes final absent an appeal of that decision to the Board. See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c). If there is no final decision, there can be no revision based on CUE. Lang v. Wilkie, 971 F.3d 1348, 1352 (2020). 

Here, the Veteran has pursued an appeal from the initial rating decision, dated May 25, 2021, which assigned the effective date for his award of service connection for OSA. Thus, that decision is not yet final. Therefore, a revision based on CUE of that decision cannot occur.

Effective Dates

38 U.S.C. § 5110, which governs the assignment of an effective date for an award of benefits, provides:

Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, the effective date of an award based on an initial claim, or a supplemental claim, of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.

38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1). The implementing regulation similarly provides that the effective date generally "will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later." 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. "Date of receipt" means the date on which a claim, information, or evidence was received by VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(r). Exceptions to the general rule exist.

If a veteran files a claim for service connection for a disability within one year of discharge from active duty, and receives an award of service connection, then the effective date for such award will be "the day following the date of the veteran's discharge[.]" 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1).

Analysis

The Veteran separated from active military service in November 1980. On review of his claims file, the Board finds that the first time he indicted his intent to file a claim for service connection for OSA occurred on June 15, 2012. He submitted correspondence on that date specifically stating that he was seeking service connection for sleep apnea. There are no other documents of record indicating that the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for OSA prior to June 15, 2012. Therefore, the earliest legally available effective date for the award of service connection is June 15, 2012, which he has received. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an effective date in November 1980, the day after he separated from military service. But to receive that effective date, he was required to file a claim for service connection for OSA within one year of separation from military service. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1). He did not. Therefore, the Board may not award an earlier effective date. 

The Veteran's representative has submitted an Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP). The IHP references the acronyms, "FDC" and "ITF." "FDC" is understood to mean the "Fully Developed Claim Program," and "ITF" is understood to mean "Intent to File." The FDC program allows claimants who attested that they have submitted all relevant non-federal records with their claims to receive faster decisions. See VA Fully Developed Claims Program, U.S. Dep't of Veterans Affs., https://www.va.gov/disability /how-to-file-claim/evidence-needed/fully-developed-claims/ (last accessed Apr. 4, 2025).

In his IHP, the Veteran argues that he is entitled to an earlier effective date under "special provisions of Section 506 of pages112-154." IHP, page 2. Section 506 of Public Law (PL) 112-154 amended 38 U.S.C. § 5110 to allow up to a one-year retroactive effective date for awards of disability compensation based on fully developed, original claims for compensation that VA received from August 6, 2013, through August 5, 2015. The Veteran's IHP does not explain why his claim, filed on June 15, 2012, would fall within the narrow exception of Section 506 of Public Law (PL) 112-154. And the Board finds no such reason that his claim would fall within the exception. The Board concludes an earlier effective date is not available. 

2. An effective date prior to August 17, 2021, for the award of service connection for a traumatic brain injury is denied.

Procedural History

On August 17, 2021, the Veteran filed a Notice of Intent to file a claim with the VA.

On October 4, 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 21-526EZ (Application for Benefits), in which he identified that he was seeking service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) due to an injury in service. 

In a November 22, 2021, Rating Decision, the VA Regional Office granted the Veteran service connection for TBI and assigned an initial disability rating of 10 percent effective August 17, 2021.

On December 10, 2021, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996 (Request for HLR). He stated that he believed he was entitled to an earlier effective date because he sustained his TBI in service. 

On December 28, 2021, he filed VA Form 21-4138 (Statement in Support of Claim), asserting that he was entitled to a higher disability rating and earlier effective date for his TBI. 

On January 10, 2022, the VA Regional Office issued a HLR Rating Decision, denying an increased disability rating and earlier effective date for the Veteran's service-connected TBI. He appealed the rating and effective date to the Board.

Evidentiary Standards

The Veteran selected higher-level review of the November 22, 2021, Rating Decision. Thus, the VA Regional Office's January 10, 2022, HLR Rating Decision was limited to consideration of the evidence at the time of the November 22, 2021, Rating Decision. Likewise, under the Direct Review docket, the Board's review of the January 10, 2022, HLR Rating Decision is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the November 22, 2021, Rating Decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2601(f), 20.301.

Any findings favorable to the Veteran made by the VA Regional Office in notification of a decision are binding on the Board unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). "Findings" means "conclusions on questions of fact and application of law to facts made by an adjudicator concerning the issue under review." Id.

In deciding claims, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal. VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). It follows, that when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applied. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

The law requires the Board address its reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the claimant. Timberlake, 14 Vet. App. at 128?29. The Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence. Gonzales, 218 F.3d at 1381. The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence within the period on appeal and on what this evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim.

Preliminary Matter

The Veteran has used the phrase "clear and unmistakable error" (CUE) in reference to his service-connected traumatic brain injury. See, e.g., December 28, 2021, VA Form 21-4138 (Statement in Support of Claim). The VA Regional Office properly did not adjudicate his assertion of CUE under the associated legal principles in this instance. 

VA's final decisions are subject to reversal or revision on the grounds of CUE. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105. "CUE proceedings are fundamentally different from direct appeals," as they are a limited statutory exception to the rule of finality. Robinson, 557 F.3d at 1360. A CUE motion is a collateral attack of an adjudicated claim that was not appealed and became final and binding. Bustos, 179 F.3d at 1380. Generally, a rating decision of a regional office becomes final absent an appeal of that decision to the Board. See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c). If there is no final decision, there can be no revision based on CUE. Lang, 971 F.3d at 1352. 

Here, the Veteran has pursued an appeal from the initial rating decision, dated November 22, 2021, which assigned the effective date for his award of service connection for TBI. Thus, that decision is not yet final. Therefore, a revision based on CUE of that decision cannot occur.

Effective Dates

38 U.S.C. § 5110, which governs the assignment of an effective date for an award of benefits, provides:

Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, the effective date of an award based on an initial claim, or a supplemental claim, of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.

38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1). The implementing regulation similarly provides that the effective date generally "will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later." 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. "Date of receipt" means the date on which a claim, information, or evidence was received by VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(r). Exceptions to the general rule exist.

If a veteran files a claim for service connection for a disability within one year of discharge from active duty, and receives an award of service connection, then the effective date for such award will be "the day following the date of the veteran's discharge[.]" 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1). 

Another exception is found under 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b), which provides that "[a] claimant . . . may indicate a claimant's desire to file a claim for benefits by submitting an intent to file a claim to VA." 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b). Once VA receives an intent to file, "VA will furnish the claimant with the appropriate application form prescribed by the Secretary." Id. "If VA receives a complete application form . . . within 1 year of receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received." Id.

Analysis

The Veteran separated from active military service in November 1980. On review of his claims file, the Board finds that the first time he indicted his intent to file a claim for service connection for TBI occurred on August 17, 2021 (receipt date of his Notice of Intent). Then, within one year of that Notice of Intent, he filed a claim for service connection for TBI on October 4, 2021. Therefore, the earliest legally available effective date for the award of service connection is August 17, 2021, which he has received. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an effective date in November 1980, the day after he separated from military service. But to be eligible for that effective date, he was required to file a claim for service connection for TBI within one year of separation from military service. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1). He did not. On February 25, 1981, he did file a claim for headaches resulting from an inservice injury. To the extent he implies that claim included a claim for TBI, that argument is not supported by the record. No competent evidence of record at the time he filed his claim on February 25, 1981, indicates that he had a medical diagnosis of TBI at that time. It was only much later, in 2021, that such a diagnosis was rendered. And there was no competent evidence in 1981 that he intended his claim to be interpreted as seeking service connection for TBI at that time. Therefore, the Board finds that there is no outstanding, unadjudicated claim for service connection for TBI that was filed within one year of separation from service. 

As discussed in the preceding section, the Veteran's representative has submitted an IHP, arguing the Veteran is entitled to an earlier effective date under "special provisions of Section 506 of pages112-154." IHP, page 2. The Veteran's IHP does not explain why his claim, filed on August 17, 2021 (Notice of Intent), would fall within the narrow exception of Section 506 of Public Law (PL) 112-154. And the Board finds no such reason that his claim would fall within the exception. The Board concludes an earlier effective date is not available.

3. An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected traumatic brain injury is denied.

The Board incorporates the discussion of the evidentiary standards identified above in connection with the analysis of the effective date for the Veteran's TBI here. The evidentiary timeframes and associated legal principles are equally applicable to his claim for a higher disability rating. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

Diagnostic codes are assigned to individual disabilities. Diagnostic codes provide rating criteria specific to a particular disability. If two diagnostic codes are applicable to the same disability, the diagnostic code that allows for the higher disability rating applies. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. Id.

Rating Criteria - TBI

Residuals associated traumatic brain injuries are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045. The rules for rating TBI residuals are relatively complicated. The applicable rating criteria for TBI residuals outline three main areas of dysfunction: (1) cognitive, (2) emotional/behavioral, and (3) physical. Each area of dysfunction has particular rules associated with it, which are outlined next.

Cognitive impairment

"Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain. Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive." Id. Adjudicators must "[e]valuate cognitive impairment[, including subjective symptoms that are residuals of TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment,] under the table titled 'Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified (TBI table).'" Id. The TBI table is provided later.

Diagnostic Code 8045 specifically instructs adjudicators to evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis under an appropriate diagnostic code separately, "such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under" the TBI table. Id.

Emotional/Behavioral dysfunction

When a mental disorder is diagnosed as a TBI residual, an adjudicator is required to evaluate the disorder under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 (Schedule of ratings - mental disorders). 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045. When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, adjudicators must rate emotional/behavioral TBI residual symptoms under the TBI table. Id.

Physical dysfunction

Diagnostic Code 8045 specifically instructs adjudicators to evaluate physical dysfunction (to include neurologic dysfunction) under appropriate diagnostic codes other than 8045. Diagnostic Code 8045 provides a detailed list of symptoms that are to be considered, which are:

"	motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face

"	visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste

"	seizures

"	gait, coordination, and balance problems

"	speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria

"	neurogenic bladder

"	neurogenic bowel

"	cranial nerve dysfunctions

"	autonomic nerve dysfunctions

"	endocrine dysfunctions.

For residuals not listed above, but that are reported during an examination, adjudicators must evaluate them under the most appropriate diagnostic code. Each physical dysfunction is evaluated separately and combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation. 

TBI Table

The TBI table contains 10 important facets of a TBI related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms. It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total." Not every facet has every level of severity. The "Consciousness" facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling. A 100 percent evaluation is to be assigned if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets. If no facet is evaluated as "total," the overall percentage evaluation based on the level of the highest facet is to be assigned as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent. The regulation provides the following example: "assign a 70 percent evaluation if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet." Id. In other words, one rating for a TBI is to be assigned based upon the highest level of severity for any of the 10 facets of cognitive impairment apart from any separately diagnosed disability.

Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified (TBI Table)

Facets of cognitive impairment and other residuals of TBI not otherwise classified	Level of impairment	Criteria

Memory, attention, concentration, executive functions	0	No complaints of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions.

?	1	A complaint of mild loss of memory (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing.

?	2	Objective evidence on testing of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment.

?	3	Objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in moderate functional impairment.

?	Total	Objective evidence on testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in severe functional impairment.

Judgment	0	Normal.

?	1	Mildly impaired judgment. For complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision.

?	2	Moderately impaired judgment. For complex or unfamiliar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, although has little difficulty with simple decisions.

?	3	Moderately severely impaired judgment. For even routine and familiar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision.

?	Total	Severely impaired judgment. For even routine and familiar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision. For example, unable to determine appropriate clothing for current weather conditions or judge when to avoid dangerous situations or activities.

Social interaction	0	Social interaction is routinely appropriate.

?	1	Social interaction is occasionally inappropriate.

?	2	Social interaction is frequently inappropriate.

?	3	Social interaction is inappropriate most or all of the time.

Orientation	0	Always oriented to person, time, place, and situation.

?	1	Occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation.

?	2	Occasionally disoriented to two of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation or often disoriented to one aspect of orientation.

?	3	Often disoriented to two or more of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation.

?	Total	Consistently disoriented to two or more of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation.

Motor activity (with intact motor and sensory system)	0	Motor activity normal.

?	1	Motor activity normal most of the time, but mildly slowed at times due to apraxia (inability to perform previously learned motor activities, despite normal motor function).

?	2	Motor activity mildly decreased or with moderate slowing due to apraxia.

?	3	Motor activity moderately decreased due to apraxia.

?	Total	Motor activity severely decreased due to apraxia.

Visual spatial orientation	0	Normal.

?	1	Mildly impaired. Occasionally gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps or following directions. Is able to use assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system).

?	2	Moderately impaired. Usually gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps, following directions, and judging distance. Has difficulty using assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system).

?	3	Moderately severely impaired. Gets lost even in familiar surroundings, unable to use assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system).

?	Total	Severely impaired. May be unable to touch or name own body parts when asked by the examiner, identify the relative position in space of two different objects, or find the way from one room to another in a familiar environment.

Subjective symptoms	0	Subjective symptoms that do not interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships. Examples are: mild or occasional headaches, mild anxiety.

?	1	Three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships. Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, hypersensitivity to light.

?	2	Three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships. Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: marked fatigability, blurred or double vision, headaches requiring rest periods during most days.

Neurobehavioral effects	0	One or more neurobehavioral effects that do not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction. Examples of neurobehavioral effects are: Irritability, impulsivity, unpredictability, lack of motivation, verbal aggression, physical aggression, belligerence, apathy, lack of empathy, moodiness, lack of cooperation, inflexibility, and impaired awareness of disability. Any of these effects may range from slight to severe, although verbal and physical aggression are likely to have a more serious impact on workplace interaction and social interaction than some of the other effects.

?	1	One or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.

?	2	One or more neurobehavioral effects that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.

?	3	One or more neurobehavioral effects that interfere with or preclude workplace interaction, social interaction, or both on most days or that occasionally require supervision for safety of self or others.

Communication	0	Able to communicate by spoken and written language (expressive communication), and to comprehend spoken and written language.

?	1	Comprehension or expression, or both, of either spoken language or written language is only occasionally impaired. Can communicate complex ideas.

?	2	Inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half of the time. Can generally communicate complex ideas.

?	3	Inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, at least half of the time but not all of the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, at least half of the time but not all of the time. May rely on gestures or other alternative modes of communication. Able to communicate basic needs.

?	Total	Complete inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both. Unable to communicate basic needs.

Consciousness	Total	Persistently altered state of consciousness, such as vegetative state, minimally responsive state, coma.

There are five notes that accompany Diagnostic Code 8045. In this case, only the first four are relevant, which are:

Note (1): There may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the TBI table with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another diagnostic code. In such cases, do not assign more than one evaluation based on the same manifestations. If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated, assign a single evaluation under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions. However, if the manifestations are clearly separable, assign a separate evaluation for each condition. 

Note (2): Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the TBI table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present in order to assign a particular evaluation. 

Note (3): "Instrumental activities of daily living" refers to activities other than self-care that are needed for independent living, such as meal preparation, doing housework and other chores, shopping, traveling, doing laundry, being responsible for one's own medications, and using a telephone. These activities are distinguished from "Activities of daily living," which refers to basic self-care and includes bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out of bed or a chair, and using the toilet. 

Note (4): The terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" TBI, which may appear in medical records, refer to a classification of TBI made at, or close to, the time of injury rather than to the current level of functioning. This classification does not affect the rating assigned under Diagnostic Code 8045. 

Analysis

The Veteran received a VA-contracted medical examination on November 15, 2021, assessing his TBI. The examiner, a physiatrist, indicated that he reviewed the Veteran's claims file and conducted an in-person examination. He diagnosed the Veteran with TBI, and he indicated that the Veteran reported that he experienced TBI residuals consisting of headaches and dizziness/vertigo. The examiner documented that the Veteran reported then-extant symptoms of headaches, dizziness/vertigo, and memory loss. He took medication to control his headaches. There no indication in the claims file that the Veteran took medication to control other symptoms. 

The examiner endorsed that the Veteran experienced "mild memory loss (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing." The examiner based his endorsement on the Veteran's reports that he had "trouble remembering plans, trouble remembering where he is going, and trouble remembering where he is at, and what he is supposed to do."

The examiner endorsed that the Veteran experienced "mildly impaired judgment: For complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision." He based his endorsement on the Veteran's report of being "indecisive at times."

The examiner endorsed that the Veteran's social interaction was routinely appropriate. The Veteran was always oriented to person, time, place, and situation. He had normal motor activity. The Veteran did not have neurobehavioral symptoms. He did not experience problems with communication, to include spoken and written language. And his consciousness was normal.

As to visual and special orientation, the examiner endorsed the Veteran experienced "mildly impaired: Occasionally gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps or following directions. Is able to use assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system)." He based his endorsement on the Veteran's report of "sometimes get[ting] lost in places he is familiar with, but able to use a GPS."

As to subjective symptoms, the examiner endorsed "three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family or other close relationships. Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, hypersensitivity to light." The examiner based the endorsement on the Veteran's report of frequent headaches, dizziness twice a week, hypersensitivity to light and sound, and insomnia.

As to functional impact caused by his TBI, the examiner stated: "The Veteran would be unable to have employment at a job requiring a great deal of memorization due to memory issues. He would also be unable to work around bright lights or loud sounds due to headaches." 

The examiner noted that the Veteran has been previously diagnosed with "schizophrenia felt to be of the chronic paranoid type" and "adjustment disorder with anxious mood." He is not service connected for an acquired psychiatric disability. The examiner opined that there was considerable overlap among the Veteran's psychiatric and TBI symptoms, such that it was not possible to differentiate them without resorting to speculation. 

The examiner conducted a thorough in-person examination, relied on accurate facts, considered the Veteran's medical history, claims file, and lay statements, and otherwise provided a correct disability picture of the Veteran's right middle finger at the time of the examination. The Board finds the examiner's report is highly credible and probative. 

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's VA and private medical records that are within the evidentiary window. His VA and private medical records do not document additional symptoms associated with his TBI that were otherwise undocumented by the VA-contracted medical examiner. His medical records are consistent with the November 2021 TBI medical examination report. The Veteran has not asserted that he experiences additional symptoms that are not documented by his medical records or the examiner. 

The Board now turns to the evaluative criteria under the TBI Table.

As to the "Memory, attention, concentration, executive functions" facet, the Board finds that the evidence establishes the Veteran's symptoms are consistent with Level 1 impairment: "A complaint of mild loss of memory (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing." He reported mild memory loss, to include forgetting where he was at times. A higher level is not proper because no "objective evidence" established impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment. 

As to the "Judgment" facet, the Board finds that the evidence establishes the Veteran's symptoms are consistent with Level 1 impairment: "Mildly impaired judgment. For complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision." The evidence of record establishes he was indecisive at times, which affected his judgment. A higher level of impairment is not proper because the Veteran's symptoms did not manifest in moderately impaired or severely impaired judgment, consistent with the respective criteria. 

As to the "Social Interaction" facet, the Board finds that the evidence establishes the Veteran's symptoms are consistent with Level 0 impairment: "The evidence establishes the Veteran engaged in routinely appropriate social interaction." A higher level is not proper because there is no competent evidence establishing the Veteran's social interactions are not routinely appropriate. 

As to the "Orientation" fact, the Board finds that the evidence establishes the Veteran's symptoms are consistent with Level 1 impairment: "Occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation." As indicated by the Veteran, he sometimes gets lost but is able to orient himself. The evidence does not establish a higher level of impairment as there is no competent evidence that the Veteran has disorientation in two or more aspects. 

As to the "Motor Activity" facet, the Board finds that the evidence establishes a Level 0 impairment: "Motor activity normal." A higher level of impairment is not proper because there is no competent evidence that the Veteran experiences symptoms affecting his motor activity. 

As to the "Visual/Spatial Orientation" facet, the Board finds that the evidence establishes Level 1 impairment: "Mildly impaired. Occasionally gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps or following directions. Is able to use assistive devices such as GPS (global positioning system)." Again, the Veteran has reported experience loss in orientation to his place sometimes, which he is able to regain with the help of GPS. A higher level of impairment is not warranted because there is no competent evidence that he experienced moderately or severely impaired visual or spatial orientation symptoms consistent with those listed in the TBI table. 

As to the "Subjective symptoms" facet, the Board finds the proper level of impairment is Level 1: "Three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships. Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, hypersensitivity to light." The evidence establishes the Veteran experiences headaches, dizziness/vertigo, hypersensitivity to light and sound, and insomnia associated with his TBI. The November 2021 examiner opined that these symptoms affected his functional employability, such that the Veteran would be unable to have employment at a job that required him to work around bright lights or loud sounds due to headaches. A Level 2 impairment is not warranted as the evidence does not establish symptoms such as fatiguability to any degree or blurred vision.

The Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for headaches, and he is rated as 50 percent disabled. Under the appliable rating criteria for headaches, 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100, a 50 percent disability rating is proper when symptoms manifest "with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability." The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's medical examinations and medical records have documented his manifestations of his headaches. And to that extent, all of his manifestations are compensated by his assigned 50 percent rating.

The Board is prohibited from compensating symptoms twice. "Except as otherwise provided in [the rating] schedule, the disabilities arising from a single disease entity,  . . . , are to be rated separately as are all other disabling conditions, if any." 38 C.F.R. § 4.25(b). VA regulation 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits "[e]valuation of the same disability under various diagnoses," as well as "evaluation of the same manifestation under different diagnoses," events known as "pyramiding." See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994). The "critical element" in determining whether separate ratings are warranted "is that none of the symptomatology of any . . . of these . . . conditions is duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other . . . conditions." Id. at 262. In short, "[i]f the [veteran's] symptoms are distinct and separate, then the [veteran] is entitled to separate disability ratings for the various conditions." Murray v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 420, 423 (2011) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).

Here, the Veteran's headaches are a symptom of his TBI. Since his headaches are also considered a separate disability, the symptoms cannot be rated twice. To do so would violate the rule against pyramiding. Thus, the Board should rate his headache symptoms under whichever diagnostic code would provide the higher rating. In this instance, the highest rating the Veteran could receive for his headache symptoms under Diagnostic Code 8045 is 40 percent. The highest level of impairment for "Subjective symptoms," which is where headaches are considered, is Level 2. And Level 2 corresponds with 40 percent. Hence, by rating the Veteran's headaches symptoms under Diagnostic Code 8100, he receives a higher rating. Therefore, consideration of his headache symptoms under Diagnostic Code 8045 is not beneficial to him.

As to the last facets, "Neurobehavioral effects," "Communication," and "Consciousness," the appropriate level of impairment for each is Level 0. The evidence establishes that the Veteran did not have neurobehavioral symptoms, did not experience problems with communication, and his consciousness was normal. Symptoms associated with higher level of impairments, respectively, are not established by the evidence of record. 

The highest level of impairment assigned to a facet under the TBI table is "1." And "1" corresponds to a 10 percent rating. The VA Regional Office properly assigned the Veteran an initial 10 percent disability rating. While the Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an initial 40 percent disability rating, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not establish such entitlement. The Veteran has not identified any evidence in support of his assertion for a higher rating, nor has he or offered any explanation as to why he believes a 40 percent rating is more appropriate. See Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1286 (2009) (stating that the claimant has the burden to "present and support a claim for benefits" and noting that the benefit of the doubt standard in [38 U.S.C. §] 5107(b) is not applicable based on pure speculation or remote possibility).

Accordingly, an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected TBI is denied.

In relation to the foregoing adjudicated claims on appeal, to the extent evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

 

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.F. Sawka, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.