Citation Nr: A25032601
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240425-435354
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

An initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder, claimed as migraines, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot and toenail fungus is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran was in receipt of a 10 percent rating, the maximum schedular rating under Diagnostic Code (DC) 6260 for tinnitus, and his disability does not result in symptomatology that is not contemplated by the rating criteria.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.14, 4.87, DC 6260.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from September 1990 to September 1994.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from five rating decisions by a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office: (1) a May 2023 rating decision, which in pertinent part denied service connection for bilateral foot and toenail fungus; (2) an August 2023 rating decision, which in pertinent part granted service connection for right ear hearing loss and assigned an initial noncompensable evaluation from July 5, 2023; (3) an October 2023 rating decision, which in pertinent part denied service connection for migraines and left ear hearing loss; (4) a December 2023 rating decision, which in pertinent part denied service connection for migraines; and (5) a March 2024 rating decision, which in pertinent part granted service connection for tinnitus and assigned an initial 10 percent evaluation from July 5, 2023, continued the noncompensable evaluation for right ear hearing loss, and continued the denial of service connection for left knee pain, bilateral foot fungus, and left ear hearing loss.  

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, VA Form 10182.  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal (i.e., May 3, 2023 with regard to the foot and toenail fungus claim; August 22, 2023 with regard to the right ear hearing loss claim; October 4, 2023 with regard to the left ear hearing loss claim; December 14, 2023 with regard to the migraine claim; and March 19, 2024 with regard to the tinnitus claim).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

With regard to the tinnitus claim, if evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran wishes VA to consider any evidence that falls into any period that the Board may not consider in this case, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim within one year of the Board's decision and submit or identify this evidence for review.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

With regard to the remanded claims, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the AOJ upon readjudication of this claim.

The Board observes that the Veteran has appealed rating decisions on claims for which subsequent rating decisions were issued.  For example, the Veteran elected to appeal the October 2023 rating decision denying service connection for left ear hearing loss, rather than the more recent March 2024 rating decision doing the same.  Such elections are permissible in the Modernized Appeals Act (AMA).  See Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1 (2023) (holding that "a claimant is able to select a second administrative review option with respect to a decision on the claim, so long as the 1-year period from that decision has not run and the second administrative review option does not run concurrently with the first administrative review option," although election of a second review option while another review option was pending (a concurrent election) was clearly prohibited).  However, these elections affect the evidence the Board is allowed to consider, as noted above.

The Board further notes that in his VA Form 10182, the Veteran attempted to appeal the issue of entitlement to service connection for migraines twice, once from a December 2023 rating decision and once from an October 2023 rating decision; though this claim is being remanded, the Board will address this issue with the largest evidence review window as doing so is more beneficial to the Veteran.  The Veteran also attempted to appeal three issues arising from rating decisions that were mailed more than one year prior to the date of the April 2024 VA Form 10182-service connection for left knee pain, right knee pain, and bilateral foot pain.  In a May 2024 letter, the Board notified the Veteran that his appeals of these issues were untimely and provided the Veteran with instructions for requesting an extension of time in which to file them.  The Veteran did not respond to this letter within the 60-day time limit cited in the letter, so the Board will not address those claims in this decision.

As a final initial matter, the Board has broadened the scope of the migraine claim to any headache disorder in order to comport with Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran's disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).  If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  After consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, and the evaluation of the same manifestation under different diagnoses, are to be avoided.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, evaluation of the medical evidence since the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged rating" (assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found) is required.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Where an increase in the level of a service-connected disability is at issue, the primary concern is the present level of disability.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Nevertheless, the Board acknowledges that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

This claim stems from the original assignment of a disability evaluation following the award of service connection.  Accordingly, the appeal period begins on July 5, 2023, which is the initial date of service connection.  See Fenderson, supra.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for his service-connected tinnitus.  For the period on appeal, the Veteran's tinnitus has been evaluated at 10 percent under DC 6260.

In Smith v. Nicholson, the Federal Circuit held that the maximum schedular rating available for tinnitus is 10 percent.  451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  The Veteran's tinnitus is already evaluated as 10 percent disabling.  Thus, there is no legal basis upon which to award an increased rating for tinnitus on a schedular basis.

As a result, to warrant a rating in excess of that already assigned, the evidence must show symptomatology that is not contemplated by the rating criteria.  An exceptional or unusual disability picture occurs where the diagnostic criteria do not reasonably describe or contemplate the severity and symptomatology of a veteran's service-connected disability.  Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111, 115 (2008).  If there is an exceptional or unusual disability picture, the Board must consider whether the disability picture exhibits other factors such as marked interference with employment and frequent periods of hospitalization.  Id. at 115-16.  When those two elements are met, the appeal must be referred for consideration of the assignment of an extraschedular rating to the Chief Benefits Director or the Director, Compensation and Pension Service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1).  Otherwise, the schedular evaluation is adequate, and referral is not required.  Thun, 22 Vet. App. at 116.

In the present case, the Veteran has not explained why an extraschedular rating would be warranted; rather, the assertion by the Veteran that a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted appears to be general in nature.  Based on the evidence of record, however, the Veteran's only reported symptom of tinnitus is a constant ringing sound, which the examiner indicated does not result in functional impairment.  See July 2023 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Examination.  Accordingly, in the absence of tinnitus symptoms other than ear ringing (which is contemplated by the rating criteria), extraschedular referral is not warranted.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

Should the Veteran have symptoms as a result of his tinnitus that are not contemplated by the rating criteria, he is encouraged to file a Supplemental Claim identifying such symptoms, either with lay or medical evidence.  Instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Based on the evidence of record at this time, however, an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus, to include on an extraschedular basis, is denied.  In reaching the above conclusion, the Board considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for migraines, left ear hearing loss, and bilateral foot and toenail fungus.  

Headaches and Hearing Loss

The Veteran has attended VA examinations for his headaches and hearing loss.  See July 2023 VA Headaches Examination; July 2023 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Examination.  After the rating decisions on appeal for these issues, the AOJ identified pre-decisional duty to assist errors regarding the sufficiency of the VA opinions for these claims.  See October 2023 VA Form 20-0999 (finding the July 2023 left ear hearing loss opinion inadequate and requesting a new opinion); March 2024 VA Form 20-0999 (finding the headache opinion inadequate and requesting a new opinion).  These higher-level review returns are favorable findings identifying clear duty-to-assist errors, and the Board is therefore bound by such findings.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, the Board is compelled to remand these matters to correct these pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors.  

Although the Board recognizes the clear duplicative nature of the development being ordered by this remand, the Board is bound to apply the holding in Terry as well as the statutes and regulations pertaining to Veterans benefits law in this case.  In this regard, the Board acknowledges that additional development on the Veteran's claims has been completed.  However, as that evidence is outside the evidence review period for the claims on appeal, the Board has not reviewed that additional development and makes no determination as to its adequacy. 

Additionally, the Veteran's claim for an increased evaluation for right ear hearing loss is inextricably intertwined with his claim for service connection for left ear hearing loss because generally hearing loss is evaluated bilaterally if present in both ears.  In this regard, because the Veteran may potentially warrant a higher evaluation for his hearing loss if his claim for left ear hearing loss is granted, the claim for an increased evaluation for right hearing loss must also be remanded.  See Henderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 11, 20 (1998); Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).

Foot and Toenail Fungus

The Veteran attended an April 2023 VA skin diseases examination in which the examiner noted diagnoses for tinea pedis and onychomycosis.  In the opinion accompanying this examination, the examiner opined that these skin diseases were less likely than not related to service because the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for complaints of foot and toenail fungus.  This is not an adequate rationale.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the Veteran's report of in-service injury but relied on the service medical records to provide a negative opinion).  In so doing, the examiner also failed to address the Veteran's specific contention that he has had these skin diseases since 1992, when he was in active service.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (stating a VA examiner must address the Veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion).  

Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error exists, and a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate opinion.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (holding that once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file to a VA clinician to review and provide an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed headache disorder.  If an examination is deemed necessary to respond to the questions presented, one should be scheduled.  However, regardless of whether the Veteran appears for an examination or not, the examiner must provide the following requested opinions.

The examiner should opine whether the Veteran's migraines and/or headaches began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service.  In addressing the above, the examiner should discuss any and all lay statements regarding onset of symptomatology as well as any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service, including whether the Veteran's in-service motor vehicle accident, in which he hit his head on the windshield, caused his headaches.  

The examiner should also address the fact that the Veteran's private physician indicated that the Veteran's prescription for Cialis may cause headaches and whether this is the more likely cause of the Veteran's current headache disorder.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

2. Forward the claims file to a VA clinician to review and provide an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's left ear hearing loss.  If an examination is deemed necessary to respond to the questions presented, one should be scheduled.  However, regardless of whether the Veteran appears for an examination or not, the examiner must provide the following requested opinions.

The examiner should opine whether the Veteran's left ear hearing loss began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service.  In addressing the above, the examiner should discuss any and all lay statements regarding onset of symptomatology as well as any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service. 

Additionally, because the Veteran's right ear hearing loss has been found to be a result of his active service, the examiner should provide a medical rationale for distinguishing between the Veteran's right ear and left ear hearing loss-i.e., the examiner should provide a medical rationale as to why the Veteran's right ear hearing loss is a result of his military service, but his left ear hearing loss is not.  In this regard, the examiner should address the fact that the Veteran has threshold shift in both ears on his separation exam, a fact that was used to provide a positive nexus between the Veteran's right ear hearing loss and his military service but was unacknowledged in discussing the Veteran's left ear.

If an intervening acoustic exposure or trauma is the more likely cause of the Veteran's left ear hearing loss, the examiner should provide a factual and medical basis for making this determination.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

3. Forward the claims file to a VA clinician to review and provide an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's foot and toenail fungus claim.  If an examination is deemed necessary to respond to the questions presented, one should be scheduled.  However, regardless of whether the Veteran appears for an examination or not, the examiner must provide the following requested opinions.

The examiner should opine whether the Veteran's foot and/or toenail fungus began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service.  In addressing the above, the examiner should discuss any and all lay statements regarding onset of symptomatology as well as any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service, including the Veteran's contention that these skin issues began in 1992 as a result of getting his feet wet and wearing boots and socks all day every day in the military.

The examiner should further address whether these diseases are chronic or acute, resolving and reoccurring based on discrete fungal exposures, and whether a single occurrence can make individuals more susceptible to recurrence of the same fungal infection.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Kuhns

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.