Citation Nr: A25032955
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240507-437340
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1999 to September 2002, from July 2008 to April 2009, from May 2013 to January 2014, and from July 2019 to August 2020.

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran timely initiated an appeal by submitting May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's issuance of the September 2023 rating decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is remanding the claims for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Sinusitis

Sleep Apnea

On August 25, 2023, an Exam Scheduling Request was issued to schedule VA examinations for the Veteran's sinusitis and sleep apnea claims. The record reflects that the AOJ subsequently scheduled a VA examination for September 15, 2023, but the Veteran was "unavailable." Thereafter, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the claims on September 27, 2023. The Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement in May 2024, stating he was never evaluated for his sinusitis or sleep apnea conditions.

Under VA regulations, if a veteran fails to report for an examination without good cause in a claim for service connection, the Board should decide the claim based on the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655. In this regard, it is unclear whether the Veteran received proper notice to attend the examinations. Although the record contains an August 2023 Exam Scheduling Request instructing the AOJ to schedule the examinations, there is no indication that the Veteran received appropriate notice of the examinations after the AOJ scheduled them. As such, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran did not receive adequate notice for the VA examinations. Failure to provide adequate notice of a scheduled VA examination constitutes a duty to assist error. Thus, a remand is necessary to provide the Veteran another opportunity for VA examinations and to ensure full compliance with VA's statutory duty to assist.

On remand, the AOJ shall provide the Veteran with proper notice of the scheduled examinations. His failure to report to the scheduled examinations, without good cause, will result in the claim being considered based on the rest of the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his sinusitis condition. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.

After the record review and examination of the Veteran, the clinician must:

2. Identify and diagnose all current respiratory conditions.

3. For each diagnosed condition, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's condition had its onset in or is otherwise related to service, to include his conceded exposure to herbicides and any other verified toxic exposures risk activities (TERA).

4. The clinician must address the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's TERAs.

The clinician is further advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment, including reports as to the onset and chronic nature of his symptoms, must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. The Veteran's statements may not be discounted solely on the basis of the lack of confirmation in the medical records.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his sleep apnea. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.

After the record review and examination of the Veteran, the clinician must:

6. Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of sleep apnea.

7. Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea had its onset in or is otherwise related to service, to include his conceded exposure to herbicides and any other verified toxic exposures risk activities (TERA).

The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's TERAs.

The clinician is further advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment, including reports as to the onset and chronic nature of his symptoms, must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. The Veteran's statements may not be discounted solely on the basis of the lack of confirmation in the medical records.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

SHAUN S. SPERANZA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Magiros, Kristen N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.