Citation Nr: A25032973
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-465808
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The competent and probative evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current bilateral tinnitus had its onset in or is otherwise related to active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral tinnitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Navy from August 1993 to August 1995. 

This appeal comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied service connection for tinnitus. The Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) was received in August 2024. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection 

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran contends that his tinnitus is related to noise exposure he experienced during active service. See August 2022 lay statement.

The AOJ found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus and conceded that the Veteran experienced in-service military noise exposure. See, e.g. November 2022 Rating Decision. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Hence, the dispositive issue is whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to the in-service noise exposure.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in November 2022. The Veteran reported onset of tinnitus in the early 2000s. The Veteran denied any post-service noise exposure. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure. The examiner stated that there is no evidence that the claimed tinnitus is causally related to noise injury. The examiner indicated that "[b]ecause there is no evidence that hearing loss or significant threshold changes occurred during military service, there is no basis on which to conclude that claimed tinnitus was caused by noise exposure." The examiner noted that, according to the Noise Manual (2000), only seldom does noise cause permanent tinnitus without causing hearing loss. The examiner stated that because there is no objective evidence of noise injury, there is no basis to conclude that the Veteran's tinnitus is associated with or aggravated by noise injury. The examiner explained that without objectively verifiable noise injury, as shown by audiograms with significant shifts in hearing thresholds, an association between tinnitus and noise exposure cannot be made. The examiner noted that hearing loss is the most common cause of tinnitus. The examiner concluded by stating that, "based on the absence of report of tinnitus in the service medical record, the presence of normal hearing at separation, and the research available on tinnitus" the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or the result of military noise exposure.

The Veteran was provided another VA examination in August 2023. The Veteran reported onset of tinnitus approximately 20-25 years earlier. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure. The examiner explained that tinnitus is a subjective complaint and that no objective measure exists to verify the presence or absence of tinnitus. The examiner stated that the etiology of tinnitus cannot be determined using current clinical technologies and must be inferred from patient history and a review of medical records. The examiner conceded in-service noise exposure in the Veteran's case but cited a 2006 Institute of Medicine study which concluded that it is difficult if not impossible to predict who will be noise-exposed and, if noise-exposed, who will suffer noise injury. The examiner stated that the audiogram is the objective standard in identifying noise injury and that the gold standard for determining the existence of auditory damage is positive, permanent shift in auditory thresholds. The examiner noted that, while there is a report of military noise exposure, there is no evidence of noise injuries as there are no significant shifts when comparing hearing at entrance to hearing at separation. The examiner reiterated that, in the absence of an objectively verifiable noise injury, the association between tinnitus and noise exposure cannot be assumed to exist. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not report onset as occurring during active service. The examiner cited the 2006 Institute of Medicine study as concluding that "as the interval between a noise exposure and the onset of tinnitus lengthens, the possibility that tinnitus will be triggered by other factors increases." The examiner explained that many factors can contribute to the development of tinnitus, including post-service recreational, occupational and environmental noise exposure as well as aging, disease, medications, environmental pollution, and genetic factors.

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in May 2023. The private medical specialist opined that the Veteran's bilateral tinnitus is at least as likely as not due to and/or related to military acoustic trauma during active service. The specialist recounted the Veteran's relevant medical history and lay statements. The specialist explained that the current medical literature states that many people suffering from tinnitus present without typical cochlear damage and thus exhibit normal parameters on audiograms. The specialist noted that normal hearing thresholds on audiograms do not necessarily indicate absence of cochlear damage. The specialist cited multiple studies showing a mechanism by which tinnitus can be present in the absence of elevated hearing thresholds and supporting the conclusion that tinnitus can have a delayed onset following auditory, cochlear damage incurred during active service which is not shown by typical audiometric testing with audiograms. Notably, one of the studies included the use of diagnostic tools other than audiograms which were capable of detecting deafferentation present in individuals with tinnitus. The specialist also cited a study demonstrating a clear link between military noise exposure and tinnitus.

The Board finds the November 2022 and August 2023 VA medical opinions of diminished probative value. Both opinions rely on the premise that any auditory damage incurred during service would necessarily be shown on audiograms. However, the May 2023 private opinion cites multiple studies which contradict that premise. Moreover, the November 2022 VA examiner noted that the Veteran had no post-service recreational or occupational noise exposure but failed to provide an alternative etiology for the Veteran's tinnitus which reportedly onset only a few years following separation. While the August 2023 VA medical opinion noted multiple other factors that could cause tinnitus, the examiner failed to discuss whether the Veteran had any of these factors and the extent to which such a factor would outweigh the Veteran's in-service noise exposure. Furthermore, the August 2023 VA examiner relied on a 2006 Institute of Medicine report that the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has found contains qualifying or contradictory aspects. McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243 (2019).  Based on the foregoing, the VA medical opinions of record are of diminished probative value. 

Conversely, the May 2023 private medical opinion is probative because the specialist thoroughly reviewed the claims file and discussed the relevant evidence, considered the contentions of the Veteran, and provided a thorough supporting rationale for the conclusions reached consistent with the majority of other evidence of record. Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303 (2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295 (2008). 

(Continued on next page.)

?

The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to his in-service noise exposure. As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

 

Paulette Vance Burton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M, Victor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.