Citation Nr: A25032637
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-465924
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Throughout the period on appeal, entitlement to a posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to evaluation and special monthly compensation (SMC)-K for sexual arousal disorder is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive weight of the evidence weighs in favor of a finding that the Veteran's PTSD most closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas to include suicidal ideation. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Throughout the period on appeal, the criteria for an initial PTSD evaluation at 70 percent, but no higher, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.125, 4.129, 4.130 Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, a critical care air transport team combat nurse, retired from reserve duty after serving from 1995 to 2022. She had multiple periods of deployment in imminent danger locations to include Kuwait, Afghanistan, and Iraq. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for PTSD. In August 2024, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) requesting the direct review docket with review by a Veterans Law Judge.  

The February 2024 rating decision granted the Veteran service connection for PTSD with a 30 percent evaluation, effective February 17, 2023. In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) with respect to the 30 percent rating and the failure to address female arousal disorder.  The August 2024 HLR rating decision denied an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for PTSD and did not address the female arousal disorder issue. In August 2024, in response to the August 2024 HLR rating decision, the Veteran submitted a NOD as noted above.  

The evidentiary record in a HLR is limited to the evidence considered in the prior AOJ decision under review; the higher-level adjudicator may not consider additional evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601 (f). Thus, in reviewing a HLR decision, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the underlying rating decision for which the appellant requested HLR (as that is the evidence that the AOJ was permitted to consider in the HLR decision on appeal), as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran during an evidentiary window. In this case, as the August 2024 rating decision on appeal constitutes a HLR rating decision, the Board's current review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's February 2024 rating decision. Additionally, as the Veteran elected the direct review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The denial of due process may include issuing a Board decision prior to the expiration of the one-year period for a claimant to request a docket change. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). In this case, the Board is granting the benefit sought by the Veteran by increasing the PTSD evaluation to the 70 percent level specifically requested in the May 2024 HLR request referenced above, and is remanding and not rendering a decision on the issue of sexual arousal disorder. Accordingly, the Veteran's due process rights are not adversely affected by not waiting until August 15, 2025, the end of the period in which to request a docket change.  

1. Entitlement to an initial PTSD evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, is granted. 

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155. Percentage ratings are determined by comparing the manifestations of a particular disability with the requirements contained in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can practically be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from a disease or injury and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. In view of the number of atypical instances, it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts shown in every case. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 4.3.

All psychiatric disabilities are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders. Under the general rating formula, a rating of 30 percent is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, generally functioning satisfactorily with routine behavior and selfcare, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, panic attacks less than once a week, and occupational impairment due to depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, general conversation is normal.  

A 10 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). Id.

A rating of 50 percent is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped, speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and in Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." The Federal Circuit further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Id. Thus, "[a]although the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.' "Id. at 118.

As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment to determine whether an evaluation higher than her current 30 percent evaluation is warranted.

The May 2024 HLR request contended there was a duty to assist error because the PTSD examination only noted depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and suicidal ideations. In the HLR request, the Veteran contended that generally, suicidal ideations are evaluated at 70 percent or sometimes 50 percent.

The Veteran further asserted that the main issue that the examiner overlooked was the Veteran's irritable behavior and angry outbursts, feelings of detachment or estrangement from others, persistent exaggerated negative beliefs and avoiding behaviors which trigger memories. Impaired impulse control and difficulty with relationships also was not reflected in the examination. Lastly, the Veteran requested an evaluation for sexual arousal disorder and SMC-K.

During the August 2024 informal HLR conference, the Veteran's representative stated that the PTSD examiner did not note irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) which were indicative of impaired impulse control.  The representative asserted during this conference that a 50 percent evaluation was warranted. 

A March 2023 VA treatment record noted that the Veteran contacted the VA for PTSD care. The record noted that the Veteran did not have suicidal ideations/intent (SI), was on medication for the PTSD, and exercised by running when she had stress.  

The Veteran had an April 2023 PTSD  mental health assessment. The examiner noted that that the Veteran had combat experience in Iraq, Kuwait, and Kandahar as a nurse. She has a master's degree in nursing and worked full time as a nursing director at a hospital. The Veteran advised the examiner that she had seen a lot of death, transporting and treating people with missing parts, dealt with wounded soldiers, burned babies, coffins, and it was too much. As a result, she reported that she hated helicopters, and "freaked" when she heard propellors, did not like loud noises or the smell of burned food or fireworks. The examiner diagnosed PTSD Combat Veteran. 

The Veteran has been married three times.  Her first marriage was to an abuser and was brief.  Her second marriage was for 19 years, and her husband died of pancreatic cancer.  She has been married to her third husband for 20 years. 

The Veteran denied suicide attempts and suicidal ideations (SI).  She noted that she felt edgy and depressed, disconnected from others, did not feel content or fulfilled, was a worrier and caretaker, and was distracted at times especially when tired.  She did not remember nightmares and tried not to let herself get angry but instead just kept things inside. She also reported that she has not slept well and gets approximately four to five hours of sleep.  She had trouble staying asleep and awakened two to three times per night. 

The examiner noted that the Veteran was guarded about her combat experiences and reluctant to express the extent of her symptoms saying she is a nurse and should be able to handle the stress of life. She had a blunted affect and appeared tired. The Veteran endorsed depression, anxiety, excessive worrying, low energy insomnia, concentration issues, and restlessness. Additionally, the Veteran had difficulty relaxing, intrusive thoughts, distant from others, easily startled, and was hypervigilant.

The examiner noted that while the Veteran reported minimal to mild symptoms of depression, anxiety, insomnia and trauma per assessments, her presentation and verbal report displayed moderate to severe symptoms. The Veteran's cognition was grossly intact, and her judgment was good. 

The July 2023 VA PTSD examination report noted the Veteran's occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks during periods of significant stress or symptoms controlled by medication. The examiner noted that the Veteran has been employed for 30 years at the same hospital where she worked at the date of this examination. She had ten PTSD counseling sessions after her 2007 deployment and advised the examiner that she did not take medication and had not ever received any other mental health treatment after 2007.  

The July 2023 VA PTSD examiner also noted the Veteran had recurrent distressing memories of the traumatic events and intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event.  The examiner further noted the Veteran had persistent and negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world as well as feelings of detachment or estrangement from others. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts, exaggerated startle response, and hypervigilance were also noted. The duration of the disturbances was described as more than one month, and it was noted that the disturbance caused clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational or other important areas of functioning. 

The examiner listed the symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and suicidal ideation. This annotation of SI is an isolated opinion in the record.  All other treatment notes in the record indicated the Veteran did not have SI to include the Veteran's completions of counseling questionnaires. In the behavioral observation section of the July 2023 VA examination report, the examiner noted "no acute indication of suicidal or homicidal ideation or intent."  The examiner then noted that the Veteran denied current SI but endorsed a plan to drive off a cliff or run out of gas in the desert. She has never had any intent or suicide attempts.  The Veteran further advised this examiner that she had a safety plan to tell her husband about SI and talk with her sister when SI occurs. Her last SI was in April 2023, and she noted that her suicidal thoughts occur quarterly.

An August 2023 VA psychology treatment record noted the Veteran had intrusive thoughts/memories, avoidance behaviors, increased startle responses, and hypervigilance.  The Veteran stated she was aware of how her trauma related reactions have been affecting her work, relationships, and overall quality of life. 

The psychologist further noted that the Veteran had repeated disturbing and unwanted memories of the stressful experience, felt very upset when something reminded her of a traumatic event, and avoided external reminders of the event such as helicopters, burning smells such as popcorn, and TV or movies involving death or war.  Additionally, the Veteran endorsed being super alert or watchful, on guard, feeling jumpy or easily startled, having difficulty concentrating, and trouble staying or falling asleep.

The August 2023 VA psychology treatment record also noted that the Veteran became tearful when sharing traumatic experiences and her thought content was remarkable for trauma cognitions. The Veteran did not express intent to harm self or others.

In March 2024, the Veteran was discharged from the PTSD clinic as she had successfully completed the PTSD program. There were weekly notes from the sessions, but they were very general without significant detail. Notably, the Veteran completed a short questionnaire each week regarding whether she had thoughts of being better off dead/hurting self.  See, weekly VA PTSD session notes for October 2023, November 2023, January 2024, and February 2024. The Veteran consistently responded, "not at all."  

The Veteran had symptoms from the 30, 50 and 70 percent evaluation criteria, but none of the symptoms from the 100 percent criteria. From the 50 percent criteria, the Veteran has disturbances of motivation and mood, and some difficulty maintaining work and social relationships. The April 2023 examiner noted that the Veteran was guarded about her combat experience and reluctant to express the extent of her symptoms saying she is a nurse and should be able to handle life's stress. She had a blunted affect, which may be less intense than a flattened affect characteristic of the 50 percent evaluation, but nonetheless reflected that she was only exposing some to none of what she was feeling. 

From the 70 percent criteria, the Veteran had some impulse control issues such as unprovoked irritability and suicidal ideation. 

The Veteran has a very responsible job as a Director of Nursing at a hospital where she has worked for thirty years reflecting that she is highly functional. Nonetheless, high functioning factors do not serve to diminish the consequences she may have as a result of combat related PTSD. Nor does the ability to reflect outwardly high functioning characteristics diminish the internal struggling occurring to deal with the effects of battle related trauma. 

Almost all of the Veteran's records reflected that she did not have SI. However, the July 2023 examiner noted SI. The description in this examination report reflected that the SI was more than fleeting in that the Veteran mentioned a few thoughts on how to execute and stated that the thoughts were typically quarterly. In Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017) the Court held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 ). The fact that treatment notes prior or subsequent to the July 2023 VA examination did not indicate the Veteran had SI may be more reflective of the Veteran's comfort level with varying treatment providers, her difficulty expressing her mental state, and completing a form in writing may be more difficult than discussing the issues. 

Suicidal ideation appears only in the 70% evaluation criteria. There are no analogues at the lower evaluation levels. Additionally, there are no descriptors, modifiers, or indicators as to suicidal ideation in the 70% criteria (including no specific mention of "active" suicidal ideation, "passive" suicidal ideation, suicidal "intent," suicidal "plan," suicidal "preparatory behavior," hospitalization, or past suicide attempts). Thus, the language of the regulation indicates that the presence of suicidal ideation alone, that is, a veteran's thoughts of their own death or thoughts of engaging in suicide-related behavior, may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 20 (2017)

Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's PTSD condition most closely approximates a 70 percent evaluation. The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  The persuasive weight of the evidence weighs in favor of a 70 percent initial evaluation for PTSD.  As, such, that doctrine is applicable in the instant appeal, and her claim must be granted to the extent outlined herein. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra. 

Therefore, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that entitlement to a PTSD evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, is warranted throughout the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND 

2. Entitlement to service connection for sexual arousal disorder is remanded. 

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of an established service-connected disease. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.310 (a)-(b); 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Allen v, Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). When service connection is established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered part of the original condition. Id.  A medical nexus opinion must state whether the claimed condition was caused by or aggravated by the service-connected condition. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013); 38 U.S.C. § 1110. 

The record is not clear whether the Veteran was asserting that the July 2023 PTSD examiner did not record the Veteran's contentions relating to sexual arousal disorder. As the Veteran asserted that the examiner did not record the other topics in the HLR request, the Board will give the Veteran the benefit of the doubt that this was mentioned to the PTSD examiner and not raised for the first time in the HLR. The VA is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for the proper evaluation level for the primary service-connected disability. Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188 (2021). As sexual arousal disorder, secondary to PTSD, was not addressed, the Board is remanding this issue for further development. 

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to correct the duty to assist error on the part of the originating agency in satisfying its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, which occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. These issues are remanded to obtain an adequate medical opinion to directly address whether the Veteran's sexual arousal disorder is service-connected secondary to PTSD and whether SMC-K is warranted.

(continued on next page)

?

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ is requested to schedule a VA medical examination for service connection for sexual arousal disorder secondary to PTSD and after receipt of the examination results, determine whether service connection for sexual arousal disorder and assignment of SMC-K is warranted.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Polk

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.