Citation Nr: A25032394
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-457391
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for schizoaffective disorder for accrued benefits purposes is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) for accrued benefits purposes is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence supports finding that the Veteran's schizoaffective disorder had its onset during service and was caused by in-service events.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for schizoaffective disorder for accrued benefits purposes have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from December 1985 to December 1988.

The Veteran died in October 2020. The Appellant is his surviving spouse.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in October 2023. The Appellant selected the Direct Review docket without a Board hearing under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) by submitting a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)). Accordingly, the Board's current review is limited to the evidence at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction's (AOJ's) October 2023 rating decision. The Board cannot consider any evidence submitted by the Veteran after the rating decision on appeal.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for schizoaffective disorder for accrued benefits purposes

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires evidence satisfying three criteria: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship (nexus) between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record. If credible, competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience. Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). If "the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise) the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt." Id.?

The Appellant has claimed entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder for accrued benefits purposes. She asserts that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was related to traumatic events during his service.

Prior to his death, the Veteran cited several military factors as possible causes of his mental disorder. In a March 1996 RO hearing, he testified that his mental disorder was related to living in confinement on a submarine during service. He also testified that he was exposed to "a lot of things" in service, but he did not go into further detail at the hearing. In a June 1998 statement, the Veteran attributed his psychiatric disorder to mental cruelty endured as a racial minority in the military. 

In a statement received in February 2016, the Veteran confided that he was sexually assaulted during service, and he asserted that his mental disorder was related to the assault. He stated that he blacked out after being pressured into drinking a large amount of alcohol in July 1986, and he woke up bound in duct tape, covered in urine and feces, and bleeding from the anus. The Veteran indicated that he began to hear voices telling him to kill himself and everyone else on his boat, and he started drinking heavily to get rid of the voices. The Veteran also described two instances where his boat nearly sank and also stated that he was frightened when his boat followed a Russian submarine into the Indian Ocean. He stated that he became an alcoholic during service, drinking to cope with racism and "antics against [him]." The Veteran indicated that his captain recommended him for alcohol rehabilitation, and he was discharged after failing to rehabilitate. In a separate February 2016 statement, the Veteran indicated that he tried to report his assault up the chain of command, but no action was taken, and he was threatened with death if he brought up the assault again.

The service treatment records are silent for evidence of treatment for sexual trauma. His service personnel records show a "marginally satisfactory" performance report for the period from March 1986 to January 1987, noting that the Veteran had received non-judicial punishments for unauthorized absence, insubordinate conduct, failure to obey an order, assault, and communicating a threat. His records further indicate that he failed to attend required Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings in May 1988 and was disqualified from submarine service. The Veteran's DD Form 214 indicates that he was honorably discharged for alcohol abuse with rehabilitation failure.

The Appellant submitted a disability benefits questionnaire completed by K.G., Ph.D., in May 2022, confirming that the Veteran had a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type. Dr. G. opined that the Veteran's schizoaffective disorder more likely than not began during service and that his alcohol and cocaine abuse were secondary to his schizoaffective disorder in an effort to cope with mental health symptoms. She noted her review of all relevant evidence, including the Veteran's service medical and personnel records, as well as medical literature, in support of her opinion. Dr. G. also noted the Veteran's lack of pre-military behavioral or emotional issues and stated that his in-service stressors and alcohol abuse made him vulnerable to mental illness. 

After considering the relevant evidence, the Board finds that service connection is warranted for the Veteran's schizoaffective disorder for accrued benefits purposes. In this regard, the evidence supports finding that the Veteran's mental disorder had its onset during service and was caused by in-service events, including military sexual trauma. This finding is supported by the Veteran's military personnel records, as they show a marginally satisfactory performance report for the period when the assault was alleged to have occurred. His military records also show non-judicial punishments for unauthorized absence, insubordinate conduct, failure to obey an order, assault, and communicating a threat. Finally, the Veteran's records show that he abused alcohol in service, being discharged after failed rehabilitation. All of this evidence, combined with the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements, support finding that he indeed suffered military sexual trauma. As indicated in Dr. G.'s medical opinion, this trauma made him vulnerable to mental illness and caused his schizoaffective disorder. Accordingly, the Board finds that the criteria for service connection for schizoaffective disorder have been met for accrued benefits purposes. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) for accrued benefits purposes is remanded.

Under the AMA, remand is permissible only for: (a) correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors, to include examinations and medical opinions; and (b) correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

VA has a duty to assist a claimant in the development of a claim. This duty includes assisting the claimant in the procurement of relevant treatment records and providing an examination when necessary. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

VA is obligated to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion in a claim of service connection when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or signs and symptoms of a current disability, the record indicates that the disability or signs and symptoms of disability may be associated with active service, and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The threshold for finding a link between current disability and service is low. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. The Veteran's reports of a continuity of symptomatology can satisfy the requirement for evidence that the claimed disability may be related to service. Id. 

Service connection for PTSD generally requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with applicable criteria; (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  Anglin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 361, 367 (1998); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f). 

A new fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) was released and represents the most up-to-date clinical diagnostic guidelines.  This revised version of the?DSM?applies to all claims pending at the RO on or after August 4, 2014, as was the case here.  See 38?C.F.R. §?4.125(a).   

The Appellant has also claimed entitlement to service connection for PTSD for accrued benefits purposes. PTSD is a diagnosis distinct from other mental disorders, with different criteria for service connection. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f). Therefore, the grant of service connection for schizoaffective disorder does not render the claim for service connection for PTSD moot. Prior to his death, the Veteran asserted that his PTSD was caused by traumatic in-service stressors, to include his military sexual trauma.

The Veteran's VA treatment records contain notations of a PTSD diagnosis prior to his death, but they do not show a PTSD diagnosis conforming to the DSM-5.

During his lifetime, the Veteran underwent VA mental examinations in March 1996, April 2002, and September 2002, but the examiners did not address PTSD.

The Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to adjudicate the claim of service connection for PTSD for accrued benefits purposes. In this regard, a VA medical opinion is necessary to determine whether the Veteran had a PTSD diagnosis under the DSM-5 and, if so, whether such was due to in-service stressors including his military sexual trauma. The RO's failure to obtain such an opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is warranted to obtain a VA medical opinion addressing PTSD.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified VA examiner. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available for review by the examiner, and such review should be noted in the examination report. The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that, prior to his death, the Veteran had a diagnosis of PTSD conforming to the DSM-5?

(b.) If so, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that his PTSD was caused by an in-service stressor(s) including, but not limited to, military sexual trauma?

The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale for each proffered opinion. The examiner is advised that, during his lifetime, the Veteran was competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion. 

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the?state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the?record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.?As appropriate, the AOJ should conduct additional development or supplement the record.

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Pratt

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.