Citation Nr: A25032005
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-434995
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran's cervical strain disability began during active service, within a year of service, or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

2. The evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran has left upper extremity radiculopathy which began during active service, manifested within a year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran has right upper extremity radiculopathy which began during active service, manifested within a year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1999 to December 2001.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The Board notes that the January 2024 rating decision was issued after the AOJ completed additional development upon finding a duty to assist error in the development of the Veteran's claims.  See May 2023 Rating Decision.  

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  

Service Connection

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; but see Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding all that is needed is a "but for" causation or aggravation to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record. A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge). Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); see Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1376-77. 

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal). To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is denied.

The Veteran contends that his current cervical strain is the result of a motor vehicle accident (MVA) during service.  

The Veteran's service treatment records indicate the Veteran was involved in a MVA on November 2, 1999.  The Veteran's service treatment records thereafter are replete with complaints and associated treatment with low back pain.  The records do not, however, contain complaints or treatment associated with neck pain or a cervical spine condition.  Indeed, the Veteran was seen in the emergency room after his MVA complaining of left lower back pain and knee pain.   The Veteran was assessed with a knee contusion and x-rays of the lumbar spine indicated a possible fracture of the left transverse process of L2 and incomplete fusion of the posterior elements of L5.  November 1999 Service Treatment Record.  The Veteran again complained of mid low back pain days after his accident and was given a provisional diagnosis of a back strain at the time.  November 1999 Service Treatment Record.  The Veteran thereafter complained of reinjuring his back after returning from his deployment to Kosovo from November 1999 to June 2000.  A March 2000 record indicates the Veteran continued to complain of lower back pain and was assessed with chronic low back pain.  In March 2001, the Veteran complained of back pain for two years now with paresthesia down his right leg.  March 2001 lumbar spine x-ray records indicated bilateral par intra-articularis defects at the L5 level with minimal spondylolisthesis.  A May 2001 MRI indicated L5-S1 spondylolysis with mild spondylolisthesis, and orthopedics recommended significant profiling and medical discharge.  

An October 2001 Physical Evaluation Board report found the Veteran was physically unfit due to the Veteran's chronic low back pain following his MVA.  In his September 2001 report of medical history, the Veteran reported constant back pain, and the Veteran's corresponding report of medical examination found the Veteran had an abnormal spine, other musculoskeletal.  The Veteran's neck, however, was clinically evaluated as normal.  September 2001 Report of Medical Examination. 

Post service, the Veteran underwent an April 2002 general VA medical examination which outlined the Veteran's history following his vehicle accident which included an injury to his lower back, both hips, and his left knee.  The Veteran complained of intermittent low back pain without radiation at the time and that he treated with a heating pad with slight relief.  April 2002 VA Examination.  The Veteran was diagnosed with a residual lumbar spine injury.  Id.  There were no associated complaints or treatment for a cervical spine condition.

For over two decades after the in-service MVA, the Veteran's post-service records are replete with treatment for low back pain and treatment, but in contrast are silent for any indication of neck pain or cervical spine abnormality. Indeed, a June 2010 treatment record indicates the Veteran's neck was found to be supple, and a February 2017 record indicates the Veteran's neck had normal range of motion. 

Over two decades after service, in an April 2022 chiropractic record, the evidentiary record reflects complaints of shoulder pain, upper back pain, and lower back pain.  April 2022 Private Treatment Record.  The Veteran was assessed with cervicalgia, pain in left shoulder, and segmental and somatic dysfunction of cervical region.  Id. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023 wherein he was diagnosed with a cervical strain.  The Veteran reported that he was involved in a car accident resulting in injury to his neck with his injury being a whiplash/strain type injury.  July 2023 VA Examination.  The VA examiner opined, however, that the Veteran's cervical strain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury stating that there are no records of the Veteran being treated for his cervical spine during service or with his motor vehicle accident.  The examiner found within the same opinion, on the other hand, that the Veteran's strains of his hips and left knee were as likely as not associated with service given his reports of bilateral hip pain during service and his left knee injury from the motor vehicle accident.  Id.

Based on the forgoing, the Board finds that service connection for a cervical spine condition is not warranted.  

It is not reasonably in dispute that the Veteran currently has cervical strain and that his military records support that he had an in-service MVA.  Instead, the pertinent inquiry is whether the evidence persuasively supports a nexus between the current cervical strain and the in-service MVA (or any other incident of service). The Board finds it does not and, indeed, the Board does not find the Veteran's claim of continuous neck pain since service persuasive considering the totality of the evidence here.

The Veteran's in-service MVA is well-documented as are his post-accident complaints and treatment for various musculoskeletal injuries.  Noticeably silent amongst these injuries and complaints, however, are any complaints, findings, treatment, or diagnoses, related to the neck / cervical spine. Indeed, the Veteran's neck was clinically evaluated as normal in his separation evaluation.  September 2001 Report of Medical Examination.  

Indeed, while the post-service treatment records are replete with evidence of continuous treatment for lumbar spine pain, the Veteran's cervical spine was either evaluated as normal or records were silent altogether related to the cervical spine / neck until 2022, over two decades later. 

While the Veteran, as a lay person who experienced the MVA and the pain thereafter, is technically competent to report as to his own observed symptoms and pain, his reported history of the continuity of neck pain through time is, at a minimum, inconsistent with the objective medical evidence. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007) (holding that lay evidence is generally competent to comment on observable symptomatology); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (holding that conflicting evidence and conflicting statements may be indicia of a lack of credibility).   

While typically the lack of contemporaneous service and post-service records would not in and of itself not be fatal to a claim, given the Veteran's in-service and post-service treatment for other musculoskeletal conditions and complaints following the MVA, such notations of neck pain would be expected and, therefore the lack of such notations are relevant, and persuasive under these circumstances. Cf. Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011).

Further, the Board finds probative the July 2023 VA examiner's opinion who considered the Veteran's lay statements but based on the objective findings at that time coupled with the review of the record, found it unlikely that the Veteran's cervical strain was related to his in-service MVA, or any incident of service, whereas the other disabilities were attributed to service.  The examiner provided a thorough rationale explaining why the cervical spine in particular was not likely related to service whereas the other disabilities were despite the Veteran's lay reports of onset of injury given the documentation thereafter as to treatment of unrelated injuries for many years. 

The Board may dismiss otherwise "competent" layperson testimony if it is fount to lack credibility.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006).  Here, although the Veteran is certainly competent to report as to his own experiences and pain, his recollection of the injuries sustained in the MVA and the pain thereafter, as well as continuity of symptomatology is simply not credible given the documented evidence for decades thereafter showing numerous other injuries, complaints, and diagnoses. Where, as here, the Veteran was seeking treatment for other musculoskeletal ailments, it would be expected for complaints of the cervical spine / neck to be reflected had they been made (as the Veteran says), but they are not. To the contrary, the Veteran's separation examination notes a normal cervical spine examination as do other post-service treatment records (albeit largely focused on other disabilities). See June 2010, February 2017 treatment records.

The Veteran's lay statements lacking plausibility, the Board finds the objective medical evidence more persuasive and consistently weigh against a finding that the Veteran incurred a cervical spine in-service or for many decades thereafter. Further, the July 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's cervical spine strain is unlikely due to any incident of service and, for reasons outlined above, the Board finds this opinion probative.

As the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding of service connection, the Veteran's cervical spine appeal is denied. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has right and left upper extremity radiculopathy secondary to his lumbar spine injury.  January 2023 VA 21-526EZ.  The Veteran also reported that burning sensations started after his neck injury.  The Veteran is currently service connected for residuals of his lumbar spine injury as well as sciatica in his lower extremities associated with his lumbar spine injury.  See March 2025 Rating Decision-Codesheet.  The Veteran is not service connected, however, for his current cervical strain disability.  Nonetheless, as explained further below, the Board finds service connection is not warranted as the Veteran does not have an upper extremity radiculopathy disability for which service connection can be awarded.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's service treatment records contain no diagnosis, treatment, or complaints related to upper extremity radiculopathy at any point during his service.  Likewise, after service, there is no medical evidence showing a diagnosis, complaints, or treatment, associated with upper extremity radiculopathy.  While April 2022 private treatment records note complaints of shoulder pain, the medical evidence of record does not indicate the Veteran's complaints of shoulder pain are due to radiculopathy or secondary from his service-connected lumbar spine condition.  

A January 2023 VA peripheral nerves examination found that the Veteran had sciatic radiculopathy of his bilateral lower extremities.  The examiner found no symptoms, however, in the Veteran's upper extremities.  The Veteran's muscle strength testing, reflexes, and upper extremity sensory exam were normal.  The Veteran's upper extremity nerves and radicular groups were also found to be normal.  January 2023 VA Examination.  The Veteran's July 2023 cervical spine VA examination further found that the Veteran did not have radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.  The Veteran's muscle strength, reflex, and sensory exams were all found to be normal.  July 2023 VA Examination.    

Based on the forgoing, the Board finds there is no competent evidence of that the Veteran has a current upper extremity radiculopathy disability for which service connection can be awarded.  There is also no evidence that he had any such condition during any time during the pendency of this appeal.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). 

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran's claimed conditions may otherwise constitute a "disability" for VA purposes per the Federal Circuit's holding in Saunders.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). In Saunders, the Federal Circuit held that the term "disability" refers to "functional impairment of earning capacity" and not "the underlying cause of said disability."   Therefore, "pain alone can constitute a disability for compensation purposes" if such pain causes such functional impairment of earning capacity.  Id.  It is important to note that while the Veteran is competent to generally describe his symptoms, subjective complaints of pain are not enough to establish the presence of a disability.  Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).  Instead, there must be objective evidence that such complaints rise to the level of a functional impairment.  Id.

While the Veteran is competent to complain of "pain," he also is not competent to indicate a nerve-root impairment or, as in this case, an upper extremity radiculopathy disability as such nerve-root impairment is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical knowledge and training.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

As such, while the record contains evidence that the Veteran complained of shoulder pain and (as outlined above) neck pain, and received chiropractic treatment in April 2022, there is no objective evidence that these complaints have been associated with a nerve-root impairment, upper extremity radiculopathy, or any other observed functional impairment (other than cervical strain, which was already addressed in the cervical spine denial above).

The Board finds no persuasive evidence of any upper extremity disability manifested by radiculopathy. Importantly, the Veteran's subsequent VA peripheral nerves examination in January 2023 found the Veteran did not have any symptoms in his upper extremities noting in support that associated muscle strength, reflex, and upper extremity sensory exams were normal.  The July 2023 VA cervical spine examination thereafter further found the Veteran had no radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.

In sum, the persuasive weight of the evidence does not support the Veteran has bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy nor did he have said radiculopathy at any time during the pendency of this appeal.  His claimed manifestations, moreover, have never been associated with any incident of service or a service-connected disability and, indeed, his secondary service connection claim must fail as the primary disability has not been service-connected. 

As the persuasive weight of the evidence does not support service connection under any reasonably raised theory, direct or secondary, the appeal is denied.    

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Knopp, Derek A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.